NASA announced that on January 6, 1992 administrator Richard H. Truly will officially present the NASA 1991 George M. Low Trophy, would be presented to Thiokol Corporation, Space Operations employees, Bringham City, Utah. The trophy recognizes NASA prime contractors, subcontractors, and suppliers for outstanding achievements in quality and productivity improvement and Total Quality Management (TGQM). Thiokol's Space Operations provides the redesigned solid rocket motor propulsion that produces 80 percent of the thrust necessary for Space Shuttle liftoff. In addition, Thiokol provides engineering services for sounding rocket design for NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Md. (NASA Note N92-1)
Following a routine star calibration, the Magellan spacecraft, which had completed 15 months of service and 3,880 orbits of successfully mapping over 95 percent of the surface of Venus, appeared to have suffered a component failure in one of its two downlink transmitters, temporarily halting the reception of mapping data with its high-resolution radar. (NASA Release 92-1)
NASA announced that the first flight of the IML-O1 (International Microgravity Laboratory), was set for January 22, 1992, aboard the Space Shuttle Discovery. Over 220 scientists from 14 countries were to be represented in this unprecedented international effort to conduct research in both materials and life sciences in the microgravity environment. (NASA Note N92-3)
Many scientists, concerned that there might not be enough money for basic research, question the wisdom of spending huge sums on projects such as the Space Station. Yet, research shows that the economic benefits of NASA's programs are greater than generally recognized. In 1987, NASA's procurement budget generated $17,800 million in total industry sales, had a "multiplier effect" on the economy of 2.1 million people, created 209,000 private-sector jobs and $2,900 million in business profits, and generated $5,600 million in federal, state and local government tax revenues. Furthermore, these benefits were widely distributed throughout the country. (Nature, Jan 9/92)
At the American Astronomical Society's semiannual meeting in Atlanta, a team of scientists announced that, using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), they had made the most precise measurement to date of the percent of heavy hydrogen in space, which better determines the physical conditions present in the theorized Big Bang at the origin of the universe. Deuterium, also called heavy hydrogen, differs from ordinary hydrogen by having one neutron in addition to one proton in its nucleus. A measurement of the ratio of deuterium to ordinary hydrogen provides a critical test of conditions in the universe at the time of the Big Bang because it is believed that essentially all of the deuterium now present was created at that time. If further research finds no evidence for large amounts of "missing matter," then the new deuterium measurements strengthen the idea that the universe will expand forever. If true, the universe had a brilliant beginning but will have no end. (NASA Release 92-2)
Astronomers reported interesting initial results from a survey of several hundred quasars being studied with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Using Hubble's high resolution images, the "Snapshot Survey" program detected evidence on gravitational lensing at a level of detail not usually found with ground-based telescopes. The findings set new limits on the nature and distribution of material in the universe. The results provided information on objects such as stars and galaxies that can be detected with telescopes as well as non-luminous material or "dark matter." In the past decade, about a dozen examples of probable gravitational lenses had been discovered by ground-based telescopes. According to conventional theoretical models, approximately half of all multiple-image gravitational lenses cannot be identified from ground-based telescopes because the separation between the images would be less than one arc second, which is below the nominal resolution limit for ground-based telescopes. The Hubble Space Telescope routinely provides 0.1 arc second resolution of moderately bright point sources, making it a unique and powerful tool for searching for multiple-image lenses. The HST data may ultimately provide new and unexpected insights into the early universe. While the Snapshot Survey will not offer insights into the competing Big Bang models, results will provide scientists with the denizens of the universe but not how they got there. (NASA Release 92-3)
At a press conference of the 179th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Atlanta, astronomers reported that recent ultraviolet observations with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) suggest that what were thought to be randomly distributed, nearby primordial clouds of hydrogen may actually be associated with galaxies or clusters of galaxies. (NASA Release 92-4)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers announced the detection of the rare element boron in an ancient star. This element may be "fossil" evidence of energetic events which accompanied the birth of the Milky Way galaxy. An alternative possibility is that this rare element may be even older, dating from the birth of the universe. If that is the case, then the HST findings may force some modifications in theories of the Big Bang. (NASA Release 92-5)
Dr. Carl Fichtel, Principal Investigator for the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment Telescope (EGRET), announced that NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory found three new gamma-ray quasars, detected more than 200 cosmic gamma ray bursts, and captured the best ever observation of the glow of gamma radiation from the disk of the Milky Way galaxy. The Compton Observatory, built by TRW Inc., Redondo Beach, California, is the second of NASA's "Great Observatories." The first was the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in April 1990. The Compton Observatory, deployed April 7, 1991, from the Space Shuttle Atlantis, orbits Earth at an altitude of 268 by 262 miles. (NASA Release 92-6)
NASA's Assistant Administrator for Procurement Darleenn A. Druyun lifted the suspension of the Collins Avionics and Communications Division (CACD), Rockwell International Corp., Cedar Rapids, Iowa. The suspension was imposed November 8, 1991, following a 15-count indictment charging the firm and two individuals with mail fraud and submission of false claims. (NASA Release 92-7)
Project officials at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, announced that the Magellan spacecraft would use its backup transmitter to resume mapping the surface of Venus with imaging radar on January 24, following a week of routine battery recharging. (NASA Release 92-8)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), Dr. Jon Holtzman, of Lowell Observatory, Flagstaff, Arizona, led a team of scientists in discovering new clues to cataclysmic events in the history of the peculiar galaxy NGC 1275, located approximately 200 million light-years from Earth. The scientists discovered about 50 bright objects at the center of the galaxy which appear to be young massive globular star clusters. This discovery was surprising because most globular clusters are among the oldest objects in the universe. (NASA Release 92-9)
Based upon images taken by NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), astronomers reported that they had found intriguing evidence that a black hole, weighing over 2.6 billion times the mass of the sun, exists at the center of the giant elliptical galaxy M87. Galaxy M87 is at the center of a nearby cluster of galaxies in the constellation of Virgo, 52 million light-years distant, and contains more than 100 billion stars. (NASA Release 92-10)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly met with representatives from seven Historical Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), the latest recipients of NASA's Research Center grants. The awards were the latest approach to meeting some of NASA's present and future research and workforce needs and in tapping into scientific resources found among under-represented minority students and faculty at qualifying universities. (NASA Release 92-11)
Amid concerns over cold weather, the Shuttle Discovery was prepared for lauch from Cape Canaveral at 8:53 a.m. EDT. (USA Today, Jan 22/92)
The flight of Space Shuttle Discovery, carrying seven astronauts from three countries, was the second Shuttle mission in a row to carry an array of life science experiments focusing on the effects of space travel on humans and other organisms, with an eye toward preparing to send astronauts on interplanetary flights, specifically, NASA's proposed manned mission to Mars. The astronauts were split 12-hour work shifts so experiments including a battery of medical tests could be conducted non-stop. Researchers hoped to learn more about space motion sickness and back pain, common ailments among astronauts in orbit. Experiments were also to be conducted in the cargo bay to measure effects of zero gravity, fertilization of eggs, and cartilage formation in various organisms. The Shuttle would also study the effect of bombardment by high-energy cosmic rays on living tissue. (B Sun, Jan 22/92; NY Times, Jan 23/92)
J.P. Mitchell, Pratt and Whitney's Space Shuttle Main Engine (SSME) Alternate Turbopump Development project manager, reported that a pair of Pratt and Whitney designed high-pressure turbopumps had been successfully tested at 100 percent rated power on a SSME at NASA's John C. Stennis Space Center in Mississippi. (PR Newswire, Jan 23/92)
L. Eugene Root, a pioneer U.S. aircraft builder who led Lockheed Missile and Space Company to maturity and was a member of the RAND think tank died in Menlo Park, California, at the age of 87. As president of the Institute of Aeronautical Sciences in 1962, Root combined his organization with the American Rocket Society, co-founding the major U.S. aerospace society, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (LA Times, Jan 25/92)
President Bush held a scheduled meeting with NASA astronauts in the Oval Office, followed by an address to Young Astronauts Council in the Old Executive Office Building. (NASA Release 92-12)
White House administration officials reported that President Bush had called for an 11 percent increase in the Space Station project for 1993, as well as additional money to put robots on the moon and build a new space launch system and a hypersonic transport plane. The Space Station project, which aims to launch a permanent orbiting platform by 1996, was slated for $2.25 billion. Bush also requested $8 million to develop a NASA plane that could make direct flights from Earth to orbit without using the traditional rocket booster launch system. If successful, it would revolutionize air travel by flying around the world in a fraction of time compared to conventional aircraft. (NY Tines, Jan 25/92; P Inq, Jan 25/92; WSJ, Jan 27/92)
Arthur C. Clark, the legendary science-fiction writer, whose accomplishments include numerous literary awards, academic honors, and more than 70 written works, including "2001: A Space Odyssey," declared that his latest personal odyssey was contemplating the feastability of "colonizing" and "farming" on Mars. "Mars is the next frontier, what the Wild West was, what America was 500 years ago...Mars is where the action is going to be in the next thousand years," declared Clark. (LA Times, Jan 24/92)
On the second day of Discovery's mission, astronauts took turns being spun in a chair, strapped blindfolded onto a lurching sled, and jolted by electrodes high above the Earth in a study of space motion sickness. Between medical tests, the seven astronauts tended to organisms carried into orbit for research, including roundworms, fruit flies, stick insects, lentil roots, bacteria and billions of single cells. The mission was scheduled to end at Edwards Air Force Base in California. (NY Times, Jan 24/92)
President Bush kicked-off International Space Year (ISY), a year-long worldwide celebration of space cooperation and discovery. During the year, 29 space agencies and ministries from around the world, 10 international organizations, and the United Nations planned to celebrate the spirit of discovery and work together to promote a new era of global cooperation and to increase knowledge of planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-13)
David H. Suddeth, 63, a NASA engineer who was honored by the agency for his work on propulsion systems for spacecraft, died Jan 25 at Bowie, Maryland. His research included work on hydrazine-fueled rocket engines used to guide satellites and the Viking spacecraft, which landed on Mars in 1976. He was with NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center from its inception in the late 1950s until he retired in 1990. (W Post, Jan 30/92)
Discovery's astronauts dimmed the Shuttle lights to conserve energy as NASA considered extending the weeklong research mission by a day to collect extra scientific data. (P Inq, Jan 27/92; W Times, Jan 27/92)
The main Russian TV news reported that some members of the former Soviet Union's cosmonaut ground controllers planned a warning strike to protest low wages, which in many cases were equivalent to $6 a month. The television report said that "One of the most prestigious jobs on Earth had become one of the lowest-paid." (W Times, Jan 28/92; P Inq, 28/92)
William R. Schindler, 64, a former project manager of the Delta launch vehicle project at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, died Jan 27 in Loma Linda, California. (W Post, Jan 29/92)
In an article in the January 16 issue of the journal Nature, Dr. Chris Argyrou Hajivassiliou of the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory in Cambridge, England, proved through statistical analysis that the scattering of radio waves caused by turbulent interstellar electrically charged gases, or plasma, is present in areas of the galaxy where it had not been previously proven to exist. The findings are considered evidence that the solar system is encapsulated in an envelope of these gases, probably the relic of the explosion of a nearby massive star tens of millions of years ago. In his article, Dr. Hajivassiliou said that he hoped scientists would be able to use his findings to identify any black hole left by that explosion. (NY Times, Jan 28/92)
George C. Patterson Jr., 67, a retired NASA official who worked for the Agency for 30 years before retiring in 1987 as a flight mission simulation coordinator, died of emphysema January 26 at Holy Cross Hospital, Kensington, Maryland. (W Post, Jan 28/92)
Scientists from University of Washington in Seattle, writing in Science magazine, said that the sulfuric haze that causes acid rain might also be protecting the Northern Hemisphere by countering the warming brought on by the greenhouse effect. (P Inq, Jan 28/92)
As part of the 1993 budget, President Bush approved the cancellation of two major NASA projects--a scientific mission to rendezvous with an asteroid and a program to build more powerful Space Shuttle boosters. Under the budget plan, the White House cancelled the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM), a $3 billion program to develop new and more powerful boosters for the Space Shuttle, as well as the Comet Rendezvous Asteroid Flyby mission, a $700 million spacecraft slated for launch in the late 1990s. The 1993 Bush plan allocated a $700 million increase over the 1992 $14.3 billion NASA budget. (Space News, Jan 28/92)
Final preparations were made for the launching of Earthwinds, a balloon whose three-member crew hoped to be the first to circumnavigate the world in a single balloon flight. Larry Newman, the captain of the Earthwinds and a former crew member of both the trans-Atlantic balloon flight in 1978 and the trans-Pacific flight in 1981, predicted a successful voyage of some 22,000 miles at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. Included in the crew, was to be Maj. Gen. Vladimir Dzhanibekov, chief of astronaut training in the Russian air force. The balloon, which is higher than the Statue of Liberty, would carry scientific experiments built in the former Soviet Union and NASA. (NY Times, Jan 29/92)
Jim Scott, Magellan project manager at the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, expressed regret at NASA's decision to cut short the spacecraft's mission. Since its launching from the Space Shuttle Atlantis on May 4, 1989, the spacecraft had mapped 97 percent of Venus' surface, using radar to peer through the planet's thick clouds and take pictures of the rugged, volcanic landscape. Scientists hoped to continue mapping in more detail during an "extended mission" ending in 1995, but NASA officials decided to avoid adding $80 million to the cost by ending the mission on September 30, 1993. The budget decision meant that engineers would not be able to move Magellan from its elliptical orbit and into a lower circular orbit starting in May 1993. That would have allowed Magellan to remap Venus with three to 10 times more detail than the pcitures it already had taken. (NASA Release, 92-14; W Times, Jan 29/92)
The Space Shuttle Discovery's international crew took time off from their scientific work to remember the seven astronauts who died in the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger six years ago. "It being the 28th, we're all mindful of the sacrifices made along the way," Discovery crewman William Readdy said during a news conference from space. It was the first time that Americans had been in orbit on the anniversary of the Jan 28, 1986 explosion of Challenger 73 seconds after it took off from Cape Canaveral. (P Inq, Jan 29/92; USA Today, Jan 29/92)
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the fate of the Russian space program is in doubt. Although most of the republics that make up the successor to the Soviet Union, the Commonwealth of Independent States, had signed an agreement pledging to continue the space program and to honor all the Soviet Union's international agreements on space projects, many experts questioned the impoverished nascent union's ability to follow through. "There is a high level of uncertainty," said James Head, a planetary scientist at Brown University. "The commonwealth will absolutely not be able to maintain a space program at the same level of activity," declared Roald Sagdeev, former director of the Soviet institute that ran all scientific research programs in space. (C Trib, Jan 29/92; Boston Globe, Jan 30/92)
NASA's plan to transfer work modifying Space Shuttles from Palmdale to its Kennedy Space Center in Florida triggered protests from California's congressional delegation and the governor's office. The NASA decision would affect about 500 jobs at Rockwell International's Palmdale facility, where five of the orbiters had been assembled since the 1970s and where the space agency had done major modification work on the Shuttle fleet. (LA Times, Feb 1/92)
Florida Today reported that the Hubble Space Telescope, despite a flawed primary mirror that prevented it from stargazing perfectly, nevertheless had shown astronomers enough of the universe to rattle their theories of creation and the nature of the universe. Circling the Earth every 90 minutes the Hubble has provided new insights into "globular clusters, the black hole, gaseous hydrogen isotopes, and a shell of gas moving from a giant star in another galaxy." (Florida Today, Feb 2/92)
According to some scientists, recent observations by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) have shown exceptionally high levels of chlorine monoxide (CIO) at high northern latitudes, raising the possibility of enhanced ozone depletion over populated areas of the Earth. UARS's Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) detected elevated levels of CIO over large areas of Europe and Asia north of about 50 degrees latitude. Dr. Joe Waters of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that high CIO levels were observed over Scandinavia and Northern Eurasia, including the cities of London, Moscow and Amsterdam. These CIO levels, approximately 1 part billion by volume, are comparable to levels observed within the Antarctic ozone hole. Waters said that sustained levels of CIO could lead to significant ozone destruction over the northern hemisphere and perhaps even lead to an ozone hole over the Arctic. (NASA Release 92-18)
It was reported that NASA's decision to kill off a multibillion-dollar program to develop a new, more powerful solid rocket booster for the Space Shuttle fleet was a carefully planned move actually intended to help save the project. The advanced solid-rocket motor program, which would have cost nearly $500 million in 1993, was eliminated with the expectation that funds for the project would be restored by Representative Jamie L. Whitten (D-Miss.), chairman of the House Apppropriations Committee. (LA Times, Feb 3/92)
Many scientists believe that by using "telepresence," a unique mix of science and engineering that NASA was developing, astronauts may someday explore Mars without leaving their base camp. Dr. Geoffrey Briggs of NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, said "telepresence will allow humans to project themselves, by way of a suitably equipped robot, into a remote environment without endangering themselves." Telepresence, which is similar to "virtual reality," will allow a researcher, wearing a video headset, to see remote locations through cameras mounted on a remotely operated robotic vehicle. The researcher points the camera by moving his or her head and steers the vehicle with a pair of joysticks or with body motion. Manipulators on the robot relay the "feel" of an object's weight and texture. Briggs called the research technique "revolutionary" because it made it possible to simulate planetary studies in hostile Earthly environments, such as the frigid waters of Antarctica, and eventually to perform real research on the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-20)
NASA, in conjunction with the nation's two leading aircraft engine makers, reported that it would be developing advanced materials that could make a next-generation supersonic airliner possible by the year 2005. A five year, $88 million partnership with General Electric Aircraft Engines, Cincinnati, and United Technologies, Pratt and Whitney Division, East Hartford, Connecticut, was to center on critical composite materials and processes that U.S. industry would need to design and build a fleet of high-speed civil transports. The planes would fly at more than twice the speed of sound and at much higher altitudes than today's commercial airliners. A cost-effective, environmentally compatible supersonic airliner could cut long-distance trip times in half. For example, a future high-speed civil transport could fly from Los Angeles to Tokyo in 4 1/2 hours instead of the 10 hours taken by present subsonic passenger planes. While NASA, Pratt and Whitney and General Electric will form the core of the team, many other U.S. engine companies, materials suppliers and composite fabricators also will play an integral part. This interaction will provide the base for a future U.S. manufacturing capability in high-temperature composites and will let the involved firms take early advantage of the program's technical results. The composites also will help American manufacturers of subsonic airplanes, power systems and military aircraft. (NASA Relese 92-21)
NASA issued its strongest warning yet about the quickening deterioration of the ozone layer over large, populated areas in northern latitudes. Experts warned that thinning ozone will let in more harmful ultraviolet rays from the sun and lead to more skin cancer and cancer deaths. An ozone layer hole could appear as early March 1992 if certain meteorological and chemical conditions occur, said the scientists. Even if the hole does not appear right away, the chances are "very high" that it will occur over the next decade, said James Anderson, a Harvard University chemistry professor who is involved in the project. (WSJ, Feb 4/92; P Inq, Feb 4/92; NY Times, Feb 4/92; USA Today, Feb 4/92; W Post, Feb 4/92; W Times, Feb 4/92; LA Times, Feb 4/92; B Sun, Feb 4/92)
Dr. Mark M. Phillips, acting director of Cerro Tololo, an American operated observatory in Chile, said the New Technology Telescope developed in Europe was capturing images up to six times more revealing than those obtained by comparable American telescopes of conventional design. The new European telescope contained advanced optical elements that automatically correct the distortions caused by gravity and wind as the telescope moves. There was an uneasy feeling among some scientists that the salad days of United States astronomy were drawing to a close and that the new European telescopes would leave American astronomers far behind. (NY Times, Feb 4/92)
Explorers reported that the lost city of Ubar, called "the Atlantis of the Sands" by Lawrence of Arabia, had been found in Oman using pictures taken from the Space Shuttle Challenger in October 1984. The city was thought to have been inhabited from 2800 B.C. until A.D. 100. (USA Today, Feb 5/92; W Times, Feb 5/92; P Inq, Feb 5/92; NY Times International, Feb 5/92; B Sun, Feb 5/92)
Thomson Consumer Electronics, owned by the French electronics concern Thomson SA, said that it would help launch a satellite-to-home television broadcasting system through a venture with the Hughes Electronics division of General Motors Corporation. The system, called DirecTV, would be capable of providing more than 100 channels to 18-in-diameter outdoor satellite dishes. (B Sun, Feb 5/92)
A panel of experts at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science said that computers now perform some medical functions better than doctors and that machines are going to get even smarter in the future. Terrell Ward Bynum of Southern Connecticut State University said that NASA and the Department of Defense were working on a "smart" battlefield stretcher, which as envisioned, could provide expert diagnostic capabilities and would be able to dispense drugs or even jolt the heart back into normal rhythmn. (AP, Feb 7/92)
Space Shuttle Mission STS-45 was designated for the first flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS-1). The ATLAS-1 was to measure long-term variability in the total energy radiated by the sun and measure the Earth's middle atmospheric constituents over one 11-year solar cycle. (NASA Note N92-14)
It was reported that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was studying aurorae on the giant planet Jupiter. The HST made observations of Jupiter over a four-day period when ESA/NASA Ulysses spacecraft swung by the giant planet. While passing Jupiter, Ulysses made measurements of Jupiter's powerful magnetic field and the flow of subatomic particles along magnetic field lines. Simultaneously, HST was looking at aurorae, one visual manifestation of these electrical fireworks. These joint observations provided a unique opportunity to combine ultraviolet images and spectra with information on particles and fields. By studying the activity of Jupiter's aurorae, astronomers hoped to learn more about the dynamics of Jupiter's immense magnetic field, the structure of the giant planet's upper atmosphere, the effects of aurora on the chemistry of the polar regions on Jupiter, and Jupiter's interaction with the moon Io via a magnetic "flux tube." (NASA Release 92-22)
Reinhard Genzel of the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physica in Garching, Germany, declared that there was mounting evidence that a black hole about a million times the mass of the sun is sucking away at the heart of the Milky Way, Earth's home galaxy. The latest clue was a bubble of gas possibly as hot as a million degrees centrigrade discovered near a mysterious source of radio waves known as Sagittarius A, which had for some time been the leading candidate for the location of the suspected black hole. (W Post, Feb 10/92; P Inq, Feb 6/92; USA Today, Feb 6/92)
It was reported that NASA's latest effort to free a stuck main antenna aboard the Galileo space probe had failed. Galileo, en route to Jupiter for a 1995-97 mapping mission, had a smaller antenna that transmit only 2,200 of the 50,000 hoped-for photos. (W Times, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 10/92; USA Today, Feb 11/92)
A 15-story unmanned Atlas rocket was launched into space with a military communications satellite intended to link the White House with U.S. forces around the world during nuclear attacks or other crisis. In peacetime, the $130 million satellite was to serve as a switchboard for the Defense Department personnel. (B Sun, Feb 11/92; AP, Feb 11/92)
NASA research aircraft were exploring the potential of fiber optic sensors in critical aircraft flight control systems. Because of fiber optic's advantages in flight systems, researchers believe fiber optics will improve flight control, engine performance and safety. The research project is part of the Fiber Optic Control System Integration program managed by NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland and jointly funded by NASA and the U.S. Navy's Naval Air Systems Command. The first NASA plane to fly with fiber optic sensors was the F-15 Highly Integrated Digital Electronic Control (HIDEC) aircraft at Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edward, California. (NASA Release 92-23)
It was reported that the spacecraft Ulysses had revealed unexpected changes in the violent vicinity of Jupiter since the last Earth probe flew past in 1979, including a swelling of the giant planet's magnetic field and an apparent abatement in volcanic eruptions on the Jovian moon Io. (W Post, Feb 12/92; NY Times, Feb 12/92; USA Today, Feb 12/92; W Times, Feb 12/92; AP, Feb 11/92; B Sun, Feb 9/92; P Inq, Feb 9/92)
Senior members of the Bush administration launched the "National Technology Initiative," a program that would speed the movement of technology out of the nation's huge federal laboratories and into commercial markets. (W Post, Feb 13/92)
Evgeny Sverdlov, director of the Institute of Molecular Genetics in Moscow, told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), that the demise of the former Soviet Union had created a "brain drain" that challenged the future existence of the Russian scientific research community. Because of the lack of funds, many research centers were on the verge of collapse. He added that it was good for young scientists to hone their skills abroad. But he said it would be a disaster for science in his country if they did not return. (CSM, Feb 13/92)
"Space Astronomy Update," a new television program launched by NASA, was scheduled for debut over NASA Select Television. The program, which was to originate from the NASA Headquarters auditorium, Washington D.C., aimed to provide an understanding of how our views of the universe are changing through continuing, new results from astrophysical observations such as the Hubble Space Telescope, Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and the Cosmic Background Explorer. (NASA Release 92-15)
In an effort to inspire students to study mathematics, science and technology, almost 1,000 engineers from NASA planned to visit schools nationwide during the week of February 16-22. NASA's "teachers for a day" will be participating in the National Engineers Week's Discover "E" Program, the largest student outreach effort sponsored by the engineering profession. NASA engineers were to participate in career day activities, teach students, conduct science competitions, participate in teacher workshops, and judge science fairs. NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly said, "Space exploration and its monumental engineering feats are vital to America's future competitiveness, will strengthen domestic economy, provide jobs for Americans and inspire students to study mathematics and science." (NASA Release 92-24)
The Associated Press reported that two ex-Soviet cosmonauts circling the Earth went on television to reassure the public that they were safe and working hard, despite the many difficulties caused by the turmoil back home. The demise of the Soviet government and independence of the former republics had thrown the space program into disarray, delaying the cosmonaut's return for months. (AP, Feb 15/92)
Space Shuttle Discovery, which flew in space nine days in January, returned home after 14 days on the ground in California and a cross-country piggyback trip on a Boeing 747. The Shuttle left for the Kennedy Space Center, stopping overnight at Biggs Army Air Field in El Paso, Texas and at Kelly Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas. (AP, Feb 16/92)
It was reported that NASA's Johnson Space Center plans to award a broad computer services contract later during the year to support the center's host computers, networks, workstations, application software and telecommunications systems. The contract, which analysts estimate will cost up to $180 million, was to include software acquisition, development and maintenance, installation, engineering, integration and costumer services. (Federal Computer Week, Feb 17/92)
Scientists reported that enhanced versions of the pictures taken from the Voyager 2 spacecraft reveal what look like three gigantic ice-gushing volcanoes on Neptune's frozen moon Triton. (NY Times, Feb 18/92; AP, Feb 14/92)
Scientists working in Antarctica were seeking evidence of radiation from space. In one project, directed by Dr. Douglas M. Lowder of the University of California at Berkeley, a hot water jet drilled two holes 2,600 feet deep in the ice to test the possibility of detecting the elusive particles called neutrinos that after traveling through space, traverse the entire earth to emerge at the pole. Scientists hope scanners in a series of such holes will be able to identify the sources of neutrinos in the Arctic sky. (NY Times, Feb 18/92)
NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced the appointment of Aaron Cohen, Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, as Acting Deputy Administrator. Prior to being named Acting Deputy Administrator, Cohen had been Director of the Johnson Space Center since October 1986. He joined NASA in 1962 in the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office at the Manned Spacecraft Center. (NASA Release 92-25)
After two failed launch attempts, the Earthwinds around-the-world balloon flight was postponed until November. The captain, airline pilot Larry Newman of Scottsdale, Arizona, and his crew, Don Moses and Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Dzhanibekov, need near-calm conditions on the ground and the right trajectory to launch the trip, expected to last from 12 to 21 days at an altitude of about 35,000 feet. It would be the first balloon to circle the world. (LA Times, Feb 23/92;)
Yuri P. Semenov, general director of NPO Energia, the Russians' civilian manned space program, invited U.S. officials to lease room aboard the Mir Space Station, orbiting 240 miles above Earth, to conduct experiments. In addition, Semenov also proposed selling Russians' most powerful rocket, the Energia, which exceeds the lifting capacity of any U.S. launch vehicle. (W Post, Feb 23/92; NY Times, Feb 23/92)
It was reported that a Delta 2 rocket carrying a $65 million military navigation satellite was launched into space. The Global Positioning System "Navstar" satellite is the 12th in a globe-spanning network of such spacecraft that allow military forces on the ground, at sea and in the air to determine their location and altitude to within 53 feet anywhere in the world. After a flawless boost into space, the satellite was released into a preliminary orbit about 25 minutes after liftoff. On-board rockets were scheduled to fire later to put the satellite in a circular 12-hour orbit 12,5000 miles up. (UPI, Feb 23/92; B Sun, Feb 24/92; W Times, Feb 24/92; USA Today, Feb 24/92)
After triumphing in a bruising congressional battle in 1991 and securing a $2.25 billion berth in the Administration's 1993 budget, NASA officials and Space Station Freedom contractors said they were on target toward a scheduled launch of the first Space Station components in November 1995. The station, to be lofted piece by piece aboard the Space Shuttle, was to be partially operational by 1997, and permanently manned by a four-astronaut crew by 2000. (LA Times, Feb 24/92)
It was reported that a Russian-German space crew will blast off from Kazakhstan on March 17, 1992, the first manned flight since the birth of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). German cosmonaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade was scheduled to travel aboard a Soyuz craft to the Mir Space Station, six weeks after his countryman Ulf Merbold returned from a successful eight-day mission aboard the U.S. Shuttle Discovery in January. Kayser-Threde GmbH, a small Munich high technology firm, would produce hardware for scientific tests during Flade's week-long mission. (Reuters, Feb 24/92)
Associated Press reported that a military satellite capable of guiding warplanes, ships and tanks with an accuracy of 50 feet or better circled Earth Monday after a ride on a Delta rocket. (AP, Feb 24/92)
It was reported that Russian scientists successfully tested an engine for a space plane in 1991. (Time, Feb 24/92)
Milton B. Ames Jr., 78, an aeronautical engineer who was mission director for the Pegasus satellite launches using Saturn rockets and who was a recepient of numerous NASA awards, died of heart failure at Mount Vernon Hospital, Alexandria, Virginia. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
Milan J. Krasnican, 68, a retired aerospace engineer with NASA, who was a member of the Project Mercury Space Task Group and a project engineer on the orbiting geophysical observatory spacecraft program at Goddard Space Flight Center, died at Sibley Hospital. A long-term resident of the Washington area, he lived in Bethesda. (W Post, Feb 25/92)
According to a released congressional study, a three billion dollar U.S. space agency satellite programme to monitor the environment would be useless without massive new computer technology. The study said that NASA would need the new technology to store and distribute the information its satellite programme gathers. The Earth Observing System (EOS) was designed to take continuous measurements of ozone depletion, global warming, polar ice melt, depletion of rainforests, and other environmental developments. But the study also indicated that the data collected by EOS would require vast new ways to store information and make available to a wide range of researchers. (Reuters, Feb 25/92; AP, Feb 25/92)
A new bearingless rotor system developed by McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Company, Mesa, Arizona, which promised to be a significant advance in helicopter technology, was tested by NASA. The tests, conducted in Ames' Research Center wind tunnel, evaluated the rotor concept and gathered data to help develop computer programs needed to design a new generation of bearingless rotors. The new system, which eliminates hinges and bearings that usually connect the blades to the rotor shaft, is the key to the innovative system. The blades have advanced airfoils and are made of high strength composites. The technology was expected to have many benefits, including easier maintenance and lower fuel use. "The new rotor system would allow for faster, more agile, more cost effective and safer helicopters," said Steve Jacklin, Project Manager for the wind tunnel test at the Ames Research Center. (NASA Release 92-27)
Reuters reported that two telecommunications satellites worth more than 350 million dollars were placed into oribt for Japan and the Arab League after launch from a European base in French Guiana. (Reuters, Feb 26/92)
The General Accounting Office recommended that NASA should not award a planned contract for the data management portion of the Earth Observing System it had slated for deployment during the coming decade. Citing past criticism of NASA's handling of data from its space missions, the GAO report emphasized that the space agency should work toward the long-term viability of a new data system. (W Times, Feb 26/92)
Fearing that unemployed scientists in the former Soviet Union might put their talents to use building weapons of mass destruction for unsavory regimes, the United States, Germany and Russia announced the formation of an international center to promote "non-military endeavors." (P Inq, Feb 26/92)
Associated Press reported that three soldiers had burned to death as hundreds of construction troops rioted at Baiknour Space Center in Kazakhstan after complaining of "inhuman treatment" by their superiors. Baikonur was the main space launch site in the former Soviet Union. (P Inq, Feb 27/92)
In a speech to the National Space Club, outgoing NASA chief Richard Truly, who resurrected the Shuttle Space program after the 1986 tragedy, said that the country's space program is in jeopardy and that "the cheap shots" coming from the National Space Council, headed by Vice President Quayle, "must end" if the White House and Congress want to maintain U.S. leadership in space. (USA Today, Feb 27/92; W Times, Feb 27/92; W Post, Feb 26/92; Fla Today, Feb 15/92; O Sen, Feb 14, 1992; Birmingham Post-Herald, Feb 18/92; Defense News, Feb 17/92; B Sun, Feb 19/92; Space News, Feb 17/92; AP, Feb 19/92; NY Times, Feb 20/92)
Congressional investigators said that the space agency's Earth-observing satellite program was flawed because of risky plans for gathering information from the satellites. (NY Times, Feb 27/92)
A status briefing marking the 20th anniversary of Pioneer 10's launch was scheduled for March 2 at Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California. The briefing was to examine new and past space accomplishments and a spacecraft signal was scheduled to be "piped in" to the briefing from five billion miles away. Also featured in the briefing would be a launch-identical, full-scale replica of Pioneer 10 shown for the first time. (NASA Note N92-16)
The Washington Post announced that Representative Howard Volpe of Michigan had accused NASA of teaching workers how to avoid disclosing controversial information, including rewriting documents and destroying them. The congressman said that congressional investigators looking into a program to develop the SP-100 nuclear space reactor had found a two-page set of instructions on how to deal with Freedom of Information Act requests. (NASA Release 92-041, Feb 28/92; Plain Dealer, Feb 28/92; AP, Feb 27/92)
Representative Richard J. Durbin, Illinois Democrat, and Senator Dale Bumpers, Arkansas Democrat, released a GAP analysis that said the space agency was committing itself to more projects than it could expect the country to pay for. "In short, it is chasing too much programs for too few dollars." (W Times, Feb 28/92: AP, Feb 27/92)
Dr. Lynn Wiley, an obstetrician who had worked with NASA since the early 1980s, reported that because of plans for long-term missions in space, the question of sex and reproduction had become very important issues. Men and women could be teamed in lunar colonization efforts planned after the turn of the century and in trips to Mars, which could take two to three years for a round trip. Dr. Stewart Whitman of the Space Settlement Studies Program at Niagara University agreed that research was "essential if males and females are going to be on long-term missions together." But Barbara Shwartz, a spokeswoman for the Johnson Space Shuttle Center, said Shuttle sex is not feasible because there is no "privacy" and stressed that NASA plans no sexual experiments involving humans. (W Times, Feb 28/92; Huntsville Times, Feb 20/92; Birmingham News, Feb 20/92; NY Times, Feb 11/92)
Yuri N. Koptev, a top Russian space official, declared in Izvestiya, that the six-year-old Space Station Mir must be replaced by 1994 and suggested turning to the West for technical and financial assistance. "We do not exclude attracting foreign capital and forming a joint stock company for joint use of the Mir Station," he said. (AP, Feb 28/92)
NASA selected 28 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase II contracts in NASA's Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR). The proposals were submitted by 65 small, high technology firms located in 16 states. Total value of the 28 awards was $14 million. SBIR objectives are to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business, including minority and disadvantaged firms, to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally funded research innovations. The SBIR program is managed by NASA's Office of Commercial Programs, NASA Headquarters, Washington, D.C., and all individual SBIR projects are managed by nine NASA field centers. (NASA Release 92-27)
A press briefing was scheduled to be held by a science team for the ATLAS-1 mission on March 23, 1992, at the Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), Huntsville, Alabama. The briefing was to discuss the mission's science activities and was to consist of two panels. (NASA Note N92-18)
A $25 million, five-year program to expand the ability of helicopter pilots to fly close to the ground, around obstacles and in bad weather, was initiated by NASA and the U.S. Army. Experiments conducted at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, would study displays that give pilots information, better guidance and navigation systems and ways to improve helicopter weapons systems. The program's main research tool would be a modified UH-60A Black Hawk helicopter called the Rotorcraft-Aircrew Systems Concepts Airborne Laboratory or "RASCAL." In addition to Ames, flight tests were also to be conducted at Crows Landing, a U.S. Navy facility in California's San Joaquin Valley. (NASA Release 92-28)
NASA reported that an SR-71A "Blackbird" research aircraft will test a key propulsion system for the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP). The SR-71A would act as a high-speed testbed to prove the concept of burning hydrogen fuel outside the X-30's engine exhaust nozzles as a way to improve overall flight efficiency. If the program operations received approval, the SR-71A would be modified and flown at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The NASP Joint Program Office, Wright-Paterson AFB, Ohio, funded the preliminary design work for the experiment. The NASP program is a joint effort involving NASA, the Department of Defense, and a U.S. industry team. (NASA Release 92-29)
In an experiment co-sponsored by NASA and the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, D.C., a novel cell culture system for growing bone cells was to undergo its first test in weightlessness on a Space Shuttle mission. The objectives of the Space Tissue Loss-1 (STL) experiment involve studying the effects of the microgravity environment on the biochemistry and functional activity of various tissues including muscle, bone and blood cells. Post-flight electron microscopic analyses of cells from the flight experiment were to be conducted by Dr. Stephen Doty of the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York City.(NASA Release 92-30)
David Wolf, Ray Schwarz, and Tinh Trinh of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC) were selected by NASA's General Counsel Office to receive the Inventor of the Year Award for their development and design of a new class of horizontally rotating tissue culture systems--also known as the rotating wall bioreactor--that in some ways simulate microgravity. Bioreactors are cell maintenance devices used for research in growth and culturing cells or tissues and have been recognized as valuable tools for pioneering research in lung tissue, skin growth, intestinal disease, cartilage growth, colon cancer, brain tumor growth, and therapeutics. (NASA Release 92-33)
NASA announced that more than 700 researchers from around the world would convene on March 16-20, 1992, at Johnson Space Center's (JSC) Gilruth Center in Houston, Texas for five days of discussions on research on the universe, with much of the focus on Venus and findings from NASA's Magellan probe. Magellan, deployed from the Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, has mapped about 97 percent of the Venusian surface with its remote sensing cameras. An overview of the Magellan program called "Magellan at Venus: The Global Perspective Emerges," start was scheduled to the conference on March 6, 1992. (NASA Note N92-19)
A House panel raised legal questions about the National Space Council's handling of a proposal to restructure space program management. Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, chairman of the House Science subcommittee on investigations and oversight, charged in a letter to president Bush that the council's official circulation of the proposal was in conflict with the 1958 Space Act. The proposal, prepared by the Livermore Laboratory's Lowell Wood, also violated the council's charter not to interfere with line management responsibility in NASA. (AvWk, March 9/92)
David A. Paige of the University of California at Los Angeles reexamined the thermodynamics of ice under Martian conditions and concluded that there could be some ground-ice deposits just a few feet below the surface and that "these deposits could be valuable resource for human exploration." (W Post, Mar 9/92)
Researchers reported in Science magazine that two groups of meteorites thought to be fragments of long-vanished planets had been dated to within 100 million years of the formation of the solar system about 4.56 billion years ago. The research could lead to a better understanding of how planets emerged from the debris of interplanetary collisions. (P Inq, Mar 9/92)
NASA technology studies have indicated that a next-generation high-speed civil transport (HSCT) would be able to meet engine emission and noise targets, although the sonic-boom problem would remain. Agency studies had shown that emissions could be reduced to an acceptable level by controlling the fuel air ratio in the combustor to eliminate high peak temperatures. NASA was also studying new high-lift flaps that allow the aircraft to climb rapidly, reducing the noise footprint. (Flight International, Mar 10/92)
In an official statement, NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly welcomed the nomination of Daniel S. Goldin to be next NASA Administrator. "I am pleased to learn that President Bush nominated Daniel S. Goldin as the next Administrator of NASA....I wish him every success as he comes to this elite organization," said Truly. (NASA Note 92-20)
It was reported that on March 17, 1992, that the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel will present its annual report to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly at NASA headquarters, Washington, D.C. The panel reviews, evaluates, and advises the NASA Administrator on present and future NASA programs and activities. Priority is given to programs that involve the safety of manned flight. (NASA Note 92-21)
A congressional investigator recommended that the government scrap development of a space nuclear reactor unless the nation was willing to commit more than $2 billion to the project. The space reactor project was begun as a joint venture of NASA, the Department of Energy, and the Pentagon. The latter agency which envisioned a use of the project in its Strategic Defense Initiative, the space-based nuclear defense shield. But Mark E. Gebicke, director of NASA issues for GAO, said the proposed reactor suffered because the National Aeronautics and Space Administration refused to identify a specific mission in which the nuclear technology would be used as a power source or propulsion system. (AP, Mar 12/92)
Dr. Everett Gibson of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC), Houston, Texas, Dr. Haraldur Karlsson, and scientists at the University of Chicago analyzed drops of water extracted from several meteorites believed to have come from Mars and concluded that the oxygen isotopes in the water were extraterrestrial. Photographs returned to Earth from the Mariner 9 and Viking spacecraft show features that suggest Mars once may have had a water-rich atmosphere and flowing water on its surface. Through the years, several meteorites have been collected on Earth that scientists have identified as Martian by comparing them to information gleaned by the Viking spacecraft. Six of these meteorites were used in the water extraction procedure. Findings from the work completed by the team may answer some questions about the processes operating in the solar system. (NASA Release 92-35)
It was reported that Vice President Dan Quayle's National Space Council had tightened its control over space activities by dividing NASA's responsibility for the U.S. moon-Mars project among several government agencies. Quayle released a directive, approved by the president, that assigns "major roles" to the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy while establishing NASA as the principal agency. (Mercury News, Mar 14/92)
The new Space Shuttle Endeavour was slowly hauled to its seaside launching pad for work to ready the ship for an engine test firing in April and its maiden flight in early May. Mounted atop a powerful Apollo-era crawler-transporter, Endeavour began the 4 1/2 mile, six-hour trip to pad 39-B at 7:18 a.m. EST. Engineers spent the afternoon hooking up fuel lines and various mechanical, hydraulic and electrical systems. (UPI, Mar 14/92; AP, Mar 13/92; P Inq, Mar 14/92)
In an effort to reduce vibrations in helicopters, a team of engineers at the University of Maryland were developing "smart" rotor blades that measure aerodynamic stresses and change shape in flight to reduce them. The team also hoped to build rotor blades that can warn pilots when the blades are about to crack or fail. (B Sun, Mar 14/92)
The Lunar and Planetary Science Conference in Houston, Texas, announced that the Magellan spacecraft's orbit around Venus would be lowered to just above the planet's dense atmosphere to conduct gravity studies on Venus. The spacecraft's closet approach to Venus was to be moved downward from 186 miles to 111 miles above the surface for maximum sensitivity to variations in the gravity field. The Magellan Project is managed by JPL for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications. (NASA Release 92-36)
James V. Correale, 69, a native of Philadelphia who figured out how to clean the air that Apollo 13 astronauts rapidly were running out of during their mission to the moon in 1970, died Saturday at a hospital in Nassau Bay, Texas. (P Inq, Mar 17/92)
Researchers from NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center's Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, used laser-ranging instruments aboard the Wallops P-3B (HL) Orion aircraft to measure the Arctic sea ice above the water and the Greenland polar glacier elevations in order to study global climate changes. The data gathered was to be compared to previous studies and used to develop a baseline for future studies. Scientists are interested in developing accurate measurements of sea ice and glaciers because changes in these systems may indicate trends in world climate. Appreciable changes in these ice systems, such as increased melting, could directly affect global climate. (NASA Release 92-38)
Managers at NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were implementing a new set of operating procedures because of a problem in the playback of recorded data. Scientific and spacecraft data was to be transmitted directly to the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) and then to a ground control center, without using tape recorders. However, because of the capability of TDRSS, using two of its spacecraft would enable nearly full coverage of each Compton orbit. This procedure will be used while an investigation continues into the cause of the problem. Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, the second of NASA's Great Observatories, was launched April 5, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Atlantis to study high-energy radiation from space. The spacecraft was developed and is managed and operated by GSFC for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 92-39)
A German and two Russian astronauts were launched into space in the first space mission of the post-Soviet era. The 160 foot Soyuz TM-14 rocket was scheduled to rendezvous on March 19 with the Mir Space Station orbiting 200 miles above Earth. Russian officials hoped the launching would attract more foreign investment for future joint missions to help finance future space explorations. (NY Times, Mar 18/92; W Post, Mar 18/92; LA Times, Mar 18/92)
The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, in its annual report to officials of NASA, questioned the agency's decision to save money by eliminating several engine improvement programs, which could compromise the safety of future Space Shuttle flights. Although the panel said NASA was generally doing a good job on safety issues, the panel said it was unwise for the agency to stop developing a new main combustion chamber for the engine and a new hydrogen fuel pump. (NY Times, Mar 18/92)
A draft report issued by the National Research Council claimed that NASA was failing to provide the technological support needed by the U.S. aircraft industry to face down foreign rivals. The study raised serious questions about NASA's role in supporting basic technology that U.S. manufacturers of aircraft jet engines and components rely on in meeting international competition. (LA Times, Mar 18/92)
According to a poll commissioned by the company that built the U.S. Space Shuttle fleet, enthusiasm was waning for NASA's planned space station and President Bush's proposed missions to the moon and Mars. Sixty-five percent of the nation's registered voters currently favor building the space station, compared with 74 percent two years ago and 78 percent in 1988. Support for an outpost on Mars, a goal announced by Bush during his first year in office, had slipped to 49 percent from 62 percent in 1990 and 66 percent in 1988. (O Sen, Mar 19/92)
Hugo Wahlquist, of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, said that Italian and American scientists would spend nine to 12 months looking for signs of gravity waves--distortions in space and time caused by gigantic black holes--in tape recordings of radio transmissions between Ulysses and stations on Earth. Discovery of gravity waves would provide strong confirmation of Albert Einstein's theory of how the universe works, and could prove the existence of black holes. (W Times, Mar 19/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
NASA released to Congress a report on the Restructuring of the Earth Observation System (EOS). The system is the centerpiece of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, a coordinated program to study the Earth's environment as a complete global system and is composed of two series of spacecraft to collect data over 15 years. "The restructured EOS program meets the concerns for a less costly more flexible program while maintaining the science observations needed to support global change research," said Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications. (NASA Note N92-22)
A Russian-German crew docked with the Mir Space Station and was to relieve a Russian cosmonaut who had been orbiting over an extended period of time. The ITAR-Tass news agency reported that the TM-14 capsule docked on schedule. Cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kaleri would replace cosmonauts Sergei Krikalev and Alexander Volkov, who were scheduled to return to Earth on March 25. Germany paid $24 million to send its astronaut Klaus-Dietrich Flade into space. He was to spend six days studying the influence of zero gravity on the human body. (P Inq, Mar 20/92; AP, Mar 19/92)
The scheduled launch of Space Shuttle Atlantis was canceled because of fuel leaks, but NASA decided it was a fleeting problem that posed no danger. Launch director Bob Sieck said he was confident the trouble was not a recurrence of the hydrogen leaks that grounded the Shuttle fleet for almost six months in 1990. The launch was rescheduled for the next day. (W Post, Mar 24/92; NY Times, Mar 24/92; W Times, Mar 24/92; P Inq, Mar 24/92)
The NASA announced that both tape recorders aboard the $617 million Compton Gamma Ray Observatory were malfunctioning, and engineers directed the craft to not use the machines. Compton, a joint project of NASA and the European Space Agency, was built by the space and technology group of TRW under the direction of Daniel Goldin, the man selected by President Bush to become the new NASA administrator. (W Post, Mar 24/92)
Michael Griffin, associate administrator of NASA, told an opening session of a NASA was conference, that NASA in trouble with the tax-paying public because its hadn't been running efficient programs. Griffin said NASA risks losing support for its projects--like proposed returns to the moon and manned missions to Mars--because the public perceives it is employing more people than it needs and not giving a good return for the money it spends. (Birmingham News, Mar 25/92)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis and its seven-member crew was launched into orbit to begin eight days of around-the-clock research to probe the health of Earth's polluted atmosphere. Embarking on NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth," Atlantis's flight was the first of 10 planned over the next decade to chart subtle atmospheric changes as the sun's energy waxes and wanes slightly over a complete 11-year "solar cycle." (W Post, Mar 25/92; USA Today, Mar 25/92; WSJ, Mar 25/92; B Sun, Mar 25/92; NY Times, Mar 25/92; AP, Mar 25/92)
It was reported that the Bush Administration's commitment to keeping Russia's nuclear scientists employed by offering financial assistance and technical cooperation was running into obstacles as U.S. officials held up some deals and sent conflicting signals about others. Among the projects awaiting approval were requests by federal agencies to acquire Russian-made plutonium, buy a Russian-made reactor for the U.S. space program, and join an international consortium with Russia and others to explore use of fusion energy.  (W Post, Mar 25/92)
Outgoing NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly announced his support for using space to enhance education and his recommendation to administrator-nominee Daniel S. Golding that NASA fly Barbara Morgan, who was a backup to Christa McAuliffe. (NASA Release 92-40)
A TRW unit was served with a whistle-blower lawsuit alleging that the firm made fraudulent claims for payments on government satellite contracts. The suit, filed in U.S. District Court in Los Angeles, alleged that TRW's Space and Technology group in Redondo California Beach, used improper design standards for the spy, communications, and scientific satellites, then billed the government for the cost of correcting the errors. (LA Times, Mar 26/92)
Russian cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev returned to earth five months later than originally planned. The 33-year-old flight engineer's stint in space aboard the Mir Space Station had been originally scheduled to end in October. But because of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, money problems in Moscow, and Kazakh nationalism, he was asked to extend his space journey by almost five months, creating a predicament for him and making him a media celebrity. (NY Times, Mar 26/92; USA Today, Mar 26/92; W Post, Mar 26/92; WSJ, Mar 26/92; B Sun, Mar 26/92)
Belgium's Prince Philippe, who is the nephew of King Baudouin and heir to the throne, called the crew members of the Space Shuttle Atlantis to congradulate them on their launch and to honor Dirk Frimout, the first Belgian in space. (AP, Mar 26/92; UPI, Mar 26/92)
The Bush Administration announced that the government would import Russian technology for the U.S. space program. "We hope that this is the beginning of a long series of transactions not only with Russia but with Ukraine and with other republics," said one official. The United States was buying a small amount of plutonium fuel for space exploration as well as a reactor designed for the same purpose and four thruster rockets built to shift a satellite from one orbit to another. The administration also said that it has approved a license for a private American company to buy Russian thrusters. The sets of deals are worth an estimated $14.3 million. (W Post, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 28/92; B Sun, Mar 28/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis photographed natural auroras and fired clouds of gas into space as they circled Earth for a fourth day. (NY Times, Mar 28/92; P Inq, Mar 27/92; W Post, Mar 27/92)
A 22-second Flight Readiness Firing (FRF) of the Space Shuttle Endeavour's three main engines was scheduled for Monday, April 6, 1992, at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Prior to launch, a successful main engine test firing is required of all new Space Shuttle Orbiters. A primary objective of the mission was to capture, retrieve, repair, and redeploy an INTELSAT-VI communications satellite that had been stranded in an incorrect orbit since March 1990. An additional goal was to demonstrate and verify Space Station Freedom EVA maintenance and assembly capabilities. (NASA Note N92-26)
It was reported that a set of briefings on Endeavour's maiden flight were scheduled for April 7 and 8, 1992, at the Johnson Space Center, Houston (JSC). The Space Shuttle Mission STS-49 crew members were to rendezvous, capture, repair, and deploy the stranded International Telecommunications Satellite (INTELSAT) and test and evaluate a variety of Space Station Freedom assembly techniques during three space walks. (NASA Note N92-25)
Dr. William B. Lenoir, NASA's Associate Administrator for Space Flight, submitted his letter of resignation to NASA Administrator Richard H. Truly, to be effective May 4, 1992. During Dr. Lenoir's tenure, NASA safely and successfully launched the Space Shuttle 17 times and completed a major restructuring of the Space Station Freedom program, reducing its development costs by $6 billion, simplifying its subsystems and improving its on-orbit assembly process. (NASA Release 92-41)
NASA officials added an extra day to the environmental mission of the Space Shuttle Atlantis so its seven-member crew could conduct more research on the atmosphere. (P Inq, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92)
James Edwin Webb, 85, whose work as the chief of America's space agency was instrumental in putting a man on the moon, died March 27 at Georgetown University Hospital. During Mr. Webb's tenure, America's first manned space flight took place as well as the first orbital flight by John Glenn and the first walk in space by Edward White. (W Times, Mar 30/92; USA Today, Mar 30/92; NY Times, Mar 29/92; W Post, Mar 29/92)
Chinese engineers blamed a faulty ignition circuit for botching the launch of an Australian communications satellite. Investigators checking the Long March-2E rocket that failed to blast off on March 22 found a fault in the ignition system circuits that led to an emergency engine shutdown. According to Chinese officials, the launch will be attempted again later during the year. (P Inq, Mar 30/92)
NASA announced the selection of 19 new astronaut candidates for the Space Shuttle program. The group consisted of four pilot astronaut candidates and 15 mission specialist astronaut candidates, including nine civilians and 10 military officers. The candidates, who were chosen from 2,054 qualified applicants, were to report to the Johnson Space Center, Houston, in August 1992 to begin a year of training and evaluation. (NASA Release 92-42)
Atlantis's astronauts reported the loss of a second scientific instrument, a telescope probing galaxies millions of light years away. Controllers spent hours trying to restore the telescope but to no avail. The telescope, the only astronomical instrument abroad, accomplished 19 observations before the fuse blew. More than 34 were planned for the nine-day mission. (W Post, Mar 31/92; USA Today, Mar 31/92; W Times, Mar 31/92; B Sun, Mar 31/92; NY Times, Mar 31/92)
In order to study the rarefied region that lies between 10 to 20 miles above the earth, designers were developing a new class of robot airplanes to monitor zone depletion and global warming. A half-dozen companies were proposing drones designed to work at these altitudes, travel thousands of miles without refueling or stay high in the sky for days, if not weeks, at a times. Some of the proposals are modifications of military models, while others harness unusual engines, airframes or materials. (NY Times, Mar 31/92)
Scientists reported that an array of instruments that detect the faintest twitches in the Earth's gravitational field had for the first time taken the pulse of the planet's solid inner core. The discovery opens a new avenue for studying the detailed structure of the Earth's deep interior, from which physicists would be able to calculate the mass of the Earth's inner core and to infer compositions of both the inner and outer core. The achievement was expected to shed light on such enigmas as the nature of the electric dynamo believed to drive the Earth's wavering magnetic field. (NY Times, Mar 31/92)
Virginia Governor L. Douglas Wilder was scheduled to dedicate on Sunday April 5, the new Virginia Air and Space Center in Hampton, Virginia. The $30 million facility, which was to serve as the new official visitor center for the NASA Langley Research Center, has a 300-seat IMAX theater and was to feature exhibits on the Viking Orbiter and Viking Lander, as well as numerous exhibits on the history of flight and space exploration. (W Post, Apr 1/92)
At the request of Congress, a NASA team researched the issue of killer asteroids and concluded that the odds of a major collision in the next century were "extremely small." But the team added that asteroid impacts posed "a significant hazard to life and property" and called for an international effort "to provide insurance for our planet against the ultimate catastrophe." The reporting team gave no cost estimates for the endeavor but said if construction began soon, a worldwide network of warning telescopes could be operational by 1997. (NY Times, Apr 1/92; W Times, Apr 1/92)
A technical consultant to the House Committee on Space, Science and Technology, said that if the hypersonic National Aero-Space Plane is built, it would be assembled in Palmdale, California. Scott Crossfield, a former test pilot, said President Bush, Vice President Quayle and the National Space Council were strong supporters of the X-30. Crossfield said it would cost an estimated $5 billion to $12 billion for the pair of X-30s. (Antelope Valley Press, Apr 1/92)
NASA reported that the agency would start supersonic flight tests of a new electronic control system that would improve the performance, reliability, and safety of high-speed military aircraft, future commercial supersonic transports, and the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane. A NASA F-15 research aircraft was to begin supersonic testing at the Performance Seeking Control in April 1992 at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. (NASA Release 92-44, Apr 1/92)
After winning Senate approval in near-record time, Daniel S. Goldin was sworn in as NASA's ninth administrator. (WP, Apr 2/92)
The Space Shuttle Atlantis made a near-perfect touchdown at Cape Canaveral after a nine-day atmospheric research flight, NASA's first manned "Mission to Planet Earth." Atlantis's ambitious flight marked the first in a series of at least 10 such missions to study the sun and Earth's atmosphere over the next decade to chart subtle changes in the sun's energy output that affect chemical processes critical to life on Earth. The Shuttle circled the world 143 times during its nine-day voyage and traveled 3.7 million miles. (UPI, Apr 2/92; AP, Apr 2/92)
U.S. officials announced a tentative agreement between United States and Europe limiting government support for the commercial aircraft industry. The deal would cap government support to Airbus for developing new aircraft at 30 percent to 35 percent of production costs. The sort of indirect support that the Europeans had charged U.S. manufacturers with receiving would be limited to 5 percent of a company's sales of civil aircraft. (B Sun, Apr 2/92; LA Times, Apr 2/92; WSJ, Apr 2/92; NY Times, Apr 2/92)
Loral Corporation became the first U.S. aerospace company to win government approval to buy advanced space technology from the former Soviet Union. The Defense Department authorized Loral's space systems division in Palo Alto, California, to import tiny electric satellite thrusters that are used to position satellites in space. Loral's Russian partners are Fakel Enterprises of Kaliningrad, which makes the so-called Hall thrusters, and the Research Institute of Applied Mechanics and Electrodynamics of Moscow. (WSJ, Apr 2/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had successfully launched a rocket-borne telescope from a site north of Fairbanks, Alaska. The telescope, sponsored by the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization, would monitor infrared characteristics of the aurora borealis, commonly known as northern lights. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
It was reported that for the first time in a generation, NASA and the Air Force were developing a new rocket engine and launch system. The National Launch System (NLS), which was to consist of three new vehicles, would become operational in 2002, and will, among other missions, carry supplies to Space Station Freedom. (W Times, Apr 2/92)
NASA announced the selection of 33 participating scientists to take part in a wide range of investigations on the Mars Observer mission, planned for launch September 16, 1992. These scientists would  be added to the current science teams in October 1992 to increase the range of studies planned for the 2-year global mapping mission. Besides representing U.S. universities and research centers, the newly selected group of participating scientists included four individuals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. Six scientists from Austria, the United Kingdom, France and Germany were already involved in the mission, and a group of 10 participating scientists from Russia were to be added later this year. (NASA Release 92-45)
NASA selected the ColeJon Corporation of Cleveland, Ohio, for negotiations leading to award of a support service contract for operations, maintenance and repair of facilities at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio. Estimated value of the contract was approximately $30 million. (NASA Release C92-3)
NASA Administration Daniel Goldin said President Bush's goal of a manned flight to Mars by 2019 was unrealistic because it would take longer to develop the spaceship and fly the robotic missions that must precede humans. (USA Today, Apr 3/92)
A space-for-rent company unveiled its first Shuttle module, which is scheduled to fly aboard Atlantis in the spring of 1993. The Spacehab module, which consists of up to 61 lockers for experiments, would be the first privately owned and operated space facility that can be tended by astronauts in orbit. (AP, Apr 3/92)
NASA started a countdown toward test-firing the Space Shuttle Endeavour's main engines. Endeavour's three main engines were to be fired for 22 seconds. If all goes well, launch teams would begin preparing the Shuttle for a satellite rescue mission in early May 1992. (W Times, Apr 4/92; AP, Apr 4/92; UPI, Apr 6/92)
China reported that it would send astronauts into space by the year 2000 as the first step toward launching its own Space Station. "Before the year 2000 China will have completed its research into experimental manned spacecraft and carrier rockets," said the State Commission on Science and Technology. (UPI, Apr 7/92; LA Times, Apr 8/92)
It was reported that a recently discovered galaxy 13 billion light-years from Earth may provide answers about the early formation of the universe. Researchers studying the galaxy, designated 10214+4724, said they believe it is forming new stars at more than 10 million times the rate of the most prolific star-forming mass in the Milky Way. (NY Times, Apr 7/92)
In a letter sent to the chairwoman of the subcommittee that funds NASA, Senator Howell T. Heflin said killing the Advanced Solid Rocket Motor would cost almost twice as much as building it. NASA and the White House had moved to cancel the $3 billion program, saying the cost of keeping it going wouldn't fit in NASA's tight budget request of $15 billion for fiscal year 1993. Using figures obtained from NASA and from the ASRM's contractors, Heflin calculated that killing the program would cost NASA $2.65 billion through the year 2000. By contrast, he said it would cost $1.29 billion to finish building the rocket, not including $510 million to buy the first six sets of motors. (Htsvl Times, Apr 7/92; Birmingham News, Apr 12/92)
NASA managers decided to replace all three main engines aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour because of problems with powerful oxygen pumps that came to light after an engine test firing. Rocket engineers initially believed that Endeavour had sailed through its flight readiness firing in good condition, with no signs of any major problems in the ship's propulsion system. But detailed analysis of data from the 22-second test indicated the liquid oxygen high pressure turbopump bolted to main engine No. 2 had experienced high vibration levels during engine operation, apparently because of abnormal bearing wear. NASA decided to replace all three of the engines to minimize the impact on the Shuttle's launch processing. (UPI, Apr 8/92; AP, Apr 8/92)
Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope announced that they had spotted the gathering of swirling stars that is believed to be the gravitational signature of a black hole in a galaxy called M32. Todd R. Lauer of the National Optical Astronomy Observatories in Tucson, Arizona, and a scientist using the Hubble, said that based upon what he has seen so far, "I would be surprised if M32 turns out not to be a black hole." Concurrently the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory discovered 11 objects in space that constitute "a new class of objects--the gamma ray quasar." The new gamma ray quasars, some as far as 10 billion light-years away, are probably similar to the thousands of other quasars detected in recent years, but the nature of quasars is still debated. (AP, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 9/92; LA Times, Apr 9/92; W Times, Apr 9/92; U Post, Apr 13/92; USA Today, Apr 9/92; CSM, Apr 14/92; NASA Release 92-46 and 92-47; NASA Note N92-28)
Seven scientists, engineers and government officials told a congressional subcommittee that the often cited claim by National Science Foundation officials that the United States faces a major shortage of scientists and engineers was false. Witnesses told the hearing that the shortage that was to have begun a few years ago--and which was to have left the nation with a "shortfall" of 675,000 scientists and engineers by 2010--never materialized. Quite the contrary, they said, there was now such a surplus of scientists and engineers that unemployment rates in some disciplines far exceeded those for the country as a whole. (W Post, Apr 9/92; B Sun, Apr 14/92)
Senator Barbara Mikulski of Maryland called for immediate congressional action to shift U.S. research and development from military hardware to products that would compete in the "environmental marketplace" of the future. NASA, she said, should develop "the second-generation Concorde...and leapfrog our competitors in a 21st century industry that will generate a $200 billion market of the future." (W Post, Apr 10/92)
Spencer Moxon Beresford, 73, a former general counsel for NASA under President Nixon, died April 7 in an automobile accident in Miami. (W Post, Apr 11/92)
The University of Maryland received $20 million from NASA to help build and equip the Christopher Columbus Center of Marine Research and Exploration. (AP, Apr 11/92)
According to Michael Griffin, NASA's associate administrator for exploration, NASA needs $3 billion annually to conduct a program of human exploration of the moon and Mars. Those funds would have to come from sacrificing other space projects if NASA's overall budget could not be increased, Griffin said. (Space News, Apr 13/92)
TRW Inc. said it had named R. Gordon Williams to succeed Daniel S. Goldin, the new head of NASA, as vice president and general manager of TRW's Space and Technology Group. Williams, 61, was formerly vice president and general manager of TRS's Federal Systems division, which manages TRW's major space systems and projects for NASA. (UPI, Apr 13/92)
The National Space Club named the NASA/TRW observatory team that built the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory the winner of the 1992 Nelson P. Jackson Award at an awards ceremony April 10 in Washington, D.C. This award honors the firm responsible for "an outstanding contribution to the missile, aircraft and space fields." (Business Wire, Apr 15/92)
A space agency spokesman said that NASA had failed again to open the main antenna of its Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft. Engineers had heated the antenna with sunlight over three days in March, then cooled it in shade. They hoped the antenna would expand and then shrink enough to free its jammed parts, said Jim Wilson, a spokesman fot the space agency's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. (P Inq, Apr 17/92; USA Today, Apr 17/92)
It was reported that in the upcoming flight of the Shuttle Endeavour, NASA would try for the first time to revitalize a crippled satellite while in orbit. During a four-day procedure, Endeavour's crew were to rendezvous with Intelsat 6, pull the satellite into the spaceship's cargo bay and mate it to a new solid rocket motor. Intelsat 6 then would be released and its rocket motor fired to send it into a 22,300 mile-hight orbit. The hope was that then, for the next 14 years, Intelsat 6 would relay trans-Atlantic telephone calls and television shows from Europe to North America and South America. (W Times, Apr 18/92)
NASA officials said that tomatoes grown by students and teachers from seeds that had been in space for nearly six years show little or no difference from the fruit of seed that never left the Earth. The tomatoes from a batch of 12.5 million space-borne seed were as healthy as their earthly counterparts, though "findings suggest that the space-exposed seeds germinated slightly faster" and "seedlings had a faster initial growth rate," the officials said. (W Times, Apr 19/92; W Post, Apr 20/92; NASA Release 92-49)
It was reported that a NASA-led team might travel to Russia to explore areas for joint cooperation on axisymmetric scramjets. At the top of the list was the possibility of the U.S. joining in a second flight later during the year of the Russian scramjet that already had achieved about three seconds of supersonic combustion. (AvWk, Apr 20/92)
Explorers who uncovered the lost Arabian city of Ubar by using ancient maps and photographs from space have also found a bigger site. The second site, at the base of Oman's Qara Mountains about 20 miles northeast of the Indian Ocean port of Salalah, was called Saffara Metropolis on the map of Roman historian Claudius Ptolemy, drawn around A.D. 100, said Juris Zarins. Zarins said the find indicates an Arabian Peninsula network of frankincense trade existed more than three millenniums before scholars previously believed. (AP, Apr 20/92; P Inq, Apr 21/92)
NASA awarded research grants to three universities to develop teacher training courses that would enable middle school teachers to incorporate aerospace topics and concepts into their classrooms and to create new and imaginative practices in learning. The Teacher Training Pre-Service Program is a two-year program. The following schools were selected from responses to a solicitation of proposals: Fayetteville State University, Eastern Michigan University, and the University of Alabama. Each was to receive a $83,000 grant and were expected to provide matching, non-Federal funds. (NASA Release 92-50)
American space scientists said the hottest star ever recorded--33 times hotter than the sun--had been photographed in a faraway galaxy by the Hubble Space Telescope. Burning at 360,000 degrees Fahrenheit, the white star at the heart of a glowing red nebula in the Great Magellanic Cloud galaxy is going out in a "blaze of glory," said Sally Heap, an astrophysicist with NASA. (NY Times, Apr 21/92; AP, Apr 21/92; W Times, Apr 21/92; USA Today, Apr 21/92)
The Justice Department accused a large military electronics maker of falsifying results of tests on sophisticated weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. The department joined a $250 million civil lawsuit that accused Teledyne Relays, a Teledyne Inc. unit, of falsifying tests to ensure the reliability of electromagnetic relays, according to court papers. Government contracts accounted for about a third of Teledyne's $3.2 billion in sales last year. (AP, Apr 23/92)
The Magellan spacecraft, which had used radar to unveil 97 percent of Venus's cloud-covered volcanic landscape, started measuring the planet's gravity. Magellan showed that Venus's crust is built up vertically as volcanoes erupt, adding material to the surface. The measurements should help scientists understand the planet's interior and how internal activity shapes the rugged surface. (NY Times, Apr 23/92)
Daniel S. Goldin, the newly appointed Administrator NASA said he was a strong supporter of the controversial Space Station Freedom, which was being developed in part at the NASA Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. The Space Station Freedom, whose price had soared from $8 billion to $40 billion, was a frequent target of lawmakers looking to trim NASA's budget. But Goldin said, "I believe that there is a crying need for human interaction in space. If we are to fulfill our role of NASA and to have humans seek their destiny in space, we must understand the interactions of humans in a hostile space environment, the long-term impacts of zero gravity, microgravity, radiation." (News-Herald, Apr 23/92; Plain Dealer, Apr 23/92)
It was announced that NASA's Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) satellite had achieved two of the three goals of its $400 million mission to study the "big bang." In 1991 COBE had shown that the wavelength or "color" of the cosmic background radiation was consistent with what the big-bang theory predicted, said John Mather, project scientist at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Scientists also said that COBE had met its second goal: detecting the oldest structures in the universe, thereby explaining how matter first started clumping together in the young universe to produce galaxies and stars. COBE was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on November 18, 1989. It was carried into a 559-mile-high, near polar orbit by a two-stage Delta rocket with nine strap-on boosters. (AP, Apr 23/92; LA Times, Apr 24/92; B Sun, Apr 24/92; NY Times, Apr 24/92; USA Today, Apr 24/92; NASA Release 92-51)
During the Soviet period, Ukrainian scientists and industry were an integral part of the Soviet space program, which employed over 250,000 people. When the breakup of the Soviet Union fragmented its space program, Ukraine gained one of the world's most advanced aerospace industries, capable of producing everything from rockets to satellites. However, without the Soviet Union to pour money into space exploration, Ukraine was looking for new ways to keep its aerospace industry working. (LA Times, Apr 24/92)
Flights of the X-31 Enhanced Fighter Maneuverability demonstrator aircraft resumed at NASA's Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility, Edwards, California. The X-31s were being flown at Ames to show the value of thrust vectoring (directing engine exhaust flow) coupled with an advanced flight control system for close-in air combat at very high angles-of-attack. (NASA Release 92-52)
The Air Force reported that a Titan 2 rocket was launched into space carrying a secret military payload into a polar, low-earth orbit. The two-stage rocket, a modified Titan intercontinental ballistic missile, was launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, about 250 miles northwest of Los Angeles. (W Times, Apr 26/92)
NASA delayed the maiden flight of the new Space Shuttle Endeavour from May 4 to May 7 to allow a daylight liftoff. Tom Utsman, acting associate administrator for space flight at NASA, said officials had reviewed the criteria and decided that it would be prudent to delay the flight so detailed photographs and documentation could be made for analysis. A dalylight liftoff also would allow Endeavour's seven-member crew to make a daylight landing back at the Kennedy Space Center in case of an engine failure early in flight. (UPI, Apr 28/92; W Post, Apr 28/92; USA Today, Apr 28/92; NY Times, Apr 28/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin, predicted a "Perils of Pauline" battle in Congress over the survival of Space Station Freedom, saying the outpost was an investment in the future that should not be squandered for short-term gains. Despite the high costs and frequent redesigns, Goldin said the station was vital to the future of America's space program. Although he refused to predict the outcome of congressional debate, he expressed guarded optimism that Freedom would survive the latest challenge. (UPI, Apr 29/92)
Gerard K. O'Neill, a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the idea of colonizing space, died in Redwood City, California. O'Neill, 65, was the author of The High Frontier, a 1977 book that proposed the construction of giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could live in space. (P Inq, Apr 29/92)
The Air Force reported that a YF-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, prototype of the planned F-22, had slammed onto the main runway of Edwards Air Force Base with its wheels retracted during a practice approach. The radar-eluding plane, designed to be the hottest air combat fighter going into the 21st century, slid several thousand feet and burned for 90 seconds. A Lockheed pilot escaped with only minor injuries. (B Sun, Apr 29/92)
Opponents of Space Station Freedom, led by Representative Tim Roemer of Indiana, said they would try to strip from the 1993 federal budget virtually all of the $2.25 billion requested for the project by NASA. The attack would come as an amendment to legislation that would set maximum spending levels for the agency over the next three years. (LA Times, Apr 29/92)
NASA administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced his first hiring decisions, naming four men to senior management posts at NASA headquarters. The new appointments--Maj. Gen. Jeremiah W. Pearson III, Bryan D. O'Connor, Charles F. Bolden and Frederick D. Gregory--included three present or former astronauts and a Marine general who led forces during Operation Desert Storm. (W Post, Apr 29/92; NASA Release 92-54)
The planned U.S. Space Station Freedom survived an attempt to kill it when the House of Representatives defeated a move to cut the $2.25 billion needed to keep the program on track. The 254-159 vote to continue funding marked the fourth time the House had voted on the costly and ambitious program in recent years. (UPI, Apr 30/92; AP, Apr 30/92; W Post, Apr 30/92; USA Today, Apr 30/92)
Russia faced a new dispute over the famed Baikonur spaceport in Kazakhstan. Russian President Boris Yeltsin revealed that Kazakhstan had prevented the liftoff of a satellite at the Baikonur cosmodrome. "Kazakhstan was playing games. It wanted to show that there has to be a Russian-Kazakhstan agreement on Baikonur," Mr. Yeltsin said. Mr. Yeltsin said he would propose to Kazakhstan President Nursultan Nazarbayev either joint financing of the famed spaceport, Russian purchase of the property, or a form of joint venture with the Kazakhstan republic. (W Times, Apr 30/92)
Results from a recently completed U.S. multi-agency aircraft study indicated that the ozone shield of the Northern Hemisphere was increasingly vulnerable to depletion by man-made chemicals. Dr. James Anderson of Harvard University, the study's Mission scientist, and 80 other scientists of the second Airborne Arctic Stratospheric Expedition (AASE II) used two NASA aircraft to examine the ozone-related chemistry and air motions of the lower stratosphere from early October 1991 through late March 1992. The extensive measurements, combined with satellite and meteorological data, provide the first detailed picture of the factors that drive changes in the Arctic ozone layer from fall, through winter, and into spring. (NASA Release 92-55; NASA Release 92-56)
NASA headquarters reported that eight finalists had been chosen for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy--NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The finalists were: Cray Research Inc., Honeywell Inc., IBM Federal Sector Division, McDonnell Douglas Space Systems, Paramax Systems Corp., Rocket Research Co., Stanford Telecommunications Inc., and Technical Analysis Inc. (NASA Release 92-57)
NASA scientists, reviewing results of seven months' observations, said that after a record buildup of ozone-damaging chemicals last January, the amounts rapidly dissipated because of sudden warming in February and March. While the tests continued to show a thinning of the ozone layer that protects the earth from ultraviolet rays, the sudden warming prevented any severe ozone depletion over the Arctic region, the scientists said. Nevertheless, they said, the potential for severe ozone destruction over parts of the United States, Canada, and Europe remains a matter of serious concern because of the high concentrations of destructive chlorine that were detected. (W Times, May 1/92; NY Times, May 1/92; W Post, May 1/92; USA Today, May 1/92; LA Times, May 1/92)
Scientists probing river muck have discovered bacteria that can "eat" the main chemicals threatening the ozone layer, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. The bacteria that break down chlorofluorocarbons, known as CFCs, were found along the Potomac River in Virginia and in pond, marsh, and swamp sediments in Maryland, South Carolina, and Virginia. The CFC-eating bacteria are harmless to humans, but can operate only in the absence of oxygen, according to Derek Lovley, a microbiologist working at the Geololgical Survey in Reston, Virginia. (W Post, May 2/92)
Senate leaders announced the appointment of Harriett G. Jenkins, assistant administrator for equal opportunity programs at NASA, to head the Senate's new office of fair employment practices. Carl D. Moore, general councel for the General Accounting Office's personnel appeals board, was named deputy director in a joint appointment by Majority Leader George J. Mitchell of Maine and Minority Leader Robert J. Dole of Kansas. (W Post, May 3/92)
If Japan follows through on plans to launch a probe toward Mars in 1996, it will become the third nation to explore the red planet, following the U.S. and Russia. Budgeted at $96.8 million, the 550-pound Japanese probe has been dubbed Planet B. It would begin to orbit Mars by October 1997, according to Japan's Institute of Space and Astronomical Science, which is planning the project. (Parade Magazine, Mar 3/92)
Preston Rogers Bassett, 100, an inventor and retired president of the Sperry Gyroscope Co. who served on the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics from 1954 to 1958, died of cardiac arrest April 30 at his home in Ridgefield, Connecticut. (W Post, May 4/92)
The House of Representatives approved a $47.3 billion space program for the next three years after voting to limit spending on development of an advanced solid-fuel rocket motor motor. The bill reauthorizing NASA for fiscal years 1993 through 1995 was passed by voice vote and sent to the Senate. The House included $7.5 billion for the proposed manned Space Station, nearly $8 billion for other space science applications, and $12.5 billion for the space shuttle program. Before approving the bill, the House agreed to cut in half, to $260 million, the 1993 budget for the next generation solid-fuel rocket, designed to enable the Space Shuttle to carry heavier payloads, including key components of the Space Station. (AP, May 5/92)
Thorsten L. Gunther, 76, a retired geodesist who worked on Goddard Space Flight Center contract involving earth measurement, died April 25 at Washington Hospital Center of combinations after surgery for an aterial aneurism. A resident of Washington area since 1947, he lived in Bethesday. Gunther was an expert onsatellite geodsy and author of the NASA Directory of Station Locations. (W Post, May 5.92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Darleen A. Druyun as Chief of Staff. The Chief of Staff facilitates communications between the Administrator's office and senior staff members, as well as with private sector executives and international visitors. In addition, the Chief of Staff focuses on internal NASA Headquarters management and operations, aiming to increase the efficiency of the organization. (NASA Release 92-58)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Charles J. Pellerin, Jr., to the position of Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Quality. Pellerin was also to serve as Special Assistant to the Administrator for long-range planning. (NASA Release 92-59)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, Wallops Flight Facility, Wallops Island, Virginia, selected the New Mexico State University, Physical Science Laboratory of Las Cruces, New Mexico, to negotiate a cost contract for the operation and maintenance of scientific balloon facilities and engineering support for the NASA Balloon Program. The total cost for the 5-year program was $65 million. (NASA Release C92-6)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope revealed an unusual new optical jet in the nucleus of the elliptical galaxy NGC 3862. NGC 3862, also known as 3C264, is a bright radio source and x-ray source. It is the sixth brightest galaxy in a rich cluster of galaxies known as Abell 1367, located at a distance of about 260 million light-years away in the constellation Leo. (NASA Release 92-61)
In a mission called "La Chalupa 30," four men were to conduct investigations in an underwater habitat without any direct outside human contact for 30 days, giving the Behavior and Performance Laboratory at NASA's Johnson Space Center, Houston, the opportunity to study team performance as part of its continuing investigation to identify pertinent psychological issues for long duration space flight. "The mission will serve as an environment which is analogous to future extended space missions on the Shuttle or Space Station," said Dr. Al Holland, Head of the Behavior and Performance Laboratory. (NASA Release 92-62)
NASA Administrater Daniel S. Goldin said he found employees worried that the space agency was letting outsiders set priorities, allowing buildings to decay and wasting its skills by using contractors. "There seems to be a concern we overpromised in the beginning on technical issues and tend to underestimate costs...There is concern about future funding of new activities and the agency's ability to set priorities. They feel we must take charge of our destiny," Goldin said. (Fla Today, May 7/92)
The names of Michael Adams and Manley "Sonny" Carter, two astronauts who died in line of duty, were scheduled to be added to the $6.2 million Space Mirror memorial at Kennedy Space Center. The 50 foot by 42 foot memorial was conceived as a way to pay tribute to the seven astronauts who died aboard the Space Shuttle Challenger in 1986. But it became a memorial for all U.S. astronauts who had died in the line of duty. The names of Adams and Carter, who died in 1991 in a commuter plane crash on their way to a NASA speaking engagement, were added to the memorial when workers were repairing cracks that had developed around the astronauts' names, which are cut through black-granite panels. (O Sent, May 7/92)
The Senate, defying veto threats by the White House, adopted an $6.3 billion savings package that demanded deep cuts in President Bush's military and space priorities, including the Strategic Defense Initiative. Approved 61-38, the measure would take $1.3 billion from prior appropriations for SDI and $1 billion from production funds for the B-2 bomber. The cuts from the space program, though much smaller, dealt a further blow to exploration of Mars, and they would kill an on-going project to design a high-speed aircraft capable of orbiting into space after launch from a conventional runway. (WSJ, May 7/92)
NASA delivered a report to the U.S. Senate outlining a shift in emphasis towards smaller, lower cost and more frequent planetary missions. The Small Planetary Mission Plan, which was requested by the Senate Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on VA, HUD and Independent Agencies chaired by Senator Barbara Mikulski, described two proposed missions that NASA had selected for preliminary studies leading to launches in 1996 and 1998. The two missions were the Mars Environmental Survey Pathfinder and the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous. (NASA Release 92-63)
Lending their expertise with long-duration exposure to microgravity, the Skylab IV astronaut crew was scheduled to participate in a series of underwater tests that would help in the development of Space Station Freedom. The tests will be monitored by engineers represented by NASA, the Boeing Defense and Space Group, and international partners from the European Space Agency and the Japanese Space Agency. (NASA Note N92-42)
It was reported that Martin Marietta Corporation had abandoned the six-year venture into the commercial satellite launching business that it started in the summer of 1986, seven months after the explosion of the Shuttle Challenger. The original plan was to build 20 Titan rockets for commercial launches. That number was reduced to 12, and the company charged $90 million to fourth-quarter earnings in 1988 for a reserve to help finance the launch venture. Martin eventually built only four commercial Titans, the last of which was scheduled for launch in September 1992, carrying a payload to map the surface of Mars and look for possible landing sites on that planet. (B Sun, May 8/92)
Thomas O. Paine, 70 who was deputy administrator and administrator of NASA from 1968 to 1970, died of cancer May 4 at his home in Los Angeles.In 1985, President Reagan named him chairman of the National Commission on Space to set goals for future space exploration. He also was a member of Vice President Quayle's Advisory Committee on the Future of the U.S. Space Program. After leaving NASA, he returned to GE where he became a vice president and power generation group manager. In 1982 he retired from the Northrop Corporation as its president. (W Post, May 8/92; NY Times, May 7/92)
Albert Parry, 92, a professor emeritus of Russian civilization and language and founder and former chairman of the department of Russian studies at Colgate University, died in Los Angeles. In 1954, Dr. Parry warned in an article that the Soviets would soon be able to launch a space satellite, and in another article published in July 1957, he predicted the launching would occur on September 17. The Soviet Union launched Sputnik I on October 4. (NY Times, May 8/92)
A research arm of John Hopkins University was chosen to design a spacecraft intended to take the first close-up look at the kind of asteroid that could one day collide with Earth. Hopkin's Applied Physics Laboratory in Laurel, Maryland, was given a $450,000 contract by NASA for preliminary work on the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous satellite, called NEAR. If NASA and Congress approved costruction of the compact $150 million spacecraft, it could begin orbiting an asteroid called "nereus" in January 2000. (B Sun, May 9/92)
It was reported that the Kennedy Space Center was about to break gground on a second Space Station project, a new building to service the outpost's propulsion modules. The 3,000 square foot building, to be located behind and south of the operations and checkout buildings in Kennedy Space Center's industrial area, would be the space center's third hazardous processing plant. This one was to be dedicated to servicing a single type of payload: 800-gallon modulles filled with propellant, which would be used to keep the space station positioned properly in orbit. The new buildingg wouldbe able to accomodate testing, cleaning, and servicing of two to four modules simultaneously. The Kennedy Space Center was soliciting bids for construction of the plant, which was to be 70 feet high, 135 feet longg and 65 feet wide. A contract, worth about $11 million, was expected to be awarded in June 1992, with construction beginning in July, said payload projects manager JoAnn Morgan. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
The Delta launch team at Cape Canavaral Air Force Station reported that the McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company group was gearing up for two launches in the next 25 days. The first, a mission to deploy an Indonesian communications satellite, and the second, a mission during which NASA's Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer would be hurled into orbit, was scheduled for launch June 4, 1992. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
Facing a tight budget, National Aerospace Plane officials proposed extra steps to slow the program aimed at building two runway-to-orbit research planes. The program's goal was to make the first flight of an x-30 aerospace plane by late 1999. The revised program director Robert Barthelemy presented the revised schedule to top Air Force and NASA officials in a quarterly technical review at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland. Congress approved $250 million for the program for the 1992 year after slashing nearly $100 million from the Bush adminstration's $303.8 million request. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
McDonell Douglas Space Systems Company's Kennedy Space Center division was chosen as a finalist for the 1992 George M. Low Trophy, which is given annually to the NASA contractor which makes the greatest achievements in applying Total Quality Management (TQM) principles to their day-to-day operations. The goals of the award are to incorporate more efficient ways of 222doing business throughout NASA and its contractors and to transfer the performance improvement methods of award winners from company to company. "It is clear from your company's application that you have positive steps to advance quality, productivity and the continuous improvement process," NASA safety chief George Rodney told division officials in a recent letter. (Fla Today, May 10/92)
A briefing and demonstration of a prototype low vision enhancement system (LVES), cooperatively developed by NASA and the Lions Vision Center at the Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, was scheduled for to be held May 13 at the Oncology Center Auditorium. The LVES technology, originally developed for possible use on Space Station Freedom, potentially could help millions of Americans afflicted with certain low vision problems. (NASA Note N92-43)
NASA's Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA was involved in too many differing projects, and must zero in on which ventures to pursue and which to abandon. "NASA has a very broad range of things on its plate," said NASA chief Daniel Goldin. "We don't have to do everything....If we can get more focused, we'll be much more efficient." (USA Today, May 12/92)
The Wall Street Journal reported that NASA officials had scheduled an unprecedented spacewalk by three Shuttle astronauts to rescue a satellite. The agency decided to undertake the third and final three-man rescue attempt upon the request of Shuttle Endeavour's commander. (WSJ, May 13/92; USA Today, May 13/92; W Post, May 13/92; W Times, May 13/92; NY Times, May 13/92; LA Times, May 13/92; P Inq, May 13/92; AP, May 13/92; UPI, May 13/92)
NASA joined Auburn University in co-sponsoring the 1992 National Science Olympiad to be held at the Auburn, Alabama, campus. More than 1,500 of the nation's top junior and senior high school students were to compete in the 33-event Olympiad, the largest science event in the United States. (NASA Release 92-66)
Scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, were investigating the importance of gravity to life on Earth. They also were studying whether intermittent exposure to gravity might help keep future space explorers healthy. Volunteers were confined to their beds for 24-hours a day in the head-down position to induce the physical changes associated with exposure to the microgravity of space. Results of the study indicated that these volunteers could avoid the changes simply by standing quietly for 15 minutes of each hour over a 16-hour period. Standing for two hours a day or walking at three miles per hour were almost as effective, according to Dr. Joan Vernikos, the study's Principal Investigator and Acting Chief of Ames's Life Science Division. (NASA Release 92-67)
A spokesman for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization said a 23,000--pound rocket motor clamped to the marrooned Intelsat 6 satellite by the crew of Space Shuttle Endeavour fired fllawlwssly at 1:25 p.m. EDT while both were orbiting about 230 miles over Africa. The 122-nation consortium, based in Washington, owns and operates the $150-million satellite. (LA Times, May 15/92)
Astronaut Kathryn Thornton became the second woman to walk in space when she floated into the open cargo bay of Endeavour and tested techniques for building a Space Station. Thornton was accompanied by Thomas Akers, one of three men who had captured a wayward satellite the day before. (C Trib, May 15/92)
Three American astronauts took a historic spacewalk using their gloved hands to make a last-ditch rescue of a wayward satellite. It was the first time so many astronsuts had gone forth into space together and the first time anyone had captured an orbiting satellite with nothing but their hands. All previous salvage operations had mainly used some type of high-technology hardware. At 230 miles above the Earth, the three astronauts of the Space Shuttle Endeavour grabbed the wobbling 4.5 ton, 17 foot satellite and stopped its rotation, holding it motionless for about a minute while sloshing fuel settled down. (NY Times, May 14/92; B Sun, May 14/92; USA Today, May 14/92; W Times, May 14/92; W Post, May 14/92; P Inq, May 14/92; AP, May 14/92)
State Senator Gary K. Hart of California authored a bill which would require the Department of Commerce to create a special program for assisting commercial space ventures that originate in California. Under the proposal, the Commerce Department would boost California as the place to launch commercial space ventures. (LA Times, May 17/92)
Space Shuttle Endeavour touched down on Rogers Dry Lake, California, ending a historic, nine-day maiden voyage. The public's response to Endeavour's mission, which featured an unprecedented three-astronaut capture of a stranded communications satellite, was the most enthusiastic since the Shuttle program resumed in 1988, NASA officials said. A crowd of an estimated 125,000 turned out in the desert to watch the landing. (LA Times, May 17/92; P Inq, May 17/92; AP, May 16/92; W Times, May 17/92; B Sun, May 16/92; W Post, May 17/92)
A company spokesman for Rockwell Corporation said that NASA was negotiating with Rockwell to build spare parts in the Antelope Valley for the Space Shuttle program. Rockwell was negotiating the terms of a $55 million contract to build a midbody fuselage and a tail for the Space Shuttle fleet. The work would be performed in the hanger where the company built all of the Space Shuttles for NASA. Work would begin with 70 employees and was expected to last until 1999. (Daily News, May 18/92)
USA Today reported that a video headset would soon allow people with limited vision to see their world as if projected on a 60-inch black-and-white TV screen. The portable, 16-ounce Low Vision Enhancement System (LVES) should be commercially available in three years at a cost of $3,000. It should help many of the 3 million people with visual impairments due to diseases such as diabets, glaucoma, multiple sclerosis, and mucular degeneration. (USA Today, May 18/92)
The commander of the Space Shuttle Endeavour, Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein of the Navy, said that the problems and needs of America's cities were no reason to divert money from the space agency's annual budget of $14 billion. If anything, Capitain Brqndemstein said a strong space program was needed to nspire yopung to high achievement and hopes for the future. He said that voyages of exploration were a vital social investment, todayand centuries ago. "America is a country based on boldness and looking into the future, not looking out the back of the bus," said Captain Brandenstein. (NY Times, May 18/92)
It was announced that the staff director of the National Space Council, the Cabinet-level agency that sets the nation's space policy, was stepping down after a three-year tenure marked by calls for better management at NASA and a push for smaller, less-expensive space projects. Mark J. Albrecht, 41, who was a national security aide to then-Senator Pete Wilson, was widely viewed as one of the principal architects of the council's efforts to curb the appetite of NASA for more long-range, expensive space endeavours. Albrecht decline to discuss his plans, but some council members said that he would join a private consulting firm. (LA Times, May 18/92; B Sun, May 18/02)
NASA reported that astronaut Bruce E. Melnick, Commander USCG, will be leaving NASA in July 1992. Melnick, who flew on Space Shuttle missions STS-41 and STS-49, accepted the position of Director, Shuttle Processing Contract Process Improvement Technology with Lockheed Space Operations Co. (LSOC) at Kennedy Space Center, Florida. (NASA Release 92-68; USA Today, May 20/92; AP, May 19/92)
Scientists at NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies said chemicals, particularly sulfurs, spewed into the atmosphere by the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines are reflecting 2 percent of sunlight back into space, reducing heat. The impact is global; local temperatures might not be affected. Scientists said early studies of the effects of Pinatubo's eruption indicated volcanoes play a far greater role in climate change than once thought. (USA Today, May 19/92; W Times, May 19/92; W Post, May 19/92; P Inq, May 19/92; B Sun, May 19/92)
The Washington Post reported that Mark J. Albrecht was leaving his post as executive secretary of the National Space Council. Albrecht's successor will be Brian D. Dailey, a Republican staff member of the Senate Armed Services Committee. Albrecht said he had taken a job with the Washington area office of Science Applications International Corporation as a senior manager. (W Post, May 19/92)
U.S. scientists solved a 20-year-old mystery about the nature of Geminga, one of the brightest emitters of high-energy gamma rays in the sky. Using data from two different spacecraft, scientists now know that the power plant in Geminga is a rotating, 300,000-year-old neutron star. Dr. Jules Halpern of Columbia University and Dr. Stephen Holt of NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center reported that they had observed x-ray pulsations from Geminga using data from the German/American Roentgen Satellite (ROSAT). These observations firmly establish Geminga as a close cousin of the Crab and Vela nebulae, which also have pulsating neutron stars at their cores. The rotating neutron star produces focused beams of radiation much like the periodic flashing or pulsating lighthouse beacon. (NASA Release 92-69)
India launched a research satellite into orbit using local technology in what officials called an important milestone in the country's ambitious space program. The 750-foot rocket blasted off from an island off the southern state of Andhra Pradesh. Nine minutes into the flight, the $7 million rocket propelled a research satellite into orbit 280 miles above earth. The flight was pronounced a total success. (W Times, May 21/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Bill Livingstone as Special Assistant to the Administrator for Communications. (NASA Release 92-71)
A newspaper reported that three NASA aquanauts submerged since May 6, 1992, in a research station 30 feet below the surface of Emerald Lagoon, Florida were doing well but missed sunshine and their family members. The exercise was part of preparation for months-long stays aboard space station Freedom. (USA Today, May 22/92)
It was reported that astronomers had discovered expanding "bubbles" of hot hydrogen gas in dwarf galaxies that apparently are caused by the explosions of hundreds of stars collectively blowing matter completely out of the small galaxies. The discovery suggests that some galaxies are dying and tends to confirm conventional theories about star formation. The discovery was based on recent observations at the Very Large Array Radio Telescope (VLA). (W Times, May 24/92; NY Times, May 24/92)
NASA announced that Laurie A. Broedling had been appointed as Associate Administrator for Continuous Improvement. She would report directly to the Administrator and serve as NASA's primary facilitator of Total Quality Management. "This appointment is an important step in bringing a world-class TQM program to NASA," Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-72)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that his agency had started an intense examination of itself and its programs aimed at setting goals for the nation's civilian space program and controlling costs in the future. Goldin said he had named two teams to undertake an agency-wide analysis of what NASA should be doing and what it could do within the constraints of a limited budget. The self-analysis was organized, Goldin said, after he examined the NASA budgets for the coming years and realized that the agency was committed to programs that could not be funded in an era of tight federal spending. (AP, May 26/92)
Scientists now believe that all the visible stars and galaxies account for less than 1 percent of the mass of the universe, with the rest being some kind of invisible, or dark matter. Finding the "stuff" of this hidden mass could alter theories of particle physics and would be a major step in understanding the structure and evolution of the universe. It might also enable cosmologists to predict whether the universe is destined to continue expanding forever or eventually to collapse of its own gravity. If dark matter does exist, and most of it turns out to be unlike the ordinary atoms of stars and people, the philosophical implications would be profound and humbling. Dr. Bernard Sadoulet, a physicist at the University of California and a leader of the search for dark matter, said: "It will be the ultimate Copernican revolution. Not only would we not be at the center of the universe as we know it, but we wouldn't even made up of the same stuff as most of the universe." (NY Times, May 26/92)
After hearing complaints from employees across the nation, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin unexpectedly announced he was changing the agency's logo. Goldin killed the despised "worm," which displayed "NASA" in high-tech red lettering, and restored the insignia affectionately known as the "meatball." The meatball, which served the agency from 1959 to 1975, consists of the agency's name surrounding a starry blue background, a red wing shape and the flight path of a spaceship. It was worn by astronauts on Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo missions. (W Post, May 26/92)
NASA launched a rocket from Puerto Rico's north coast at 7:55 p.m. EDT to study radio waves in the ionosphere. The launch, originally set for May 18 but delayed due to bad weather, was the first time NASA had launched from the Caribbean island since 1967. (USA Today, May 26/92; AP, May 26/92)
A team of scientists using two satellites in orbit announced they had solved the puzzle of a mysterious source of high-energy gamma rays, located in the direction of the constellation Gemini and known as Geminga. According to a report in the journal Nature, the gamma rays were flowing from a spinning 300,000 year old  neutron star or pulsar. Scientists do not understand why Geminga favors gamma rays over other wavelengths. Two other bright sources of gamma rays already known to be pulsars, buried within the Crab and Vela supernova remnants, emit radiation in x-ray, radio, and optical wavelenghts. (W Post, May 26/92; P Inq, May 22/92)
Three U.S. scientists, including one from NASA's Ames Research Center, completed the first joint U.S./Russian Antarctic expedition since the breakup of the former Soviet Union. The purpose of the expedition was to investigate the physical, chemical, and biological properties of ice-covered lakes in the Bunger Hills Oasis of East Antarctica. This was the first time U.S. scientists had explored these lakes, which are near a Russian research station. (NASA Release 92-73)
Nearly 300 atmospheric researchers were scheduled convene to study the effect of clouds on global climate in an international cooperative experiment. With NASA as the coordinating agency, scientists from over 50 research institutions in the United States and seven other countries would employ the combined measurements from land, sea, air, and space platforms. The project was to be based in the Azores and Madeira Islands of the eastern Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-74)
NASA announced that an exotic mix of materials and equipment would be exposed to the unique conditions of microgravity during Space Shuttle Columbia's 13-day mission scheduled for June 1992. The flight would be NASA's longest Shuttle mission and was the first of a series of missions leading to 90-day assignments aboard the planned Space Station Freedom. Astronaut Bonnie Dunbar and three scientists were scheduled spend most of their time in the pressurized Spacelab module in Columbia's cargo bay. (USA Today, May 27/92)
NASA announced that it would kick-off a nationwide tour of its full-scale traveling Space Station Freedom model in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. The model, which is housed in two connected tractor trailers, features the U.S. living quarters and the U.S. laboratory module of the international space-based research facility. (NASA Note N92-47)
Large landslides have been identified on Venus by Magellan Project scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California. They are similar to landslides that have been known for some time to occur on Earth and Mars, a project spokesman said. (NASA Release 92-75)
NASA announced that astronaut James F. Buchli (Col., USMC), a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, was to retire from the U.S. Marine Corps and leave NASA to accept the position of Manager, Station Systems Operations and Requirements with Boeing Defense and Space Group, Huntsville, Alabama. (NASA Release: 92-77)
Associated Press announced that Hughes Aircraft and Japan's JVC together plan to build projection displays that would allow airline passengers to watch movies with the window shades up, and teleconferences to be held in rooms with the lights on. The basic technology, known as liquid crystal light valve projection, will allow projection of very bright, high-resolution images. The joint venture was to be based in Carlsbad, California, and employ about 200 people by the end of next year. (NASA Current News 92-107)
Advanced techniques used to place criminals are now being employed in NASA's continuing investigation of microbial activity in the weightless environment of orbiting spacecraft. Since the Apollo program, medical researchers have investigated the possibility of microbial cross-contamination between astronauts confined to a spacecraft. The advent of recent methods such as DNA fingerprinting, which studies organisms at the molecular level, has allowed scientists to track the transfer of a specific microbe within the environment of the Space Shuttle orbiter, according to a joint study by NASA's Johnson Space Center and the University of Texas Medical School. (NASA Release 92-79)
NASA reported that the TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite would be launched aboard an Ariane IV launch vehicle from the Guiana Space Center (CSG) in Kourou, French Guiana. The satellite, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, was to study ocean circulation and its role in regulating the global climate. (NASA Note N92-50)
NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealed a new class of object in the universe--a grouping of gigantic star clusters produced by the collision of galaxies. Images of the core of the peculiar galaxy Arp 220 show that stars are produced at a furious rate from the dust and gas supplied by the interaction of two galaxies. The discovery was made by Dr. Edward Shaya and graduate student Dan Dowling, University of Maryland, and the Wide Field/Planetary Camera Team. (NASA Release 92-80)
NASA headquarters announced that Space Shuttle Columbia would be launched on a 13-day mission on June 25, 1992. Mission STS-50, planned to be the longest flight to date in the Shuttle program, will carry the United States Microgravity Laboratory-1 payload into orbit. A Spacelab long module was to serve as an in-orbit laboratory for seven crewmembers and 31 experiments devoted to materials science, fluid physics, combustion science, and biotechnology. (NASA STS-50 Launch Advisory)
NASA engineers were preparing to do the first assembly of a large-scale, parabolic antenna in a huge water tank whose buoyancy lets researchers simulate working in the microgravity environment of space. The tests would help establish assembly times for such antennas, evaluate work procedures and task coordination, and check the compatibility of the hardware itself. (NASA Release 92-84)
NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight, Jeremiah W. Pearson, III, announced that Thomas Utsman, Deputy Associate Administrator, Office of Space Flight, will become the Program Director for the Space Shuttle. He will direct long-range Shuttle planning, Space Shuttle continuous improvement activities and overseeing efforts to reduce Shuttle operations costs while maintaining safety. (NASA Release 92-83)
Through a letter agreement, NASA and the National Center for Manufacturing Sciences, Inc. (NCMS), Ann Arbor, Michigan, have established a continuing program for technology development and transfer between NASA and NCMS and its member companies to advance the state of U.S. manufacturing. NASA and NCMS agreed to establish procedures and principles for research endeavors in the area of advanced manufacturing sciences. (NASA Release 92-85)
A 50-foot-long X-30 National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) mockup rolled out of its hanger in ceremonies at Mississippi State University, Starkville. Forty-five students in Mississippi State's engineering program worked for five months to construct the 5,000-pound mockup at the University's Raspet Flight Research Laboratory. Throughout the project, they had access to NASP program officials, who advised them on technical aspects of the X-30's design. The program was directed by Dr. George Bennett. (NASA Release 92-86)
Two astronauts at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, California, said that they had evidence of planets or other bodies around eight stars they had studied in a star-forming region of the Milky Way Galaxy, 450 light years from Earth. The scientists, Drs. Kenneth Marsh and Michael J. Mahoney, said their discovery of unseen companions around low-mass stars in the Taurus-Auriga region of the Milky Way had resulted from the study of data from the Infrared Astronomy Satellite acquired in 1983 and data from ground-based observations acquired mostly from 1981-1983. (NASA Release 92-87)
Dr. Harriett G. Jenkins, Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, resigned her NASA position to become first Director of the newly established Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices. (NASA Release 92-89)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and Yuri Koptev, the Director General of the Russian Space Agency, ratified the first contract between NASA and a Russian aerospace firm, NPO-Energia. The contract was for the study of applications of Russian space technology to the Space Station Freedom program. The contract was for an initial period of one year with a value of $1 million. (NASA Release 92-91)
In remarks before the National Space Club, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the United States needs a laboratory in space so scientists can learn how to protect the health of humans living and working for long periods in space and improve the quality of life on Earth. "We can light up the sky with the inspirational work of Space Station Freedom, or we can stand by and watch the greatest technological bonfire of the century if it's canceled. We need Space Station Freedom and we need it now," said Goldin. (NASA Release 92-92)
Robotics engineers and scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), Pasadena, California, planned to demonstrate a new planetary lander and robotic rover at a specially designed test site near the laboratory. "Rocky IV," a prototype of a mini-rover, might be launched to Mars in 1996 as part of the Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) Pathfinder mission. The 16.5-pound testbed would let NASA researchers study how to integrate planetary lander functions and science instruments under conditions approximately those of a Mars mission. (NASA Release 92-93)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of key personnel in the Office of Public Affairs and the Office of Equal Opportunity Programs. Bill Livingstone was appointed Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Sue Mathis Richard was appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Public Affairs; Lewin S. Warren was appointed Acting Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs; and Oceola S. Hall was designated Acting Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs. (NASA Release 92-94)
It was announced that astronaut John O. Creighton (Capt., USN) would retire from the U.S. Navy and leave NASA to work in the Commercial Airplanee Group of the Boeing Co., Seattle, Washington, beginning September 1, 1992. He was to work as a production test pilot and as an instructor pilot in the customer support area. (NASA Release 92-96)
Using NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST), an international team of astronomers took a major step in redetermining the expansion rate of the universe. This rate, known as the Hubble Constant, is one of two critical numbers needed for making a precise determination of the size and age of the universe. The Constant is an estimate of the rate at which the universe is expanding and is expressed in kilometers per second per megaparsec (3.26 million light years). The results were reported by Drs. F. Duccio Macchetto, Nino Panagia and Abhijit Saha of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland; Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Institute of Washington; and Gustav Tammann of the University of Basel, Switzerland, at the internationl workshop "Science with the Hubble Space Telescope," held in Sardinia, Italy, June 29 through July 9, 1992. (NASA Release 92-97)
NASA reported that a survey of the heavens with the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) was uncovering remote and unusual galaxies never before resolved by optical telescopes on Earth. HST revealed an unusual variety of shapes and structures in these distant galaxies, which previously had appeared as fuzzy blobs in ground-based sky surveys. The results might lead to much clearer understanding of the formation and evolution of galaxies. The results were presented by Dr. Richard Griffiths of the Space Telescope Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland. (NASA Release 92-98)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed an agreement with International Technology Underwriters (INTEC) to explore ways that the insurance industry can assist in financing human and robotic satellite rescue and repair missions. INTEC would also look at options for providing incentives in the construction of commercial satellites to make them easier to rescue and repair if problems develop. "We need to consider new approaches to salvaging satellites that will encourage the further commercialization of space, such as robotic rescues in high and lower orbits," Goldin said. (NASA Release 92-99)
NASA announced the departure of Navy Capt. Daniel C. Brandenstein, Chief of the Astronaut Office, Johnson Space Center, Houston, since 1986 and a veteran of four Space Shuttle missions, effective about October 1. Selected by NASA in 1978, Brandenstein first flew as a pilot aboard the Shuttle Challenger in 1978 and holds the record for time in space (789 hours) among Space Shuttle astronauts. (NASA Release 92-100)
Newly-released photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope showed that the "Whirpool Galaxy" may have a black hole at its core and that the core of a powerful infrared radiating galaxy called Arp 220 supports vigorous star birth and supernova star explosions. Astronomers suspect that Arp 220 is the product of an earlier collision of two "parent" galaxies. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
Cornell University astrophysicist Thomas Gold said in the "Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences" that there is probably more life inside the Earth than there is on its surface. This life would be in the form of bacteria and other microorganisms, and its overall volume probably surpasses that of all the plants and animals living on the planet's surface. NASA scientist Stephen Maran said that if Gold's ideas prove correct, "they will revolutionize scientific theories of geology and the evolution of life on Earth." Gold speculated that similar life forms may exist inside the moon and other planets in our solar system. "The surface life on Earth, based on photosynthesis for its overall energy supply, may be just one strange branch of life. The deep, chemically supplied life, however, may be very common in the universe," Gold commented. (P Inq, Jul 1/92)
Scientists studying data from the Magellan radar-mapping satellite around Venus concluded that Venus is not a twin of the Earth. Magellan has produced images 10 times sharper than any seen before of more than 97 percent of the planet's surface. Magellan's images show Venus to be as geologically active as the Earth, but whereas Earth's crust is shaped by continuous recycling, Venus' surface appears to evolve by building crust vertically as lava flows out of volcanoes or meteorite craters. (CSM, Jul 1/92)
NASA chose Rockwell International's Palmdale plant in California to refit the seven-year-old Space Shuttle Atlantis, allowing the spacecraft to stay aloft longer and possibly enabling it to rendezvous with the Russian Space Station Mir.  (LA Times, Jul 2/92)
The Kennedy Space Center awarded three indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contracts for its Personal Computer Acquisition contract program. The three winners were to provide a range of personal computers, peripherals, and software packages and would be required to compete against each other for NASA orders throughout the duration of the contract, an arrangement designed to provide NASA with the most up-to-date equipment at the lowest cost. (Federal Computer Week, July 13/92)
NASA launched the first of its new, low-cost spacecraft, the Solar, Anomalous, and Magnetospheric Particle Explorer satellite (SAMPEX) aboard a four-stage Scout rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California. The spacecraft was designed to study anomalous cosmic rays in an effort to improve understanding of the evolution of the sun, the solar system, and the Milky Way Galaxy. (NASA Release 29-102; The Sun, Jul 4/92; P Inq, Jul 4/92; W Times, Jul 4/92; W Post, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia commander Richard N. Richards made a pitch today for the Space Station Freedom, saying that astronauts on the Columbia Shuttle flight needed more time in orbit to conduct scheduled experiments. Such time would be available on the Space Station, which had experienced funding difficulties in Congress. Two Shuttle astronauts worked though part of their breaks as they rushed to complete experiments, one dealing with the growth of crystals and the other with dust particles. (W Post, Jul 4/92)
Astronauts aboard the Shuttle Columbia beamed down Fourth of July greetings on the 10th day of a planned 13-day mission, the longest in Shuttle history. The goal of Columbia's was  twofold: to study the effects of weightlessness on physical, chemical, medical, and biological processes, and to demonstrate the Shuttle's capability to remain in orbit at least 13 days. A wide range of experiments aimed at generating knowledge from microgravity science were underway in the long Spacelab module being flown on Columbia. (UPI, Jul 4/92; AP, Jul 4/92; LA Times, Jul 5/92; W Post, Jul 5/92; NY Times, Jul 5/92; P Inq, Jul 5/92; W Times, Jul 5/92; Reuters, Jul 4/92; AvWk, Jul 6/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia and its crew set a record for the longest Space Shuttle flight on the 11th day of a laboratory research mission. Columbia passed the previous Shuttle endurance record of 10 days, 21 hours, and one minute set in 1990 by another Shuttle Columbia crew. (W Times, Jul 7/92; The Sun, Jul 7/92; W Post, Jul 7/92; AP Jul 7/92; UPI Jul 76/92; USA Today, Jul 7/92)
Scientists announced that dust and chemicals from last year's eruption of Mount Pinatubo in the Philippine Islands had cooled the Earth by blocking incoming sunlight. The planet's average temperature dipped about one degree between the June 16, 1991, eruption and May of this year because a layer of sulfuric acid droplets released by the volcano had reduced the total amount of solar energy reaching the Earth's surface. The scientists said the cooling should last about five years. (W Times, Jul 7/92; AP, Jul 7/92)
Engineers from Stanford University announced that they had teamed up with Russian space exploration experts to define an international manned mission to Mars that would cost about $70 billion, a relative bargain compared with NASA's estimates of a U. S.-only mission. Significant contributions from the European Space Agency and Japan were also included in the plan, which envisioned sending six astronauts to Mars for a 500-day visit in 2009. The plan relied on readily available space technology and would not require major new appropriations from Congress. (AvWk, Jul 67/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Samuel W. Keller as Associate Administrator for Russian Programs. The new position was established to provide focus for the many programs involving NASA and the former Soviet Union. (NASA Release 92-103)
NASA ground controllers said they had reactivated two key scientific instruments aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite and hoped to revive the other eight in coming weeks following two major glitches with the motors that drive the solar power array. The problems had sent the satellite into a quiescent safe mode June 1 and 2. The Microwave Limb Sounder, which helps measure ozone depletion, and the Cryogenic Limb Array Etalon Spectrometer, which has a limited lifetime, were restored to service.  (Space News, Jul 7/92)
Weather conditions forced postponement of the Space Shuttle Columbia's return, lengthening what is already NASA's longest Shuttle mission into a full two weeks. (P Inq, Jul 9/92; LA Times, Jul 9/92; W Post, Jul 9/92; NY Times, Jul 9/92; W Times, Jul 9/92; The Sun, Jul 9/92)
Russian cosmonauts Alexander Viktorenko and Alexander Kalery worked outside the Mir Space Station on an unscheduled two-hour spacewalk to activate a pair of gyroscopes that help stabilize the Space Station. The gyroscopes had worn out naturally during the course of Mir's life and had to be replaced. (AP Jul 8/92)
A spokesman announced that NASA had failed in its latest attempt to fix the jammed main antenna on the Jupiter-bound Galileo spacecraft, but the agency said it would try different repair methods next year. Engineers turned Galileo's main antenna toward the sun to warm it, then cooled it in shade, but the antenna remained stuck. The latest warming and cooling of the antenna was the seventh and final effort to open the antenna by thermally expanding or shrinking what NASA engineers think are stuck pins on three of the antenna's ribs. Despite the loss of the main antenna, NASA scientists expected to complete 70 percent of Galileo's mission by using a small antenna. The small antenna, however, is capable of transmitting only 1 percent as many computer "bits" as the main antenna would have sent. (AP, Jul 8/92)
To help bolster the competitiveness of American industry, NASA and the Department of Energy announced that they had formed a partnership to enhance the transfer of technologies developed in their laboratories to American enterprise. Areas of cooperation included outreach to business and non-profit research organizations, access to federal technology resources, training and education, dissemination of scientific and technical information, and technology transfer policy and program analysis.
The Space Shuttle Columbia landed at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the conclusion of the longest-ever Shuttle flight, a 14-day research mission intended as a rehearsal for NASA's Space Station. The arrival was diverted from the preferred site, Edwards Air Force Base in California, because of rain. (P Inq, Jul 10/92; The Sun, Jul 10/92; LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 9/92, 10/92; CSM, Jul 10/92; NY Times, Jul 10/92; WSJ, Jul 10/92; AP, Jul 09/92; UPI, Jul 9/92)
NASA researchers said they had "flown" a complete three-dimensional high-performance aircraft in a supercomputer for the first time. The research was part of an effort to reduce wind tunnel tests of new aircraft designs. The new supercomputer techniques have promise in aerodynamic studies of fighter aircraft and in other areas where fluid flow is modeled, such as weather prediction, spacecraft entry, artificial heart design, etc. (NASA Release 92-105)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and National Space Council Executive Secretary Brian Dailey left with an interagency delegation to visit the European Space Operations Center in Germany. The delegation planned to proceed on to Moscow to gain a first-hand understanding of Russia's space program. (NASA Release 92-106)
In a letter to the British journal Nature, two American scientists at the University of Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, David Kring and Willima Boynton, said that they had found what they believe to be the location where a gigantic object from outer space crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago, possibly ending the age of the dinosaurs. The site is a buried crater 110 miles across on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. (The Sun, Jul 9/92; WSJ, Jul 9/92)
In another article in Nature, scientists from NASA and Hughes STX Corporation in Lanham, Maryland, said that the uppermost part of Earth's protective ozone layer was about seven percent thinner in 1989 than it was in 1980. The conclusions were based on observations taken by the Nimbus-7 environmental research satellite launched in 1978 and refined by a calibration device on a Space Shuttle mission in October 1989. The new observations were consistent with previous projections of ozone depletion. (UPI Jul 9/92;
NASA announced that it expected to launch a radar satellite in August that would sweep above the Bering Sea off Alaska and beam down a detailed radar snapshot giving the location of every fishing vessel. The project was intended to be the beginning of a foolproof system to police the world's fishing grounds against pirate trawlers. NASA expected to spend $650,000 as its share of a program to transfer its sophisticated technology to commercial uses. (P Inq, Jul 9/92)
Writing in the Astrophysical Journal, two astronomers at the University of Hawaii discussed evidence of a monstrous black hole with the mass of a billion suns, 100 times more powerful than any apparent black hole previously detected. The suspected black hole at the center of NGC 3115, a galaxy 30 million light-years away, appears to be about half as large as our solar system. The discovery moves the concept of black holes further along from theoretical prediction to accepted reality. It also illuminates the nature of the mysterious, brilliant objects known as quasars. (LA Times, Jul 10/92; W Post, Jul 10/92; W Times, Jul 10/92)
The European Space Agency's Giotto space probe, which six years ago flew within 335 miles of Comet Halley, flew past Comet Grigg-Skjellerup. Although the probe's cameras were too badly damaged from the Halley fly-by to be used, Giotto's other instruments measured magnetic fields, dust impacts, electrically charged gases, and the chemical makeup of particles from a distance of 124 miles. (AP, Jul 7/92, Jul 11/92; P Inq, Jul 11/92)
A recent U. S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs oversight subcommittee report said that millions of dollars had been wasted in recent years because of poor auditing and contract management at 39 federally funded research and development centers. The report concluded that standard government accounting and auditing requirements were often "missing or ignored" at the privately owned but publicly funded research centers, which together received contracts worth more than $10 billion last year. Among the laboratories criticized was the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, which received $1 billion in
NASA officials scheduled the next Shuttle launch for July 31, three weeks after the Shuttle Columbia returned from its record-breaking two-week mission. Atlantis' seven-day flight was slated to troll an Italian satellite on a 12-mile-long tether and to launch Eureca, a European satellite, on a one-year mission. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 26/92; W Times, Jul 27/92; NY Times, Jul 28/92)
Harrison A. Storms, Jr., an aeronautics pioneer, died at his home in Rancho Palos Verdes, California, at age 76. Storms's designs and leadership played a key role in developing B-25 and P-51 Mustang fighters in World War II and in Project Apollo's billion-dollar race for the moon in the 1960s. He served as an advisor to NASA, the Air Force, and the Pentagon. (NY Times, Jul 16/92)
The Pentagon announced that it would allocate $1.5 billion for the V-22 Osprey to keep development of the aircraft alive through next year. The move temporarily settled a three-year battle between Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and a coalition of V-22 supporters in Congress and the military. (USA Today, Jul 13/92)
NASA started the first flight test in Denver of a laser-based sensor to provide airline pilots with advance warning of "microbursts" that can harbor potentially dangerous windshears. The Federal Aviation Administration has mandated that airlines must select and install an approved microburst detection system on their aircraft by the end of 1995. (NASA Release 92-108)
Scientists from the United States and Australia announced completion of the Southern Ocean Waves Experiment. From June 6 through June 18, the scientists observed how ocean winds and waves affect one another off the coast of Australia. Project findings were expected to improve the reliability of ocean wave forecasting and to improve measurements from the TOPEX/Poseidon satellite. This satellite, a joint U.S./French venture, was scheduled for launch in August 1992 and was to study ocean topography and circulation, leading to better understanding of the oceans' role in global climate change. (NASA Release 92-109)
A NASA "aquanaut" set an endurance record of 69 days, 20 minutes underwater after spending time in a scuba divers' lodge submerged in a Florida Keys Lagoon. Richard Presley began the habitation May 6 as part of an experiment by NASA on conditions astronauts would face during long space missions. (W Times, Jul 15/92; USA Today 15/92; AP, Jul 15/92)
Engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory said that the Magellan spacecraft, already threatened with suspension of operations to save money, had developed serious transmitter trouble and for more than a week had been unable to send usable data and pictures for the completion of its mapping survey of the Venusian surface. Magellan's only functioning radio transmitter begun overheating, a repeat of similar trouble more than a year ago. Engineers hoped to devise a solution within a few days. (NY Times, Jul 15/92; NY Times, Jul 18/92)
NASA announced that Rockwell International Corporation's Space Systems Division had received NASA's first-ever award for World Class Performance in recognition of its exemplary work in building the new Space Shuttle orbiter Endeavour. The award is given when the NASA administrator determines that an organization has performed world-class work of significant benefit to the agency and U.S. taxpayers. (PR Newswire, Jul 14/92)
NASA said that construction had started on a high-flying, light-weight, unpiloted research aircraft called "Perseus" that NASA was to use to measure ozone levels and other atmospheric conditions. NASA viewed Perseus as the first step toward general use of advanced aircraft for many aspects of Earth sciences research such as climate and radiation studies, tropical dynamics, meteorology, and for studies of the stratosphere and troposphere. Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation of Manassas, Virginia, won the $2.25 million contract to design, build, and flight test two Perseus aircraft. Flight tests were slated to begin in late 1992.(NASA Release 92-110)
Solar scientists were puzzled by an unexpected "gamma ray afterglow" discovered on the sun by NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. The glow, a strong emanation of high-energy gamma rays, persisted for more than five hours after a solar flare explosion on June 11, 1991. A similar phenomenon occurred four days later. The scientists also announced that the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had taken the first image of the sun in neutrons, the first picture of any celestial object ever made with neutrons, that is, matter, rather than light. Another scientist reported that the Hubble Space Telescope had found evidence of powerful beams of downward-streaming protons at the onset of a stellar flare while looking at a red dwarf star more than 30 light-years away. Solar flares can produce magnetic storms on Earth that interfere with electrical power and radio transmissions. (NASA Releases 92-112 and 92-113; NY Times, Jul 16/92; USA Today, Jul 16/92; The Sun, Jul 16/92; P Inq, Jul 16/92; UPI, Jul 15/92, Jul 17/92; W Post, Jul 20/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
A study conducted for the Federal Aviation Administration by the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments concluded that the Washington area could support flights of "tiltrotor" aircraft to New York and Boston. Tiltrotors would be competitive with commercial aircraft within a range of about 350 nautical miles from Washington. To date, tiltrotor aircraft had been developed and flown by the military, which hoped to use the craft for transporting troops. (W Post, Jul 16/92)
The "New York Times" reported that the Georgia Institute of Technology was engaged in experiments to measure the impact of sonic booms on people and buildings. The research was part of a NASA program to develop a supersonic commercial airplane larger and faster than the Concorde. (NY Times, Jul 15/92)
NASA announced that a group of Alaskans had started a three-year experiment in the use of a small emergency radio transmitter known as a Personal Locator Beacon to communicate with a 10-year-old search and rescue satellite system that up to now had been used primarily for aircraft and ship emergencies. The locator beacon has the potential to save lives when used in emergencies in remote areas. The experiment was being carried out by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U. S. Air Force, and the U. S. Coast Guard. (NASA Release 92-115)
At a news conference in Moscow, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced plans for the United States and Russia to implement the agreements Presidents Bush and Yeltsin announced on June 17, 1992. Goldin said significant progress was made in developing a plan to carry out a wide range of projects, including expansion of cooperation in life sciences and global change research, the exchange of an American astronaut and Russian cosmonaut, and a Space Shuttle rendezvous and docking with the Russian Mir Space Station. A tentative date of October 1993 was set for a cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle, with an American on the Russian Space Station MIR the next year. Goldin also signed a $1 million contract with the Russian space agency for a detailed study of the use of Russian space technology in the U.S. space program. (NASA Release 92-116; UPI, Jul 17/92; WSJ, Jul 17/92; AP, Jul 16/92; W Post, Jul 20/92)
The North American Air Defense Command said that it was tracking nearly 7,000 spacecraft and pieces of debris bigger than a square yard that were in orbit around the Earth. The proliferating use of satellites has resulted in a ring of several hundred of the spacecraft around the Earth's equator, most in low-Earth to mid-Earth orbit. As a result, concerns were being raised about possible interference from one satellite to another and about the need for adequate distance between satellites in view of plans for more satellites in the 1990s. (W Times, Jul 19/92)
NASA announced that the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) had resumed full science operations following the resolution of problems with the satellite's solar array drive. Flight controllers had turned off the satellite's instruments June 2 after observing that the solar array drive was not operating smoothly and that the solar array itself was not properly tracking the sun. UARS was launched September 12, 1991, by the Space Shuttle Discovery. It was designed to study the chemistry, dynamics, and energetics of the Earth's upper atmosphere, focusing particularly on ozone depletion. UARS was the first major satellite element of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 92-117)
A V-22 Osprey "tiltrotor" aircraft carrying seven people crashed into the Potomac River at the Quantico Marine Corps Air Station in northern Virginia, killing all seven passengers. The crash involved the fourth of five prototype Ospreys built by the military since 1989. The craft was on its maiden flight from Florida when the crash occurred. (W Post, Jul 21/92; NY Times, Jul 21/92; The Sun, Jul 22/92)
The seven astronauts who returned to Earth July 9 after spending 14 days on the Shuttle Columbia said that getting used to Earth again had been similar to adjusting after shorter flights. They also said that preliminary results indicated their experiments had been successful. The crew grew protein crystals for use in medical research, studied fire safety in space by lighting candles and igniting wiring insulation and polyurethane foam, jiggled drops of liquid with sound waves to see how fluids behave in space, and tested a new miniature space greenhouse. (AP, Jul 10/92, Jul 21/92)
NASA and the National Institutes of Health signed an agreement to enhance each agency's biomedical research capabilities. The agencies pledged to develop programs that apply NASA's unique expertise to practical, medical needs on Earth and in space. The agreement was intended to stimulate new opportunities in the biomedical and behavioral research community because it provides for greater access to space-based facilities as well as involvement by university-based research centers. It was expected to increase support for Space Station Freedom, funding for which was under attack in Congress. (NASA Release 92-119; W Post, Jul 22/92; Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
A division of Rockwell International agreed to pay $1.42 million and to permit the federal government to lecture employees about honesty to settle a fraud case involving Space Shuttle work. Prosecutors said they would drop charges that Rockwell's Collins Commercial Avionics Division in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, which makes and repairs Shuttle flight instruments, had defrauded NASA by altering time cards for work done on the Shuttle program. (P Inq, Jul 22/92; NY Times, Jul 22/92; WSJ, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the expansion of the National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program to include all 50 states and the District of Columbia. The Space Grant Program offers states the opportunity to receive grants to further projects in aeronautics, space, and related fields. (NASA Release 92-112)
Vice-President Dan Quayle called for a major review of the nation's space policies that could lead to formal merger of some civilian and military activities for the first time since the Space Age began. Quayle essentially suggested that the National Space Agency consider increasing the interaction between civil and national security space activities, lowering some of the technical and managerial walls, a process already occurring on an ad hoc basis, analysts said. (W Post, Jul 23/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of procurement reforms to make NASA the model of excellence for the Federal Government. Goldin said reforms in NASA's procurement process were necessary because 90 percent of the agency's budget is spent through contracts. Major changes in procurement will include the award of new contracts to companies that have demonstrated accountability by delivering quality systems that meet cost, schedule, and technical requirements. (NASA Release 92-123)
According to NASA scientists, human, plant, and animal cells exposed to the microgravity of space for only a few days show changes in function and structure. Although preliminary, the results of the recent life sciences research on the Space Shuttle suggest alteration in metabolism, immune cell function, cell division, and cell attachment. Scientists also reported dramatic changes from space travel in some of the body's systems. Four principal investigators from the Space Life Sciences-1 mission flown aboard Space Shuttle Columbia in June 1991 reported key finds in the areas of cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, and neurovestibular physiology. (NASA Release 92-124)
NASA launched a rocket carrying a Japanese scientific satellite called "Geotail" that will swing by the moon and be flung by lunar gravity nearly a million miles into space. The satellite was intended to explore the effect of the solar wind on the tail of the magnetosphere, a comet- shaped region surrounding Earth and containing radiation belts. The $160 million, four-year mission was a joint project between NASA and the Japanese Institute for Space and Astronautical Science. (W Post, Jul 25/92; APn, Jul 24/92)
NASA researchers said that tests on astronauts aboard a June 5-14, 1991, flight of the Space Shuttle Columbia found their hearts, lungs, immune systems, and nervous systems responded in unexpected ways. Involved were blood pressure, muscle mass, production of key cells, and proper balance and orientation. The results do not suggest any major obstacles to long-term space missions, according to Ronald White, NASA's chief of life sciences. Longer human space flights, however, might depend on developing artificial gravity or other measures to minimize the physical effects of spaceflight. (UPI, Jul 25/92; NY Times, Jul 25/92; W Post, Jul 25/92)
A joint Russian-French crew blasted off on a 12-day mission aimed at keeping the aging Space Station Mir in orbit until 1996.  The cosmonauts were slated to install a complex of stabilizing gyroscopes inside the Station and also to work in space to assemble an engine to make space navigation easier. (W Times, Jul 22/92; AP, Jul 21/92, Jul 27/92; UPI, Jul 27/92; The Sun, Jul 28/92; WSJ, Jul 28/92; W Post, Jul 28/92; NY Times, July 28/92; APn, Jul 27/92; UPn, Jul 27/92)
NASA engineers decided to stop operating the radar aboard the Magellan Venus mapping probe until early September in an attempt to preserve the spacecraft's one fully operational transmitter until Magellan swings over one of the large regions of the planet that it has not mapped. Ground controllers had relied on Magellan's backup transmitter since January, but the backup unit had developed radio noise that interfered with its periodic transmissions of scientific data. (Space News, Jul 27-Aug 9/92)
Recent findings by the Very Large Array radio telescope in New Mexico confirmed that the so-called "Great Annihilator," a mysterious region close to the center of the Milky Way Galaxy that spews out bursts of high-energy gamma rays, does seem to be a black hole, but it is much smaller than thought and it is, indeed, merely close to, not at the center of, the galaxy. It seems also to be powered by collisions between matter and antimatter. (Time, Jul 27/92)
NASA and air industry sources said recently that a decision to narrow the number of engine concepts for the U. S. high-speed civil transport would slip by about a year. Test facility startup delays and the failure of preliminary nozzle tests to allow early identification of a preferred noise suppression system were cited as the main reasons for the slip. Postponement of the decision was not expected to affect the pace of high-speed civil transport development or the program's long-term schedule, which could lead to an operable aircraft in 2005. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
Recent studies showed that the technology spinoffs from National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) research and development had already had a positive impact on U. S. aerospace, automotive, medical, chemical, food processing, and energy industries. The studies predicted that the Gross National Product could expand by about $26 billion over the next 10-15 years as a result of productivity gains fostered by the program and that employment also could increase by an average of 40,000 jobs annually. In particular, the studies showed that NASP research could significantly benefit industries such as aerospace, motor vehicle, and emerging industries such as ceramics and high-speed civil transportation. (AvWk, Jul 27/92)
Contractors were awaiting the award of the $3 billion Earth Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) contract, which had been expected in early July. The proposal had been undergoing review and evaluation, and several suggestions for increasing the utility of the system for global environmental change research were offered in the opening of the initial report. In March 1992, NASA projected EOSDIS spend at about $200 billion through the 1990s. (Federal Computer Week, Jul 27/92)
The Kennedy Space Center, Florida, said it had awarded first-of-a-kind contracts to three firms under NASA's Personal Computer Acquisition Contract program. Throughout the five-year life of the contracts, the three companies would have to compete against each other for NASA orders to supply personal computer hardware and software to Kennedy Space Center and other NASA locations. NASA established this competitive arrangement so that the agency could be assured of a steady supply of high-quality products for the best price. (NASA Release C92-10)
The countdown began for the Space Shuttle Atlantis on a mission to test an Italian satellite linked to the Shuttle by 12 miles of electricity-generating cord. NASA officials said there was a 90 percent chance of acceptable launching conditions on July 31. (NY Times, Jul 29/92, Jul 31/92; CSM, Jul 29/92; UPI, Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; AP Jul 29/92, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92, Jul 31/92; The Sun, Jul 31/92; W Post, Jul 31/92; LA Times, Jul 31/92; P Inq, Jul 31/92)
A Russian-French crew docked with the Space Station Mir during the first of several joint missions intended to strengthen both countries' space programs. While aboard Mir, the crew was scheduled to conduct several experiments, including one into the chemistry of urine and saliva in weightlessness. They also would test vibrations and pressure on the human body. (AP, Jul 29/92)
The Space Station Freedom was saved, as the House of Representatives voted down an amendment aimed at killing the $40 billion project. The House voted 237-181 against an appropriations bill amendment that would have cut $1.2 billion from the 1993 budget for NASA, effectively eliminating the Space Station. The Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its lifetime. It was the fourth time in the last two years that the House had affirmed its commitment to build the Space Station. Supporters said the vote could well represent the program's last serious Congressional challenge. (P Inq, Jul 30/92; LA Times, Jul 30/92; NY Times, Jul 30/92; WSJ, Jul 30/92; W Times, Jul 30/92; W Post, Jul 30/92; The Sun, Jul 30/92; USA Today, Jul 30/92; AP, Jul 30/92; UPI, Jul 30/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92; AvWk, Aug 3/92)
A Senate Appropriations subcommittee recommended spending no additional funds for NASA's advanced solid-rocket motor plant in Mississippi. On July 29, the House of Representatives voted 249 to 159 to eliminate $265 million in research and development funds for the project, leaving only $50 million to close it down. (W Post, Jul 31/92; Htsvl Tms, Jul 30/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis rocketed into orbit on a seven-day mission carrying a science satellite that is to be left in space and another satellite that was to be reeled out 12 miles and back in a critical test of tethered space flight. Dr. Franco Malerba, an electrical engineer and Italy's first astronaut, was in charge of the tether operation. Another European, Dr. Claude Nicollier, a test pilot and research scientist from Switzerland, was to oversee the deploying of the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, designed to investigate materials processing and life sciences. The other crew members, all Americans, were Col. Loren J. Shriver of the Air Force, Maj. Andrew M. Allen of the Marine Corps, Marsha S. Ivins, Dr. Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dr. Franklin R. Chang-Diaz. (NY Times, Aug 1/92, Aug 2/92; P Inq, Aug 1/92; The Sun, Aug 1/92; W Post, Aug 1/92; W Times, Aug 1/92)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Atlantis released the European Space Agency's Eureca satellite, but it encountered immediate problems with its steering system and remained in too low an orbit. Engineers at the European Space Agency's control center in Darmstadt, Germany, struggled to understand the problem, hoping to boost the satellite into its proper orbit 320 miles above the Earth within  a day or two. (W Times, Aug 3/92; WSJ, Aug 3/92; The Sun, Aug 3/92; LA Times, Aug 3/92; NY Times, Aug 3/92; P Inq, Aug 3/92; APn, Aug 3/92; UPI, Aug 3/92)
Technicians at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida placed the Mars Observer spacecraft atop its upper-stage rocket in preparation for launch sometime during the September 16 to October 13 launch window. The craft was expected to take 11 months to cover the 450 million miles (740 million kilometers) to Mars. Once there, Mars Observer was expected to compile the first comprehensive database of Martian geophysics and climate. (CSM, Aug 26/92; H Chron, Aug 20/92)
Shuttle Atlantis' astronauts unreeled a tethered satellite in a risky electrical experiment never before tried in space, but the effort immediately ran into difficulties. Four hours and about a dozen tries were needed to free the satellite from the Shuttle. Then the unreeling tether line jammed twice, and the satellite ended the day about 850 feet instead of twelve and one-half miles from the Shuttle. NASA added an eighth day to Atlantis' mission because of problems with the Eureca and tethered satellite experiments. (W Post, Aug 5/92; The Sun, Aug 5/92; LA Times, Aug 5/92; WSJ, Aug 5/92; USA Today, Aug 5/92; NY Times, Aug 5/92; P Inq, Aug 5/92; W Times, Aug 5/92; APn, Aug 5/92; UPI, Aug 5/92; C Trib, Aug 5/92; Time Magazine, Aug 17/92)
NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, said it had selected Lockheed Missiles & Space Company  of Sunnyvale, California, to negotiate a cost-plus-award-fee, level-of-effort contract for the Hubble Space Telescope Mission Operations, Systems Engineering, and Software effort. The contract was in excess of $100 million and was a follow-on to existing contracts. The proposed effort included maintenance of the spacecraft's health and safety, efficient operation of the observatory, systems management, and servicing mission support. (NASA Release C92-11)
Astronauts on the Shuttle Atlantis cleared a snag in the tether cord linking the Italian-built satellite to the Shuttle and safely reeled the satellite back into the Shuttle's cargo bay, averting the need for an emergency space walk. The satellite flew above Atlantis for 24 hours, never going higher than 850 feet on the tether, far short of the twelve-and-one-half mile target. Even though the experiment fell short of its goal of generating electricity with a tethered satellite, the exercise showed that tethered vehicles probably can be reliably controlled in space. (LA Times, Aug 6/92; P Inq, Aug 6/92; W Post, Aug 6/92; W Times, Aug 6/92; NY Times, Aug 6/92, Aug 9/92; USA Today, Aug 6/92; WSJ, Aug 6/92; APn, Aug 6/92, Aug 8/92; UPI, Aug 6/92, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 6/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
Nature magazine reported that astronomers had detected the most distant source known for very high-energy gamma rays--a galaxy with a powerhouse nucleus. The radiation is about a trillion times as energetic as ordinary starlight. Astronomers were puzzled as to how the Markarian 421 Galaxy, 20 times farther away than any other galaxy previously reported to emit such radiation, produces it. (P Inq, Aug 6/92)
The Eureca satellite that failed to enter proper orbit after being released from the Shuttle Atlantis responded to commands to boost itself into a higher orbit. The reusable satellite held experiments using shrimp eggs, seeds, crystals, bacteria spores, solar monitors, cosmic dust catchers, and a telescope. Its was slated to remain in orbit for several months before being retrieved and returned to Earth for study. (P Inq, Aug 7/92; LA Times, Aug 7/92; NY Times, Aug 7/92; W Times, Aug 7/92; USA Today, Aug 7/92; The Sun, Aug 7/92; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92)
NASA announced that a Board of Investigation had been formed to assess the problem of the fouled tether that prevented the successful release of the Tethered Satellite System during Shuttle Atlantis' just-completed flight. NASA officials said that any decision about reflight of the $380 million tether system would depend in part on a quick determination of what went wrong and how much it would cost to solve the problem. NASA set an August 28 deadline for the board to report its findings. (NASA Release 92-129; W Post, Aug 7/92; AvWk, Aug 10/92, Aug 17/92)
The Shuttle Atlantis landed at Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending a mission that deployed a European scientific satellite but that failed to complete an experiment with a tethered satellite. (USA Today, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 8/92; P Inq, Aug 9/92; W Post, Aug 9/92; The Sun, Aug 9/92; W Times, Aug 9/92; NY Times, Aug 9/92; CSM, Aug 10/92; WSJ, Aug 10/92)
The Associated Press reported that Japanese space officials recently had travelled to Russia for two weeks of talks and tours of previously off-limits space facilities. During the trip, the officials discussed a space cooperation treaty that would grant Japan access to Russian manned spaceflight data for use in medical research and to remote-sensing technology for use on satellites. (AP, Aug 9/92)
Russian space authorities reported that they had developed a new design for their Mir 2 Space Station and that initial production of the primary module had already started. The new Mir 2 design envisioned a core with five modules that were to be attached to the middle of a long beam. The officials said they expected Mir 2 to be launched in the mid-1990s and that it represented Russia's determination to continue its long-term plan of manned flight activities despite the difficult financial and political situation in Russia. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
A Russian industry grouping called the Space Regatta
European Space Agency mission controllers doubted that the Giotto spacecraft would be able to perform a flyby of a third comet. Scientists were enthusiastic about Giotto's encounter with Comet Grigg-Skjellerup on July 10, a followup on its original mission to Comet Halley in 1986. But low fuel supply and out-of-date communication systems probably signalled the end of Giotto's usefulness. (AvWk, Aug 10/92)
A U.S.-French satellite roared into orbit aboard a European Ariane 4 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. The $706 million Topex-Poseidon satellite carried a $30 million altimeter designed for NASA by Johns Hopkins University scientists to measure ocean topography to within 1.2 inches or less from 830 miles in space. During the next three to five years, scientists hoped to use the altimeter to make a comprehensive map of ocean currents, aiding the study of how they pump heat from the tropics to the poles. NASA said the research could eventually improve long-range climate forecasts and predict large-scale weather patterns, such as the El Nino warming trend in the eastern Pacific Ocean, and help in understanding the impact of green-house gases on climate. Also in the payload were a small South Korean communications satellite and a French technological satellite. (The Sun, Aug 10/92; USA Today, Aug 11/92; AP, Aug 10/92; LA Times, Aug 13/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts and a French researcher landed safely in Kazakhstan after completing scientific experiments aboard the orbiting Mir Space Station. The 14-day mission brought to a close the third joint Russian-French flight since 1982. The three worked on experiments involving astrophysics, biology, and bioengineering. They also conducted geophysical research based on commercial contracts from several European countries and members of the Commonwealth of Independent States. (AP, Aug 10/92; UPI, Aug 10/92; The Sun, Aug 11/92)
The National Science Board, the policy-making arm of the National Science Foundation, warned that the United States was losing its competitive edge in technologies of the future. Blaming government incompetence, leveraged buyouts, and executives' and investors' short-term focus, the panel urged increased public funding and changes in tax laws to counter technological competition from Europe and Japan. It said ways to improve performance included studying process technologies to make better products, training more engineers, and creating a better understanding of the role of research. (LA Times, Aug 13/92; NY Times, Aug 13/92; W Post, Aug 13/92)
Scientists studying the effects of ozone depletion in Earth's atmosphere reported that the frequencies of light passing through a depleted ozone layer may not cause the widespread catastrophic damage to plants scientists previously predicted. They found that the kind of ultraviolet radiation that causes the most damage to alfalfa plants passes straight through the ozone layer, meaning a depleted ozone layer would not increase exposure to the most damaging light. Significant depletions in the ozone layer would certainly send up the cancer rate in humans quite substantially, biophysicist John Sutherland of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, said, but plants are not likely to be the most severely affected by the increased ultraviolet light hitting Earth because of a thinning protective layer. (UPI, Aug 13/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin charged a new team of agency officials with finding a cheaper way to build Space Station Freedom, even if that meant assembling much of it without the Space Shuttle. The team, comprised mainly of officials within NASA but outside the Station program, was asked to redesign the Station so that it can be completed on time despite congressionally imposed spending limits. Goldin's directive came in the wake of reduced Space Station funding in both the House of Representative and the Senate. Findings were due to Goldin by November. (Space News, Aug 17/92; AvWk, Aug 24/92)
Scientists from NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said they planned to seek answers to such problems as the development of frog eggs in weightlessness and control of space motion sickness on the next Shuttle flight scheduled for mid-September. Space Shuttle Endeavour was slated to carry a crew of seven, including a Japanese mission specialist, and Spacelab-J, a science laboratory containing 43 experiments, 34 of them provided by Japan, on a six-day mission. (NASA Releases 92-130 and 92-128)
A group of scientists said in today's issue of the journal Science that new studies prove that a buried crater in the Yucatan Peninsula of Mexico is the point of impact of an asteroid that smashed into the Earth about 65 million years ago, contributing to the extinction of the dinosaurs. The Yucatan crater is big enough to be linked directly to ancient extinctions, and its mineral content is also compatible with that produced by an ancient explosion. Geologists, led by Carl C. Switcher III of the University of California at Berkeley, California, have dated rocks from the crater to 64.98 million years old, making the crater the leading candidate for a cataclysmic impact thought to have contributed to the mass extinction of life forms, including dinosaurs, 65 million years ago. (NY Times, Aug 14/92; B Sun, Aug 14/92; C Trib, Aug 14/92)
Reacting to the recent failed attempt at tethered space flight by the crew of Shuttle Atlantis, Astronaut Jeffrey Hoffman, the payload commander, said NASA needed to improve the way equipment was tested on the ground before flight. "When we're doing fundamentally new things, we've really got to pay close attention to how we're doing the testing on the ground or else we're going to continue to get surprised," Hoffman said. (APn, Aug 14/92)
The launch of Consort 5, a commercial suborbital rocket carrying nine microgravity experiments, was scheduled for September 10 by the University of Alabama in Huntsville's Consortium for Materials Development in Space. A two-stage Starfire solid fuel rocket would carry the payload to an altitude of 200 miles and provide the experiments with seven to eight minutes of microgravity exposure or weightlessness. The rocket and launch services were funded by a grant from NASA's Office of Commercial Programs.(NASA Release 92-133)
NASA announced that it had selected 31 experiments from the public and private sectors for inclusion in the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite (ACTS) Program. Scheduled for launch in early 1993, this national communications facility was to operate as an orbiting testbed for the next generation of commercial communications satellites. A two-year experiment, the ACTS program was designed to offer a unique opportunity for commercial, governmental, and academic organizations to experiment with and to validate new communications satellite technologies. (NASA Release 92-134)
Some leading American astronomers complained about the failure of the Federal Government to provide dependable financial support for astronomical research in the United States. The absence of dependable funding put American astronomy at a serious disadvantage in the competition with its counterparts in Europe and Japan, the astronomers charged. Federal financing had flagged, they said, just as a steam of new telescopes and telescope-enhancing devices were ready to be exploited. There were also management problems. Dr. Riccardo Giacconi, chief scientist for NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, charged that poor management of America's space and astronomy programs had hobbled efforts to compete with European science. (NY Times, Aug 18/92)
The Air Force and NASA announced that they were developing a new family of rockets to meet the unmanned launch needs of the next century. As currently conceived, the National Launch System would include three new vehicles designed to lift cargoes ranging from 20,000 to 130,000 pounds into low Earth orbit. The new rockets were expected to become operational in 2002 and would carry supplies to Space Station Freedom at less cost than present U. S. delivery systems. (W Times, Aug 18/92; Birmingham News, Aug 19/92)
The United States and France recently announced plans to increase civil space program cooperation. The two countries said they were also prepared to invite Russia to join with them in new cooperative endeavors. The focus of this new cooperation was the monitoring of the global environment and bringing France and Russia in with the United States as major partners on the Mission to Planet Earth program. The August 10 launch of the U. S./French Topex-Poseidon ocean survey satellite laid the foundation for the U.S/French initiative. (AvWk, Aug 17/92)
NASA researchers began a three-week airborne study to increase understanding of microscopic plant productivity in the  equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean. The principal scientific objective was to understand why microscopic plant productivity involving phytoplankton is so limited in the Pacific compared to the Atlantic Ocean. (NASA Release 92-135)
An experimental tilt-rotor forerunner of the controversial V-22 Osprey aircraft crashed during a routine training flight at Arlington, Texas, slightly injuring the pilot and co-pilot. Although the XV-15 looks much like the V-22 Osprey, a spokesman said the plane's development was not part of the V-22 program. The XV-15 resulted from cooperation between Bell Helicopter, NASA, and the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency. (P Inq, Aug 21/92; WSJ, Aug 21/92; USA Today, Aug 21/92; AP, Aug 20/82; UPI, Aug 20/92)
Jeremiah Pearson, NASA's associate administrator for space flight, said NASA planners were studying ways to cut up to 25 percent from the Space Shuttle budget by 1997, a much more extensive reduction than previously projected. The 25 percent cut would produce savings of about $3 billion, Pearson said. Managers at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida were already working to cut 10 percent from the Shuttle's 1994 budget. (Space News, Aug 24-30/92)
The journal Science carried reports by two teams of scientists who had found new evidence that speeding objects from space struck the Earth 370 million and 65 million years ago, possibly disrupting the global climate and causing mass extinctions. The scientists found tiny glass beads called microtektites in Belgian shale. The beads, more than 400 of which were found in a rock layer two to four inches thick, were reported to have round, elongated, teardrop and dumbbell shapes. The scientists said geochemical analysis strongly suggested that they were produced from a cosmic collision. (C Trib, Aug 23/92)
An Atlas 1 rocket tumbled out of control after one of two Centaur second-stage engines failed to ignite, destroying a cable television satellite in a $150 million failure for General Dynamics' commercial-launch business. It was the second catastrophic failure in seven flights for General Dynamics Space Systems Division of San Diego, California, which was trying to overtake the European consortium Arianespace for control of the world's commercial launch market. Lost with the Atlas 1 was a  Galaxy 1R cable television relay station, a satellite built by Hughes Aircraft Company. (UPI, Aug 22/92; WSJ, Aug 24/92; LA Times, Aug 23/92)
The Association of Space Explorers 8th Planetary Congress opened at Georgetown University in Washington, D. C. It was attended by the largest group of astronauts and cosmonauts ever assembled, with over 100 international space flyers, representing 19 nations, in attendance. The congress opened with remarks by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and was concerned mainly with discussions about an international mission to Mars. Goldin also mentioned the practical applications of NASA's technology innovations since the 1960s. He identified CAT scans, laser surgery, and intensive care units as having had their genesis in the space program. "New products, new industries, and new jobs come through NASA research," Goldin said. (NASA Note to Editors: N92-75; W Times, Aug 31/92)
Officials at NASA's John F. Kennedy Space Center in Florida said that the agency had selected I-Net, Inc., of Bethesda, Maryland, for negotiation of a contract to provide engineering support services to the center's Engineering Development Directorate. The contract was to  run for five years and have an estimated value in excess of $100 million. (NASA Release C92-12)
NASA officials were reported to be focusing on a September 1994 Shuttle flight to rendezvous with the Russian Mir Space Station and possibly bring back a U. S. astronaut launched to the outpost earlier that summer. Shuttle launch was tentatively scheduled for September 9, 1994, after extensive modifications to install a Russian docking fixture in the Shuttle Atlantis' cargo bay. A different Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993 was listed as a possibility for a flight featuring a Russian cosmonaut. (Space News, Aug 24/92)
The U.S. Air Force, NASA, and Grumman aircraft company said they had reached the mid-point of the X-29 vortex flow control (VFC) program at Edwards Air Force Base in California, producing yaw rates of up to 20 degrees. The use of VCF to yaw the aircraft while at high angle-of-attack is an aviation first according to Col. William Gotcher, X-29 program manager.(Flight International, Aug 19-25/92)
NASA announced that the Mars Observer spacecraft was seriously contaminated with metal filings, paint chips, and other trash and could not be launched until it had been cleaned. The contamination may have been introduced when technicians tried to protect the spacecraft from possible damage from Hurricane Andrew. Originally scheduled for launch on September 16, NASA officials estimated a postponement of at least 10 days or possibly two weeks in the launch date. (NY Times, Aug 28/92; AP, Aug 28/92; W Post, Aug 29/92; The Sun, Aug 29/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
Scientists reported that the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano in the Philippines last June sent massive amounts of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere, which in turn was contributing to erosion of Earth's protective ozone layer and to warming in the tropics. While the depletion could amount to 5 or 10 percent, the researchers expected the effect to be temporary.   Detailed observations of the ozone layer were being made by NASA's Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite launched last year. (UPI, Aug 27/92)
The fifth meeting of the Space Agency Forum on the International Space Year (SAFISY) opened in Washington, D. C. The forum is composed of 29 members (national and multi-national space agencies), including NASA, and 10 affiliate members (international, space-related organizations). The meeting was called to review progress of the various SAFISY-sponsored international space year projects and to discuss options for post-1992 cooperation. (NASA Note to Editors N92-76)
The Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board presented an interim report on the cause of the failure of the tethered satellite experiment on the Shuttle Atlantis' mission earlier this month. Preliminary findings indicated that a bolt one-quarter of an inch in diameter got in the way of a reel of cord, causing it to jam. The bolt was part of a structural change made earlier this year to strengthen the tether system's attach points to withstand better the rigors of launch and landing, NASA said. Italian scientists hope to retry the experiment. A complete report was expected in about a month. (AP, Aug 29/92; API, Aug 28/92; UPI, Aug 28/92; NY Times, Aug 30/92; C Trib, Aug 30/92; W Times, Aug 29/92)
In an interview with Final Frontier magazine, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin gave his views about NASA and its contribution to American society. "I took this job because I believe NASA is critical to America's future. NASA provides hope, opportunity, and inspiration to the American public. It does this through its primary mission: to reach for the stars, in the broadest sense, of course. . . . For the last 30 years it has been demonstrated over and over again that the space program helps take America's value-added industry right to the cutting edge and provides jobs and opportunity." (Final Frontier, Sept/92)
For the first time, virtually every nation with an interest in space or its practical benefits sent delegates to the World Space Congress. Meeting in Washington, D. C., at the invitation of President George Bush, almost 4,000 representatives began a week of meetings that were expected to usher in a new era of international cooperation in space exploration. The conference was sponsored by the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions, NASA, the U. S. Academy of Sciences, the International Astronautical Federation, and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (The Sun, Aug 31/92;  CSM, Aug 31/92)
NASA announced that its Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer (EUVE) satellite had detected an object emitting extreme ultraviolet radiation located outside the Milky Way galaxy through interstellar dust and gas, once thought to block this source of radiation. EUVE also had detected a new source of extreme ultraviolet radiation coming from the corona of a star much like the sun located about 16 light-years from Earth. The EUVE satellite, now six weeks into a survey of the entire sky in extreme ultraviolet wavelengths, was intended to provide astronomers with their first detailed maps in multiple extreme ultraviolet energy bands. (NASA Release 92-138)
NASA set Sept. 12 as the launch date for the seven-day scientific mission of the Shuttle Endeavour. The 50th Shuttle mission was to include a number of Shuttle mission firsts: the first married couple, the first black woman, and the first Japanese astronaut on a U.S. spacecraft. (NASA Release STS-47 Launch Advisory; USA Today, Sept. 2/92)
NASA announced that its Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program had been renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey in a bid to defuse criticism of the program, especially by congressional budget-cutters. The new $100 million program aimed to survey the entire sky by the year 2010 and specifically target about a thousand stars. (CSM, Sept. 2/92)
Lockheed Missiles and Space Company received two NASA contracts worth $267 million for work on the Hubble Space Telescope. The flight systems contract, valued at $147 million, includes funds for servicing missions, the first of which was set for December 1993 and was to deliver an optical instrument to correct the telescope's flawed mirror. (WSJ, Sept 2/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts made a spacewalk to position a cable that will power an exterior engine on their Mir Space Station. (AP Sept 9/92)
International cooperation in space exploration and new opportunities between Western nations and the Russian Federation were among the topics NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin discussed in his address to the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C. Goldin said the changes in governments around the world present challenges but also new opportunities. He said cooperation with Russia was among those opportunities. (Spacewatch, Sept 92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, said it had won a $13.5 million contract from Brazil's civilian space agency to launch a remote-sensing and date-relay satellite in 1992. (W Times, Sept 2/92)
The launch date of Mars Observer was rescheduled from September 16 to 25 in the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew. Although the hurricane passed well south of Cape Canaveral, the craft was nonetheless removed from the launch pad for protection. It required cleaning before it could be repositioned for launch, necessitating launch postponement. (NASA Release Launch Advisory, Sept 2/92; W Post, Sept 4/92; AP Sept 3/92)
NASA selected Dr. Claude R. Canizares, head of the Astrophysics Division at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as the new Chairman of the space Science and Applications Advisory Committee. (NASA Release 92-141)
At a meeting with NASA employees at Edwards Air Force Base, NASA chief administrator, Dan Goldin, emphasized the need for increased attention to aeronautics research in the face of competition from Europe and Japan. Goldin also said that NASA would have to do things "better, faster, cheaper"--the message Congress had just sent the agency by not increasing its $14 billion budget. Goldin also urged senior managment to place more minorities in its ranks and indicated that agency personnel would be reshuffled in the future. (Daily News, Sept 4/92; Antelope Valley Press, Sept 4/92)
Rockwell International and NPO Energia of Kaliningrad agreed September 4 to discuss cooperation in space flight and technology and to work together on a docking system that will connect the U.S. Space Shuttle to the Russian Mir Space Station. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin endorsed the creation of a Space Agency Forum to coordinate activities among the leades of the world's space agencies to prevent duplication and overlap. (NASA Release 92-143)
NASA proposed to explore the planet Pluto by dispatching two small spacecraft with cameras and a few essential instruments as early as 1998 on flights taking them close to the planet in seven or eight years. Such a mission would utilize existing technology and cost an estimated $400 million, an example of NASA's new philosophy of "better, faster, cheaper." Scientists were anxious to send a mission to Pluto in the near future, since the planet was favorably positioned relative to earth and its atmosphere was in a gaseous state, conditions that would not continue beyond about 2010. (NY Times, Sept 8/92; CSM, Nov 4/92)
The Magellan spacecraft resumed its radar-imaging of Venus after a seven-week outage, making radar pictures of some of the last unmapped regions on Venus. Magellan was also scheduled to go into a lower orbit to measure Venus' gravity and to explore the planets' internal structure. The spacecraft has mapped 99 percent of Venus' landscape. Plans were under consideration to extend the life of the mission until November 1994 to obtain even more detailed pictures of Venus. (AP, Sept 9/94; W Times, Sept 9/92)
Lockheed, a principal designer of NASA's Hubble Space Telescope, won $267 million in contracts to maintain, service, and help repair the orbiting observatory. (W Post, Sept 9/92)
NASA scientists were baffled by a brownish discoloration, representing some kind of growth, on the Long Duration Exposure Facility (LDEF) satellite. The LDEF was retrieved by a Space Shuttle in January 1990. Whatever the growth, it had formed in space and despite high ultraviolet radiation and the corrosive power of atomic oxygen. (W Times, Sept 9/92)
Rockwell International and a Russian company announced plans to collaborate on a system to enable the Space Shuttle  Atlantis to dock with Russia's MIR Space Station. Rockwell said it had signed an agreement under which NPO Energia would develop hardware for the system and build some components. (AP, Sept 9/92)
The U.S. Senate rejected by a wide margin a move to cancel NASA's international Space Station but forbade NASA from significantly changing the laboratory's design and schedule. If approved by the House of Representative, the restriction would severely limit NASA's ability to overhaul key aspects of the program. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation announced that it had reached a key milestone in development of the Taurus launch vehicle with the successful integration and testing of a full-scale engineering vehicle at its Chandler, Arizona, facilities. Taurus was designed to place payloads of up to 3,000 lbs. in low Earth orbit or 950 lbs. in geostationary transfer orbit. It was part of a program to develop a new class of U.S. launch vehicles that could be integrated, checked out, and launched on short notice. (AvWk, Sept 7/92)
Joint NASA/FAA tests in Denver and Orlando showed that advanced, predictive sensor systems could provide airline crews up to 30 seconds' warning of wind shears during takeoff and landing phases of flight. Of three forward-looking sensors tested, the modified Doppler weather radar detected wind shear consistently and at longer ranges than light detection and ranging systems or infrared sensors. Windshear caused more than 26 U.S. air carrier accidents between 1964 and 1985. (AvWk, Sept 7/92)
NASA announced that five contractors had been selected to develop designs for two Earth Observing Systems spacecraft, EOS-PM and EOS Chemistry, scheduled for launch in 2000 and 2002, respectively. NASA planned to spend about $12 million on the five studies. (AvWk, Sept 7/92)
Leaders of the world's space nations attending the World Space Congress in Washington, D.C., last week said that they lacked the money to go it alone in space, yet the will to cooperate internationally seemed also to be lacking. Two views about space exploration emerged among scientists. An optimistic view held that space exploration methods could worthwhile projects at affordable prices. The pessimistic view held that space cost too much, lacked public support, and that ideas must be constrained. The congress, the largest gathering of space experts ever convened, attracted more than 5,000 delegates from 70 nations and featured more than 2,700 technical papers. (Space News, Sept 7-13/92)
The Senate approved funding of $2.1 billion for continuation of the Space Station after defeating a proposal to close down the project because of its expense. The Senate vote, together with House approval in July, assured continued funding and Congressional support for the Space Station. (W Post, Sept 10/92; LA Times, Sept 10/92; WSJ, Sept 10/92; AP, Sept 10/92)
A Starfire I rocket manufactured by EER Systems Corporation of Vienna, Virginia, failed to achieve suborbital flight after launch from the White Sands Missile Range. The flight carried nine microgravity experiments. At a cost of $3 million, the Starfire rocket was thought to be an inexpensive way to carry out experiments without the costs associated with programs such as the Space Shuttle. (Las Cruces, NM, Sun News, Sept 11/92; El Paso Times, Sept 11/92)
The Boeing Aircraft Company announced plans to produce some jetliner parts in the former Soviet Union as soon as possible. The effort would enable Boeing to gain increased access to the Russian aviation market and to meet stiff competition from Russian and European firms. (WSJ, Sept 11/92)
NASA announced that a Space Shuttle flight link up with the Russian Mir Space Station, tentatively planned for September 1994, would be retargeted for launch in April 1995. A flight by a Russian cosmonaut aboard the Shuttle Discovery remained on track for launch on November 16, 1993. The first flight to begin building the planned Space Station Freedom was rescheduled for July 1996. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
In an interview in Huntsville, Alabama, Vice-Presidential candidate Al Gore said that a Clinton administration would support a return to the moon and Mars but would not commit major resources to such efforts. Given other current NASA priorities, Gore said the longer-range mission to Mars "must be pursued according to a sensible timetable." (Htsvl Tms, Sept 11/92)
Scientists studying data from Jupiter's highly chatrged magnetic enviroment reported that the solar wind exerts a much stronger influence on the planet's magnetic field than previously thought. The discovery was the result of the unique trajectory of the spacecraft Ulysses, a joint NASA-European Space Agency mission on its way to study the poles of the sun. (NASA Release 92-145)
The Space Shuttle Endeavor roared into orbit on September 12 on a history-making seven-day mission. It carried the first married couple, Mark Lee and Jan Davis, the first black woman, Mae Jemison, and the first Japanese, Mamoru Mohri, to fly on a U.S. spacecraft. It also carried fish, frogs, hornets, flies, and fertilized chicken eggs, all subjects of the research mission. Endeavour's flight was also the first U.S. space mission devoted to Japanese research. Japan supplied 34 of the 43 Spacelab experiments, the United States seven, and two were shared. Japan contributed $90 million of the estimated $363 million cost of the flight. (CSM, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 13/92; NY Times, Sept 13/92; The Sun, Sept 13/92; P Inq, Sept 13/92; W Times, Sept 12/92; W Post, Sept 12/92; The Sun, Sept 12/92; C Trib, Sept 12/92;)
On their first full day in space, two crew members of the Space Shuttle Endeavour conducted experiments involving motion sickness. Understanding motion sickness has high priority among space agencies around the world. It strikes most astronauts during their first few days in space, and it affects flight planning, such as space walks, which are never scheduled early in a mission. (W Post, Sept 14/92; NY Times, Sept 14/92; W Times, Sept 14/92; AP, Sept 14/92; W Post, Sept 13/92)
In the summer 1992 issue of Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Richard H. Kohrs, director of Space Station Freedom in NASA's Office of Space Development, discussed the advantages and challenge of constructing Space Station Freedom. Aside from the international cooperation required to build and operate it, Kohrs gave three primary functions that the Space Station would perform in the U.S. civil space program: 1) it would enable humans to learn to live and work productively in space; 2) it would serve as an advanced research facility; and 3) it would provide experience and knowledge of building, operating, and maintaining large systems in space. The Space Station was also expected to be a vital component of the total U.S. civil space program, augmenting the planetary exploration program, astronomical research, life-sciences program, aeronautics research, and transportation program. (Phi Kappa Phi Journal, Summer 1992)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour resumed science work after successful repairs Sunday night on a set of water-cooled furnaces critical to several of the 43 experiments aboard the shuttle. The crew observed irradiated fruit fly larvae, fertilized frog eggs, kept tabs on two fish with electrodes attached to their brains, and tested a new manufacturing method for electronic components. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 15/92; W Post, Sept 15/92; The Sun, Sept 15/92)
Deidre Lee was appointed deputy assistant administrator for procurement at NASA headquarters. (NASA Release 92-146; Space News, Sept 21-27/92)
The Magellan spacecraft fired its four thrusters to swoop within 113 miles of the surface of Venus for study of the planet's gravity and prominent surface details. Since its deployment in 1989, the Venus probe has used radar to map 99 percent of the planet, exceeding its goal of 70-90 percent. With its mission completed beyond expectations, NASA scientists expected to shut down Magellan in May 1993 as a cost-cutting measure. (NASA Release 92-148; USA Today, Sept 15/92; LA Times, Sept 15/92)
A NASA Ames Research ER-2 aircraft was scheduled to take high altitude aerial images of the Hawaiian Islands to help officials determine the full extent of the damage caused by Hurricane Iniki. (NASA Release 92-149)
Weather satellite officials at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration expressed concern about the heightened danger from hurricanes because of delays in modernizing the U.S. weather satellite system. The delays forced the use of antiquated and poorly positioned satellites that raised the risk of forecasting errors. Two hurricanes, Andrew and Iniki, showed the limits of the antiquated satellites. Replacement satellites were stymied by a series of technical failures, delaying the first launching from 1989 to 1994. In the meantime, the United States was borrowing surplus satellites from Europe. (NY Times, Sept 15/92; W Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA managers said last week that they would refashion the way the space agency conducts its programs, drawing on the results of internal NASA studies now under way and the advice of outside groups. The proposed reforms would serve as a test of whether Administrator Daniel Goldin's vision of faster and cheaper space projects could work in practice. (NASA Release 92-154; Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Dr. David M. Rust, chief scientist for the Flare Genesis project, a powerful solar telescope project developed by a team at Johns Hopkins University, said the telescope could be launched as early as December 1993. Rather than be launched on a NASA rocket or from a Space Shuttle, which might take a decade of planning and cost hundreds of millions of dollars, the telescope was to be dragged 19 miles above Antarctica by a balloon. The project would be another in a series of long-duration research flights using large balloons. Project scientists hoped to use the telescope to explore the precise cause of solar flares. (The Sun, Sept 15/92)
NASA scientists announced that they would use "telepresence" technology in the Antarctic this fall to see if life that existed millions of years ago on Earth could provide clues about organisms that once may have lived on Mars. A team was scheduled to travel to Antarctica in October to study sediment on the bottom of ice-covered Lake Hoare on Ross Island. (NASA Release 92-147)
An editorial in Aviation Week & Space Technology lamented the lack of priorities in developing more new space launch and propulsion systems than the United States could possibly use. It stated that the White House, Congress, NASA, the Defense Department, and other agencies involved in space transportation are the bodies that should lay out a realistic national plan to develop new launch systems and technologies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The European Space Agency (ESA) reported last week that Hermes, the ESA's spaceplane program, already scaled back to an unmanned demonstrator, would have to be downgraded to a technology development program because of budgetary constraints. On another project, ESA's scientists were evaluating data from a test of inter-satellite communications conducted by Eureca, ESA's large, retrievable satellite. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The National Center for Advanced Technologies received a two-year, $200,000 grant from NASA and the Aerospace Industries Association to study civil space technology needs and technology transfer mechanisms. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
According to a report in Aviation Week & Space Technology, wind tunnel facilities at Russia's Sibnia research and development center were being made available to Western companies. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin appeared ready to abandon the X-30 National Aero-Space Plane program with its goal of constructing and flying a single-stage-to-orbit air-breathing vehicle in favor of a hypersonic research effort. The latter, the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility effort, centers on a manned, Mach 10-class reusable test aircraft launched from the back of a NASA/Lockheed SR-71A, and on an unmanned platform launched atop a rocket to explore physical phenomena at speeds approaching Mach 25. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
NASA acknowledged that it could not keep the Space Station project on schedule even with the most optimistic current funding projections. The projected level of Congressional appropriations for the next few years meant certain delays in development and launch schedules of anything up to 12 or 18 months. Such delays would mean that the station would miss the official December 1999 target for being able to support a crew on a permanent basis. (AvWk, Sept 14/92)
The National Aero-Space Plane program applyied a battery of optical instrumentation to the problem of measuring the chemistry and aerodynamics of a hypersonic combustor during 0.002-second shock tunnel test runs. The NASP test environment has the unique challenge of a high Mach number, short run time, and a flow so energetic that measurements were obscured by the brightly glowing air.(AvWk, Sept 14/92)
Space magazine carried an assessment of NASA's new administrator, Daniel Goldin, five months after his confirmation as NASA's chief. Goldin's task was to drag NASA out of its doldrums by sheer force of will. In his first five months, Goldin had already shaken up the U.S. space agency by applying business and management practices honed at the helm of some of TRW Corporations most significant space projects, such as total quality management. The Huntsville News viewed Goldin as an agent of change, determined to revamp NASA from within. (Space, Aug-Sept 92; Htsvl Tms, Sept 3/92)
Shuttle Endeavour's astronauts reported abnormal behavior for tadpoles hatched aboard the shuttle. Oriental hornets similarly displayed confused, disoriented behavior, seemingly unable to build nests in a weightless environment. The tadpoles and hornets were part of 43 experiments in weightless conditions being carried out on the Shuttle. (UPI, Sept 15/92; W Times, Sept 16/92; UPI, Sept 16/92; AP, Sept 16/92)
Two Russian cosmonauts on Tuesday completed a series of spacewalks to install an engine and move an antenna on the Mir Space Station, partly in preparation for docking with a U.S. Space Shuttle in 1994. (AP, Sept 15/92)
September 16: Astronomers reported that they had recently detected a small faint object beyond Neptune and Pluto that could be the first direct evidence for the existence of the Kuiper belt, a broad belt of icy minor planets that is presumably the source of many short-period comets streaking in from the fringes of the solar system. Initial observations suggested that the object is about 120 miles in diameter, has a reddish glow, and is traveling in a 200-year orbit between 3.4 and 5.5 billion miles from the sun. (NY Times, Sept 16/92; W Post, Sept 16/92; Time, Sept 28/92))
The U.S. Defense Department announced that it had no further plans to use the Space Shuttle for major payloads after launch of a classified military satellite during a Shuttle flight in November. The Pentagon, which once had planned to be a prime user of the Space Shuttles, was to be relegated to a minor and occasional Shuttle customer. In place of the Shuttles, the Pentagon planned to rely much more heavily on expendable launch vehicles for military payloads. (Space News, Sept 14-20/92)
Dr. Wesley T. Huntress, Jr., Director of NASA's Solar System Exploration Division, last week received the Korolev Medal, awarded by the Russian Federation of Astronautics and Cosmonautics for achievement in space research. (NASA Relesase 92-151)
Astronauts aboard the Space Shuttle Endeavour began testing a system to deliver intravenous fluids in weightlessness, a step toward meeting the possible medical needs of astronauts who stay in space long-term. (AP Sept 18/92)
Dick Weinstein, manager of engineering standards and practices for NASA, said NASA was predominantly non-metric and likely to stay that way in view of a September 30, 1992, deadline for the United States to convert to the metric system. Weinstein predicted, however, that by 1995 NASA would be well into the conversion process. (Washington Technology, Sept 10/92)
The Pentagon, bowing to congressional pressure, revealed the existence of the super-secret agency that buys and operates the nation's spy satellites and its other airborne espionage systems. The National Reconnaissance Office's mission is to ensure that the United States has the technology and spaceborne and airborne assets needed to acquire intelligence worldwide, according to the Pentagon. (P Inq, Sept 1992; C Trib, Sept 18/92)
NASA announced signature of a $59.3 million supplemental agreement with Rockwell International's Space Systems Divison for the design, development, test, and evaluation of a new system to update Space Shuttle orbiter cockpit displays. (NASA Release C92-15)
The Space Shuttle returned to earth with its seven-member crew, two Japanese carp, four frogs and assorted tadpoles, hornets, and flies. This was the first Shuttle flight devoted to Japanese research. (NY Times, Sept 21/92; P Inq, Sept 21/92; The Sun, Sept 21/92; W Times, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; W Post, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; AP, Sept 20/92, Sept 21/92; UPI, Sept 21/92; USA Today, Sept 21/92; LA Times, Sept 21/92)
A new 5,000-mile-wide radio telescope designed to probe the edge of the universe was near completion in the United States, according to Peter Napier, project manager for the Very Long Baseline Array project. The federally funded project, actually a series of 10 dish-shaped antennas, was expected to begin high-resolution imaging work by December. (W Times, Sept 20/92)
A satellite launched to study oceans and global climate was maneuvered into position Monday for months of tests before beginning its mission. The Topex-Poseidon, the first major space mission conducted jointed by the United States and France, was launched August 10 from French Guiana. (AP, Sept 21/92)
The first student managed and built payload flown on a NASA sounding rocket was launched successfully from the NASA flight facility on Wallops Island, Virginia. (NASA Release 92-156)
A NASA airplane, equipped with delicate instruments, carried three astronomers to 41,000 feet above Hawaii last month to examine indications of a "black hole" at the heart of the Milky Way galaxy. The launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and improvements in ground-based instruments led to several announcements this year of tangible evidence for the existence of "black holes." (LA Times, Sept 21/92)
House-Senate negotiators agreed yesterday to provide $2.1 billion next fiscal year for Space Station Freedom. The agreement spelled the end of another year of efforts by opponents to kill a program they consider too expensive and of little scientific value. The Space Station was expected to cost $40 billion to build and $100 billion more to operate over its planned 30-year lifetime. (W Post, Sept 23/92; USA Today, Sept 23/92; LA Times, Sept 23/92; The Sun, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23/92)
NASA inspectors announced that they had discovered a pinhole-size leak in an O-ring seal of a solid rocket booster intended for Space Shuttle Discovery's November 15 launch. Technicians replaced the seal, which was similar to the one that caused the 1986 Challenger explosion. (USA Today, Sept 23/92; W Times, Sept 23/92; AP, Sept 23; UPI, Sept 23/92)
NASA announced plans to revamp its cumbersome procurement rules to entice more small businesses to bid for contracts as a way of ensuring continued technological and economic growth in the United States. (Fla Today, Sept 23/92; Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
A pinched piece of rubber filler--not a faulty O-ring seal--caused a leak in a solid rocket booster being readied for the launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, NASA said. The booster's three O-rings seals were in good condition. (AP, Sept 24/92; UPn, Sept 24/92; W Times, Sept 25/92)
NASA announced that congressionally imposed funding limits for Space Station Freedom would delay its full operation by about nine months. Under a revised schedule, NASA would begin launching parts of the Space Station in March 1996, a four-month delay. The station would be ready for limited astronaut use in June 1997 and for full astronaut use in June 2000, a nine-month delay. (Space News, Sept 28-October 4/92)
NASA announced that more than 200 scientists from 13 countries were participating in a science expedition, spearheaded by NASA, to investigate newly discovered concentrations of harmfull ozone over large regions of southern Africa and Brazil. The ozone pollution was recently uncovered by satellite analysis. (NASA Release 92-155)
NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration began evaluating new technology that could substantially improve the efficiency of the nation's air traffic system, including improved on-time arrivals, increased fuel efficiency, and a decreased work load for air traffic controllers, according to scientists at NASA's Ames Research Center. (Commercial Aviation News, Sept 22/92)
*NASA's Mars Observer space probe, the first American mission to Mars in 17 years, blasted off from Cape Canaveral. The probe was to search for future landing sites and map the planet's geology and climate. Despite a radio blackout before a critical rocket firing that left flight controllers in the dark for nearly two hours, the spacecraft was successfully boosted out of Earth orbit on an 11-month, 450-million-mile journey to Mars after a flawless launch atop a Titan 3 rocket. It was also the first mission for the Transfer Orbit Stage, a 13-foot thrusting unit designed to fire for two and a half minutes to provide the final shove to put the probe on its 11-month coast to Mars. The launch heralded an era of unprecedented United States-Russian cooperation in space. Eleven Russians were part of the spacecraft's science team, and the orbiter was designed to help relay pictures and data from Russian probes scheduled to land on Mars in 1995 and 1997. (UPI, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; AP, Sept 25/92, Sept 26/92; W Post, Sept 25/92, Sept 29/92; The Sun, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; P Inq, Sept 26/92, Sept 27/92; NY Times, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
Air Force officials employed a revised and more accurate computer model of wind direction and speed in the launch of the Mars Observer. The officials insisted on ideal weather conditions before allowing the launch because of concerns that a plume of harmful nitrogen tetroxide could drift over nearby populated areas should the Titan 3 rocket explode within the first 20 to 30 seconds of flight. The new computer model allows the Martin Marietta-built Titan family of rockets to continue as launch vehicles, although the modelling may make it more difficult to launch on time. (Fla Today, Oct 4/92)
The House of Representatives voted to spend $2.1 billion next year for work on NASA's Space Station Freedom as opponents ended their efforts to scuttle the project. (The Sun, Sept 26/92; W Times, Sept 26/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced new minority contract goals and the formation of a NASA Minority Business Resource Advisory Committee. He also announced that the Minority Contractor of the Year was Jackson & Tull, Chartered Engineers, of Seabrook, Maryland; B & W Services, Inc., Bay St. Louis, Mississippi, was selected as Minority Subcontractor of the Year. (NASA Release 92-158)
A Japanese amateur astronomer detected Comet Swift-Tuttle on its return to the inner solar system. Swift-Tuttle, last seen during the American Civil War, is currently the longest predictable periodic comet, returning approximately every 130 years. (W Post, Sept 29/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
Germany announced that it would go ahead with a celebration to mark the 50th anniversary of the first launch of the V-2 rocket despite British protests. The organizers said the event would celebrate the "first step into space" and did not represent a glorification of a Nazi weapon. (W Post, Sept 28/92;  The Sun, Sept 26/92)
Douglas Broome, Jr., deputy director of the solar system exploration division at NASA, died of liver cancer September 27 in Fairfax, Virginia. (W Post, Sept 30/92; W Times, Sept 30/92)
James Abrahamson, former Strategic Defense Initiative Director, left Hughes Aircraft to serve as co-chairman of Oracle Systems. A former Air Force general, Abrahamson was expected to supervise such projects as NASA's Space Shuttle and the Air Force's F-16 fighter. (Bus Wk, Sept 28/92)
A high-powered panel of space experts appointed by U.S. Vice-President Dan Quayle was scheduled to begin deliberations on October 1 that were intended to lay the groundwork for a revamped U.S. space program. The 11-person panel was to advise on ways to change the space effort in light of the Cold War's end, tight budgets, and rapid technological advancements. (Space News, Sept 28-Oct 4/92)
Reacting to a wave of international protest and some severe domestic criticism, Germany canceled a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the first successful V-2 rocket launch at the Peenemunde range on the north German coast. The first V-2 rocket was fired on October 3, 1942, under the direction of Werner von Braun, then a young scientist. The date is generally recognized as the birth of the space age. (LA Times, Sept 29/92; W Post, Sept 29/92)
NASA and Thiokol Corporation officials were working on a modification to prevent a field joint lining from creating leaks in the cases of solid rocket boosters for the Space Shuttle. This effort came after engineers discovered a leak in a segment of the booster rocket assembled for the Space Shuttle Discovery's scheduled November launch. (AvWk, Sept 28/92)
An experimental aircraft known as the X-31 had flown maneuvers at a 70-degree angle of attack, the Pentagon announced.  All of the plane's experimental flights were flown at the NASA Ames-Dryden Flight Research Facility in Edwards, California. (AP, Sept 28/92)
Scientists at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California announced plans to blast an 11-pound projectile from a 155-foot-long cannon into a California hill. The test shot was intended to demonstrate that an ultra-high-velocity gun hitherto used only for laboratory research can be adapted to send payloads into space at only about one-fortieth of what it costs to orbit them by Space Shuttle. The gun was the product of a program called the Super High Altitude Research Project. (NY Times, Sept 29/92)
NASA administrator Daniel Goldin announced in a number of recent speeches the first major reforms resulting from the internal review of NASA programs he had ordered. The Earth Observing System would be streamlined again, and incentives to Space Station Freedom contractors might be pooled to assure that they worked as a team. The reforms were designed to make U.S. civil space programs better, faster, and cheaper. Money saved would be applied to new missions using small spacecraft. (AvWk, Sept 28/92; Science, Oct 2/92)
General Motors and Ford automotive companies began experimenting with technology derived from the National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) project. Both companies were testing automobiles equipped with titanium aluminide valves. Application of existing NASP materials technology to current automobile engines could reduce the weight of their moving parts by 50 percent, increasing fuel efficiency and durability, according to materials scientists. (AvWk, Sept 28/92)
The Galileo space probe, on its way to study the planet Jupiter, recently passed within 5,300 kilometers (3,300 miles) of the asteroid 951 Gaspra, and scientists instructed it to take the first ever closeup photo of such an object. The irregular shape suggests that Gaspra was chipped from a larger body in a mammoth collision. (Time, Sept 28/92)
NASA selected Hughes Aircraft Company to build a data and information system for the Earth Orbiting System. The program, which would collect environmental data from satellites, was expected to cost NASA about $3 billion. (NASA Release C92-16; NY Times, Sept 30/92; WSJ, Sept 30/92; W Post, Sept 30/92; AvWk, Oct 5/92)
NASA announced that satellite measurements showed that the ozone hole over Antarctica was now the largest on record, being almost three times as large as the area of the United States. Measurements by the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer instrument aboard the Nimbus-7 satellite last Wednesday showed that the south polar territory under the depleted ozone area extended to about 8.9 million square miles, about 15 percent larger than the ozone hole measured in 1991. (NASA Relese 92-159; W Post, Sept 30/92; Time, Oct 5/92; AP, Sept 30/92; UPI, Sept 30/92)
The Pentagon said that the crash of an experimental V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft that claimed seven lives in July was caused by a combination of a flash fire, engine failure, and a failed drive shaft. The statement did not make clear whether the problems arose from a design flaw or some defect in a part or parts. (P Inq, Sept 30/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
A bipartisan group of prominent Americans proposed a plan to reduce government spending, invest in growth, and reshape the income tax system in the hope of balancing the federal budget in a decade. Decisions on which programs would be cut were left to Congress and the president, but the group suggested that NASA's planned Space Station, mass transit operating aid to cities, and other programs would be prime candidates for funding reductions. (AP, Sept 30/92)
Shuttle managers said budget-cutting goals recently mandated by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin could mean the loss of as many as 800 jobs on top of the 300 to 400 being phased out during the new fiscal year at the Kennedy Space Center. The cuts were part of Goldin's pledge to run a leaner, more efficient space agency. (O Sen Star, Sept 30/92)
The National Research Council said NASA should increase its budget for civil airliner and air traffic control research, even if it means a cutback in NASA's military and space programs. The council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, said the United States status as the world leader in aircraft manufacturing would continue to erode if NASA did not enter into a major cooperative program with industry, universities, and other government agencies to develop a new generation of airliners. (W Post, Oct 1/92)
The Navy said yesterday that a July 20 crash of a V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft outside Washington had been caused by oil or transmission fluid being sucked into one of the aircraft's two engines and not by a fuel leak as had been reported earlier. All seven crewmen were killed when the aircraft crashed. (P Inq, Oct 2/92)
Astronaut John Young was awarded the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal today by NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin at NASA headquarters in Washington, D. C. Young, 62, was currently serving as Special Assistant to the Director of the Johnson Space Center, Houston, for Enginering, Operations, and Safety. (NASA Release 92-160; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
The National Association of Small Disadvantaged Business presented NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin with its Meritorious Award. It was the second time Goldin had received the award. (NASA Release 92-162)
Ceremonies at Edwards Air Force Base marked the 50th anniversary of the birth of the jet age. On October 2, 1942, Bob Stanley first flew the XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed at Muroc Air Base (now Edwards Air Force Base). (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 2/92)
The first meetings of the National Space Policy Assessment Task Group took place on October 1 and 2 in Washington, D. C. The group was considering policy changes to military, civilian, and commercial space efforts and ways to make them work more in tandem now that the Cold War had ended. At the meetings, government officials urged the group's members to privatize the weather satellite system, to call for revamping commercial space rules, and to decry missile proliferation. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
Defense contractor Teledyne, Inc., announced that it would pay $17.5 million in fines to settle federal criminal charges alleging that the company systematically falsified reliability tests of electromagnetic relays. The relays are used in virtually all U. S. weapons systems and space programs, including the Patriot missile and the Space Shuttle. It wasn't known if any systems failures had been caused by the relays, which function as electronic switches. (AP Oct 3/92)
NASA announced that extended observations by the Hubble Space Telescope indicated that Jupiter's moon Io has a smaller atmosphere than previously thought, with very dense regions possibly over volcanoes and surface frost. The observations also showed that despite continual volcanic activity, Io's surface has remained largely unchanged since first photographed by the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. (NASA Release 92-163)
The Pioneer Venus orbiter ran out of thruster propellant today after circling Venus for 14 years. The orbiter was expected to burn up in Venus' atmosphere sometime in the coming week. The orbiter was the first U. S. spacecraft to circle Venus. It used a crude radar to map more than 90 percent of the planet's surface. (AP, Oct 3/92; UPI, Oct 3/92, Oct 5/92; W Times, Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/92)
John L. Sloop, 76, an electrical engineer who was a retired official of NASA, died in Washington, DC. Mr. Sloop retired in 1972 as assistant associate administrator for advanced research and propulsion after a 30-year career with NASA and its predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics. (W Post, Oct 7/92)
Zoltan L. Bay, a research physicist who developed the first radar to study celestial bodies, died of emphysema at his home in Chevy Chase, Maryland. Born in Hungary, he taught physics at Szeged University in the 1930s and was research professor at George Washington University before joining the National Bureau of Standards in 1955. (W Post, Oct 11/92; C Trib, Oct 11/92)
NASA's funding remained flat as Congressional appropriations committees completed work on NASA's 1993 budget. Although some high-profile programs such as the Space Station and a  constellation of environmental monitoring satellites emerged virtually unscathed, newer or less visible efforts suffered setbacks. An advanced series of tracking satellites, robotic missions to the moon, and a new generation of launchers were among the efforts put on hold for at least the next year. Spending on space research and technology was reduced by 13 percent. (Space News, Oct 5-11/92)
NASA announced that asteroid Toutatis would pass within 2.2 million miles of Earth on October 8, an unusually close encounter. Toutatis is about two miles in diameter and passes Earth every four years, making it one of the largest objects to cross Earth's orbit on a regular basis. In 2004 Toutatis would pass within one million miles of Earth. (NASA Release 92-164;      UPI Oct 5/92)
Directors of the U. S. and Russian space agencies announced plans in Moscow to put a Russian cosmonaut on the Space Shuttle in November 1993 and to fly an American astronaut on a Soyuz rocket to the Mir Space Station in 1995. In addition to the projects involving cosmonauts and astronauts working together in space, plans were announced to put American instruments on board an unmanned Russian scientific flight to Mars in 1994. (NASA Release 92-165; UPI (Oct 5/92; NY Times, Oct 6/95; W Times, Oct 6/92; W Post, Oct 6/92; The Sun; Oct 6/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; SCM, Oct 14/92)
NASA set an October 22 launch date for Space Shuttle Columbia's satellite-delivery and research mission. The six-member crew was to release the Itlian Space Agency's Laser Geodynamic Satellite, or Lageos, then conduct spacecraft tracking experiments and mechanical and medical tests. (NASA Release N92-88; LA Times, Oct 7/92)
NASA announced that Sergei K. Krikalev and Col.Valadimir G. Titov had been approved as the two Russian candidates to be trained to fly on a Space Shuttle mission scheduled for November 1993. (NASA Release 92-166)
NASA announced that it had awarded about $15 million for 124 microgravity research grants to develop the research potential of Space Station Freedom as one of the nation's premiere science and technology assets. The grants represent an increase of 70 percent in the number of investigators sponsored by NASA's microgravity division. The division now sponsors nearly 200 scientific investigators and plans to expand to at least 300 before the agency's planned Space Station becomes operational in the late 1990s. (NASA Release 92-167; Fla Today, Oct 11/92)
President George Bush signed an appropriations bill providing $2.1 billion for NASA's Space Station in fiscal year 1993. Other projects to be funded include the Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network, which was to provide social scientists with Earth science data beamed from NASA environmental monitoring satellites to understand issues such as land use and population growth. A program for developing a new NASA-Pentagon rocket to put satellites into space, ensuring continued use of Martin Marietta's Titan IV booster for satellite launchings, was terminated. (P Inq, Oct 7/92; AP Oct, 7/92; W Post, Oct 7/92; Space News, Oct 12-18)
Congress planned to give the fledgling U. S. commercial space business a boost next year by pumping $10 million into launch site improvements. Most of that money was expected to be spent on upgrades to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station facilities. (Fla Today, Oct 8/92)
Hubble Space Telescope scientists announced that Hubble has used a natural "zoom lens" it discovered in space to photograph an otherwise invisible distant galaxy and to chart concentrations of the mysterious dark matter that controls the fate of the universe. The astronomers said that the telescope was actually seeing a phenomenon known as a gravitational lens, which occurs when the gravitational field of a massive object bends light rays from a more distant source. They regarded the ability to discern in detail the structure of the distant magnified object as a major breakthrough in observing techniques. (W Post, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; NY Times, Oct 9/92; NASA Release 92-87 and 92-168)
NASA's Pioneer 12 spacecraft fell out of radio contact with Earth as the craft, dipping lower and lower with each orbit, faced the prospect of a slow and fiery death in Venus' atmosphere during the next few days. Launched in 1978 on a radar-mapping mission planned to last only 15 months, the craft worked nearly perfectly for 14 years, using radar to make a crude topographic map of 93 percent of Venus' surface. (AP, Oct 9/92; UPI, Oct 8/92; W Times, Oct 9/92; The Sun, Oct 9/92)
NASA announced that astronomers using a new NASA satellite had detected a powerful, exotic object 2 billion light-years beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. The radiation source was observed by the Extreme Ultraviolet Explorer Spacecraft launched on June 7. (NASA Release 92-169)
David Williamson, Jr., 62, retired assistant administrator for special projects with NASA, died at his home in Bethesda, MD. (W Post, Oct 9/92)
In a speech to the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers in Los Angeles, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA was committed to building a culturally diverse workforce as it pursued the exploration of space. (NASA Release 92-170)
The Argentine weather service reported that the outer edge of the "ozone hole" has shifted for the first time to a populated island in Tierra del Fuego off the southern tip of the South American mainland. Data from NASA's Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer on the Nimbus 7 satellite confirmed that the area of depleted ozone extended for some 8.9 million square miles over the south polar region, an increase of about 15 percent from 1991, the largest ozone hole ever observed. (W Times, Oct 11/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92; P Inq, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92)
Astronomers resumed the search for evidence of extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) today with simultaneous commands to computers and radio telescopes at Arecibo, Puerto Rico, and in the Mojave Desert of California. Although there have been previous limited projects, NASA officials, who are financing and directing the new project, said the planned 10-year, $100 million search would be the most comprehensive and ambitious one ever undertaken to search for signals of life beyond Earth's galaxy. Later, more radio telescopes around the world were to join the search, which NASA has renamed the High Resolution Microwave Survey. The latest SETI project was timed to begin on the 500th anniversary of Columbus' discovery of land in the Americas. (NY Times, Oct 6/92, Oct 13/92; W Post, Oct 5/92; LA Times, Oct 7/92; The Sun, Oct 8/92; Newsweek, Oct 12/92; AP, Oct 10/92, Oct 12/92; UPI, Oct 13/92; C Trib, Oct 10/92; P Inq, Oct 10/92; 13/92; NASA Release 92-160)
A group of NASA scientists sampling the air over southern Africa found massive pollution usually associated with the industrial centers of the Northern Hemisphere. Most of the pollution is caused by peasant farmers burning huge tracts of scrub brush to clear their land for planting. The group arrived in southern Africa in early October after studying a virtually identical problem in Brazil. Together, the pollution from the two regions was thought to be changing the atmosphere throughout the Southern Hemisphere. Some 180 scientists from 13 countries were involved in what was considered the most detailed atmospheric study ever made of the South Atlantic. (AP, Oct 12/92; AvWk, Oct 12/92)
A Defense Science Board review of the National Aero-Space Plane ruled against building the single-stage-to-orbit vehicle in the near future, citing persistent technology shortfalls. (AvWk, Oct 12/92)
The U. S. National Research Council urged NASA to expand study of advanced subsonic aircraft in order to keep U. S. aerospace companies competitive in the face of growing advances made by foreign industry. A council report said NASA should focus on improving aircraft performance and operating efficiency and coordinate the work with industry and academia. (AvWk, Oct 12/92; National Research Council News Report, Fall Report)
NASA officials reported that a 41-year-old Alaskan hunter was rescued thanks to a distress signal picked up by a Russian satellite and relayed to the U. S. Air Force and search teams. The hunter carried an tiny experimental emergency transmitter that may eventually become available for widespread use by campers, hunters, and other outdoorsmen. The international satellite-aided search and rescue system started 10 years ago and includes Canada, France, Russia, and the United States. (NASA Release 92-171; UPI, Oct 13/92)
NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena was added to the federal Superfund list of the nation's most dangerous dump sites because toxic solvents used 40 years ago during research on liquid rocket propellants had leaked into ground water. (LA Times, Oct 14/92; AP, Oct 14/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced a series of structural changes at NASA to improve management and to bring focus to programs that are essential to the nation's space effort. The changes affected divisions dealing with the Space Station Freedom, Science and Technology, Earth and Planetary Science, Aeronautics, and Russian Programs. (NASA Release 92-172; Space News, Nov 2-8/92; Science, Oct 23/92)
The Air Force test-fired a new booster for the Titan IV rocket and said it was the second successful test since an explosion ruined a firing last year. The new booster would allow Titan IVs, which launch U. S. spy satellites, to carry heavier payloads. (AP Oct 16/92)
NASA officials said that the last scheduled U.S. shuttle flght this year, a military mission by Discovery, probably would be delayed because of a faulty component in the orbital maneuvering system. A December 2 launch date was subsequently planned. (AP, Oct 15/92; NY Times, Oct 16/92; W Times, Oct 16/92; AP, Nov 2/92)
The International Astronomical Union for the first time issued a warning of a potential collision between Earth and a comet, in this case Comet Swift-Tuttle. The date of a potential collision is more than a century away, and the odds of a collision about one in 10,000. (NY Times, Oct 27/92; C Trib, Oct 31/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; W Post, Nov 4/92)
Space Center Houston opened on this date. The $70 million non-profit center, which expected to lure two million visitors a year, is designed to bring the "wonder days" of the early space program to a generation of children that has known only the Space Shuttle. The center, on the periphery of NASA's space campus, supplants the former visitor facility inside the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center.  (USA Today, Oct 14/92; H Chron, Oct 14/92, Oct 16/92; AP, Oct 16/92; Newsweek, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
Orbital Sciences Corporation of Fairfax, Virginia, suffered another failure of one of its rockets. Ground controllers blew up the rocket about seven minutes into its flight at Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean, conducted as part of the Pentagon's "Brillinat Pebbles" program. (W Post, Nov 4/92)
NASA announced that Dr. Chiaki Mukai of the Japanese National Space Development Agency had been designated as the prime payload specialist for the second International Microgravity Laboratory mission scheduled for launch aboard the Space Shuttle Columbia in July 1994. She was to be the first Japanese woman to take part in a U.S. space shuttle mission. Dr. Jean-Jacques Favier, a scientist with the French Atomic Energy Commission, was selected as an alternate payload specialist. (NASA Release 92-173; UPI, Oct 20/92)
NASA's inspector general, Bill Colvin, said that an investigation had been going on for nearly two years as to whether the Perkin-Elmer Corporation of Danbury, Connecticut, maker of the flawed mirrors of the Hubble Space Telescope, withheld data that would have revealed focusing problems before Hubble was sent aloft. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; WSJ, Oct 20/92)
Democratic vice presidential candidate Albert Gore criticized the Bush Administration for misdirecting the national space program before an audience at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Gore said that the administration had failed to establish strategic priorities and that under President Bush NASA had found itself working on too many programs with too little money. He pledged that a Bill Clinton administration would seek to spend $35 billion by the end of the decade to build an orbiting space station, in part to replace jobs lost in military industries. (The Sun, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 20/92; Prince Georges Journal, Oct 21/92; W. Post, Oct 20/92)
The countdown began for the launching of the Space Shuttle Columbia on a research and satellite delivery mission. (NY Times, Oct 20/92; UPI, Oct 20/92; NY Times, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92)
NASA Acting Deputy Director Aaron Cohen announced that IBM Federal Systems Company, Houston, and Honeywell, Inc., Space and Strategic Systems Operations, Clearwater, Florida, were the recipients of NASA's Quality and Excellence Award. The announcement came at the Ninth Annual NASA/Contractors Conference on Quality and Productivity in Pasadena, California. (NASA Release 92-178)
During Space Shuttle Columbia's upcoming mission, scientists planned to test a theory which may have applications ranging from hurricane dynamics to superconductivity . The Lambda-Point Experiment was to study the strange behavior of helium at its critical temperature of 2.177 degrees above absolute zero. Other experiments were to study the effects of gravity on metals and semiconductors as they solidify on Earth and in orbit and vibrations in the Shuttle as the vibrations affect the other two experiments. The Shuttle crew was also scheduled to deploy the Laser Geodynamics Satellite, an Italian satellite to study the movements of the Earth's crust and other phenomena. (NASA Releases 92-175 and 92-176; LA Times, Oct 2/92)
NASA chose 29 supercomputing research proposals that the agency hoped would lead to a revolution in the way scientists study the Earth and space. The goal was to achieve computational capabilities far beyond those of today's machines, enabling researchers to produce realistic simulations of phenomena such as the interaction of Earth's oceans, air, and land masses and reconstructions of the evolution of stars, galaxies, and the universe.
NASA researchers found unexpectedly high productivity of microscopic plants near the equator in the Pacific Ocean during a recent airborne study aimed at increasing understanding of these plants in the region. The plants, called phytoplankton, play an important role in the absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. (NASA Release 92-179)
NASA scientists tapped into a 300-year-old lead coffin in St. Mary's City, Maryland, in a search for air free of man-made pollutants. Samples of such air was expected to aid in understanding ozone damage in the present-day atmosphere. Tests on this and other coffins also helped NASA scientists evaluate the effectiveness of a tool that examines metal for tiny cracks or corrosion that occur in aircraft or spacecraft. (USA Today, Oct 21/92)
NASA-sponsored research into the biological effects of space flight at the University of Wisconsin suggested that astronauts may have to workout in space to protect their bones on long-duration flights. Dr. Arthur Vailas of the university's Biodynamics Laboratory based his conclusions on the metabolic processes in the bones of rats that had experienced days of weightlessness aboard the Space Shuttle. (UPI, Oct 21/92)
U.S. Rep. Louis Stokes, who criticized NASA hiring policies as racially discriminatory during Congressional debate in July, said that he was encouraged by recent steps toward diversification discussed by the space agency at a gathering of top NASA officials at a mostly black elementary school in Cleveland. The gathering included a visit by black astronaut Charles Bolden. (The Plain Dealer, Oct 22/92)
The Space Shuttle Columbia blasted into space under control of a five-man, one-woman crew. In command was James Wetherbee of the Navy; his co-pilot was Capt. Michael Baker.  Mission specialists were Capt. William Shepherd of the Navy, flight engineer; Charles Lacy Veach; Tamara Jernigan; and Canadian researcher Steven MacLean. On board were commercially sponsored experiments that were to examine a potential treatment for osteoporosis, material crystals to increase the speed of computers, protein crystals to determine the molecular structure of "alfa-2b interferon" used in the treatment of some cancers, and experiments on microgravity effects on astronauts. (NASA Release 92-180; P Inq, Oct 22/92; UPI, Oct 22/92; AP, Oct 22/92; P Inq, Oct 23/92; NY Times, Oct 23/92; Oct 25/92; W Times, Oct 23/92; USA Today, Oct 23/92; AP, Oct 23/92; CSM, Oct 23/92; LA Times, Oct 23/92; The Sun, Oct 23/92; C Trib, Oct 23/92)
A Japanese scientist, Eiichi Yamaguchi, a senior research scientist at Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation, said that he had observed "cold" nuclear fusion five times since the beginning of August. Much about his claim remained unclear, however. (The Sun, Oct 23/92)
The "Brilliant Pebbles" missile-defense system suffered a new setback when the test of an experimental rocket was aborted 55 seconds after launch. It was the second failure in three experimental launches. (W Post, Oct 25/92)
NASA signed an agreement with the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders to expand biomedical cooperation between the two agencies. The agreement was intended to be the beginning of NASA's cooperation with various institutes within the National Institutes of Health. The major goal of this collaboration was the enhancing of basic knowledge and understanding of vestibular function in both normal and clinical states. (NASA Release 92-182)
Astronomer Duncan Steel of the Anglo-Australian Observatory in Sydney warned of a possible collision between the Earth and  Comet Smith-Tuttle in the year 2116. Several years would be needed to track the comet to determine its orbit with accuracy and to decide whether or not a collision is likely. (The Sun, Oct 26/92; W Times, Oct 27/92)
Shuttle Columbia astronauts carried out experiments designed to ease reentry from space. They pedalled furiously on a stationary bicycle and floated in a depressurization sack to draw blood from the top of the body to the legs. They also grabbed an aluminum panel with the Shuttle's arm and swung it about the spacecraft's cargo bay to test a Canadian robotic vision system. A day earlier, they deployed the Lageos II geodynamics satellite. (NY Times, (Oct 25/92; W Post, Oct 25/92; P Inq Oct 24/92; The Sun, Oct 25/92)
Two NASA workshops held during the past year produced a recommendation that a multi-governmental effort be undertaken to detect dangerous asteroids using a worldwide network of telescopes at a cost of $50 million. The second workshop examined methods for deflecting or destroying asteroids. The chance of a catastrophic collision in the average person's lifetime is quite small--about 1 in 10,000, the scientists said. (USA Weekend, Oct 23-25/92)
On the fourth day of their mission, Shuttle Columbia's astronauts measured ozone in Earth's upper atmosphere and tested a new toilet. The flight was scheduled to last ten days. (W Post, Oct 26/92; P Inq, Oct 26/92; The Sun, Oct 26/92; USA Today, Oct 26/92; W. Times, Oct 26/92; AP, Oct 25/92, Oct 26/92; UPI, Oct 26/92)
A physicist at the University of Maryland, Richard L. Greene, developed a type of microscope that utilizes superconducting wire that is supersensitive to magnetic fields. Known to physicists as Superconducting Quantum Interference Devices, the superconducting filaments in the microscope zero in on magnetic fields with great accuracy when passed over an object. The technology has medical, military, and industrial applications. (The Sun, Oct. 26/92)
Geologists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at Louisiana State University announced that they had discovered several previously unknown earthquake faults in California's northeastern Mojave Desert by analyzing remote sensing images at optical, infrared, and radar wavelengths. At a meeting of the Geological Society of America in Cincinnati, JPL's Dr. John Ford outlined how spaceborne imaging technology has helped scientists find these newly observed faults. (NASA Release 92-186; AP Oct 27/92)
NASA announced that Charles F. Bolden, Jr. Col., USMC, would command Space Shuttle mission STS-60 in November 1993. Other crew members would be Pilot Kenneth S. Reightler, Jr.; and mission specialists Franklin R. Chang-Diaz; Jan Davis, Ronald M. Sega, and a Russian cosmonaut yet to be designated. (NASA Release 92-188; Space News, Nov 2-8/92)
NASA announced that Dr. Martin J. Fettman of Colorado State University's College of Veterinary Medicine would be the prime payload specialist for the second Spacelab Life Sciences mission scheduled for launch in August 1993. Previously named crew members consist of Commander John Blaha; Pilot Richard Searfoss; Payload Commander Rhea Seddon; and mission specialists William S. McArthur, Jr.; Shannon Lucid, and David Wolfe. (NASA Release 92-190)
NASA announced that the Space Station Freedom program had initiated a new effort to reduce dramatically the time it would take to integrate small experiments on the Space Station. Called EXPRESS for Expedited Processing of Experiments to Space Station, NASA engineers hoped to reduce the time it takes to get a small payload flown aboard Freedom from up to five years to less than one. (NASA Release 92-191)
NASA and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) signed an agreement to broaden cooperation between the two agencies. The agreement addresses environmental research, pollution monitoring, and other activities where the research capabilities of NASA can support EPA's mission to protect the environment. (NASA Release 92-192)
The Inter-Agency Consultative Group for Space Science announced in Washington, D.C., that scientists from the United States, Japan, Russia, and Europe were mounting a coordinated, multi-mission effort in solar-terrestrial science during the next four years. The effort began with the launch of Japan's Geotail satellite in July 1992 and was to continue with the 1993 launch of NASA's WIND spacecraft and missions from Russia in 1993 and Europe in 1995. NASA's Interplanetary Monitoring Platform and Japan's AKEBONO spacecraft were to provide important data as well. (NASA Release 92-193)
The Pontifical Academy of Sciences of the Roman Catholic Church admitted in Rome that clerical judges erred in 1633 when they condemned the Italian mathematician and astronomer Galileo Galilei for propagating the notion that the earth revolves around the sun. (P Inq, Nov 1/92)
NASA astronomers at Kitt Peak National Observatory announced that they had observed what they believed to be a galaxy in the process of forming. They estimated that the galaxy is more than 10 billion light years distant. (W Times, Nov 1/92; NY Times, Nov 3/92; AP, Nov 11/92)
Space Shuttle Columbia landed at Cape Canaveral, ending a 10-day journey during which the crew released a laser-reflecting satellite and tested a robotic eye. (NY Times, Nov 2/92; P Inq, Nov 2/92; W Post, Nov 2/92; W Times, Nov 2/92; AP, Nov 2/92; UPI, Nov 2/92; The Sun, Nov 2/92)
Rockwell's Space Systems Division and NPO Energia announced that they had signed a contract that was the first step in building docking hardware for a U.S. Space Shuttle/Russian MIR Space Station mission planned for 1995. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Planetary scientists at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory and at California Institute of Technology recently reported that they had found water ice on the planet Mercury. Radar beams aimed at both of the planet's poles bore telltale signs of having bounced off of frozen surfaces. (Time, Nov 2/92)
The European Space Research and Technology Center at Noordwijk, the Netherlands, said it would use a new robotics center to support planning for the European Space Agency's manned space operations. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Michael Griffin, NASA associate administrator for exploration, said that a new heavy-lift vehicle built from components of the Space Shuttle transportation system should be able to launch elements of Space Station Freedom at a cost comparable to that of the space shuttle. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
Japanese and Chinese researchers announced that they would study single crystals produced by semiconductors during the first joint space experiment by the two countries. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
NASA and a contractor team headed by Rockwell International said they were conducting supersonic laminar flow experiments using two General Dynamics F-16XL demonstrators on loan from the U. S. Air Force. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Dr. Charles Pellerin as Associate Deputy Administrator for Strategic Planning, John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, and Ralph C. Thomas as Assistant Administrator for Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. The appointments continued management changes Goldin had instituted in recent months. (NASA Release 92-194; Space News, Nov 9-15)
NASA began assembling Space Shuttle Discovery for launch in December on a mission to deploy a secret Department of Defense satellite. Liftoff was scheduled for December 2, nearly a month behind schedule because of problems with a faulty steering engine. (P Inq, Nov 4/92; W Times, Nov 4/92)
Former NASA Administrator Richard Truly said that he would assume a new job as director of the Georgia Tech Research Institute, a branch of the Georgia Institute of Technology. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA announced that an array of powerful, interconnected computers would help NASA solve some of the complex problems associated with designing aircraft propulsion systems. The Lewis Advanced Cluster Environment system at NASA's Lewis Research Center, Cleveland, is a network of 33 IBM RISC/6000 computer stations that can perform up to 1 billion floating point operations per second and has three billion bytes of memory, making it the world's most powerful IBM workstation cluster. (NASA Release 92-195)
General Dynamics Corporation said its space systems unit had won a $112.6 million Air Force contract to modify space-launch facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. (WSJ, Nov 6/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin agreed to seek increased funding for NASA's life sciences program destined for the Space Station Freedom, calling current funding levels "disgraceful" and clearly in need of increased funding. (Space News, Nov 9-15/92)
NASA's Tethered Satellite System Investigative Board released its report, presenting the panel's finding on problems which had prevented full deployment of the satellite during Space Shuttle mission STS-46. The report identified causes for four of five problems that occurred and made recommendations for actions to prevent similar occurrences in the future. (NASA Release 92-196; UPI, Nov 6/92)
A task group looking into issues concerning future satellite rescue and repair said NASA should continue to perform such missions but only when they "produce genuine benefits to U. S. interests in view of the inherent risks to the Shuttle and its crew." The task force also recommended that NASA should charge higher fees for the risky and expensive work of retrieving commercial satellites with the Space Shuttle. (NASA Release 92-197; The Sun, Nov 7/92; AP, Nov. 6/92; W Post, Nov 7/92; Space News, Nov 16-22/92)
NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and the U. S. Geological Survey in a published paper said that Mars was once very active tectonically and may still be shaken by quakes daily. The scientists said that although the planet is less seismically active than the earth, their studies, based on Viking photos, predict that about two marsquakes of magnitude five or greater occur per year, and about a hundred quakes of magnitude three or greater occur per year. (NASA Release 92-198; LA Times, Nov 6/92; W Times, Nov 7/92; P Inq, Nov 26/92)
An article in the Chicago Tribune discussed the Soviet Space Shuttle Buran; built in the early 1980s, the Buran flew only once in November 1988. Today all three models of the spacecraft sit idle, victims of the economic downsizing in Russia. The Buran program seems destined for oblivion. (C Trib, Nov 8/92)
Radio astronomers meeting in Sydney, Australia, said that stray radio signals from manmade sources were spilling over into the radio bands set aside for radio and space research, swamping and threatening the reception of extremely weak radio signals from space. (C Trib, Nov 8/92)
NASA announced that it would help sponsor the third national technology transfer conference and exposition in Baltimore December 1-3, 1992. TECHNOLOGY 2002 was scheduled to highlight leading-edge technologies from NASA and other federal agencies which U.S. industry could use to develop new or improved products and processes. (NASA Release 92-199)
Teledyne Industries paid a record $17.5 million in criminal fines for falsifying tests on electronic relay switches used in high-tech weapons and spacecraft, including the Space Shuttle. Teledyne pleaded guilty to 35 criminal counts. (W Times, Nov 10/92; WSJ, Nov 10/92; USA Today, Nov 10/92; AP, Nov 9/92; UPI, Nov 9/92)
A report for the Aerospace Industries Association said U.S. aerospace manufacturers would cut at least 78,000 jobs in 1992 and that sales would decline for the first time in more than 20 years. (W Post, Nov 10/92).
Scientists from NASA and the National Science Foundation detailed experimental projects scheduled to be undertaken in the winter in Antarctica. The Antarctic Space Analog Program was to use the harsh, frigid conditions of the Antarctic continent to test technology and techniques for future missions to the moon and Mars. (NASA Release 92-200)
European, Canadian, and Finnish ministers, meeting in Granada, Spain, approved spending cuts for the European Space Agency of about 13 percent through the year 2000--down to $26 billion. The biggest cuts will affect the Hermes Space Shuttle. The ministers also launched a three-year study of ways to work with Russia on future space missions. (WSJ, Nov 11/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin told a meeting of the Washington Space Business Roundtable in Washington, D. C,, that the U.S. government should spin off more new technology to help boost the economy. He also said that the space business sector must move beyond its attempts to sell goods and services to the government to become a real commercial industry. Goldin said NASA's newly created Office of Advanced Concepts and Technology would be given broad authority to pursue innovative ideas, seek out new technologies, and accelerate transfer of the agency's own breakthroughs to industry. (Space News, Nov 16-22/92; AvWk, Nov 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that Paul F. Holloway, in addition to his responsibilities as Director of Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, would be assigned temporarily to NASA headquarters as a special assistant to the administrator. Goldin also announced the departure of Don G. Bush, assistant administrator for procurement, effective January 11, 1993. (NASA Release 92-292)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had revealed a chain of luminous knots in the core of the most distant known galaxy--one that existed in the infancy of the universe and is located more than 10 billion light-years from Earth. The new photos, taken with the telescope's wide field and planetary camera, reveal detail ten times better than photographs previously taken with ground-based telescopes. (NASA Release 92-203; W Times, Nov 14/92)
A team of American and British astronomers detected the flare of a supernova almost halfway to the edge of the known universe--five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed. Light from the supernova was expected to help astronomers grapple with the questions of whether the universe is infinite and will expand forever or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse. (NY Times, Nov 15/92)
NASA announced the selection of 321 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts under the agency's 1992 Small Business Innovation Research Program. The program aims to stimulate technological innovation in the United States by using small business to help meet federal research and development needs and to encourage commercial applications of federally supported research innovations. (NASA Release 92-204)
Jan H. Oort, 92, whose discoveries on the origins of comets and the movement of the Milky Way made him one of the 20th century's leading astronomers, died in Leiden, Holland, in early November. (W Times, Nov 13/92; P Inq, Nov 13/92)
NASA said that it was collaborating with Cray Research, Inc., of Eagan, Minnesota, to conduct joint research and development activities using the company's Cray T3D supercomputer. NASA scientists at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory expected to use the T3D system for applications that require high-power computers, such as turning planetary data from spacecraft into three-dimensional animations and analyzing Earth satellite data. (NASA Release 92-205; NY Times, Nov 17/92; WSJ, Nov 17/92; W Post, Nov 17/92)
At the Asia-Pacific International Space Year Conference in Tokyo, Russian cosmonaut Vladimir Shatalov called for strengthened space monitoring to determine compliance of major military powers with strategic nuclear arms reduction treaties. Shatalov said such collaboration in space also would help uncover possible efforts by smaller countries to develop nuclear weapons. Japan announced a plan to allow Southeast Asian countries to use a module that will be built onto the future international space station for scientific experiments in orbit. (UPI, Nov 16/92)
NASA said the Advanced Communications Technology Satellite Conference '92, co-sponsored by NASA, Comsat Laboratories, Harris Corporation, and MITRE Corporation, scheduled for November 18-19 in Washington, D. C., would focus on pioneering communications technology developments to provide better service, lower cost, greater convenience, and improved reliability. The conference marked another of NASA's partnerships with industry in developing advanced technologies that create new markets and commercial applications. (NASA Release 92-206)
In a carefully hedged report, the General Accounting Office said that crucial American high-technology industries including consumer electronics and robotics may have lost ground in the 1980s to foreign competitors, particularly Japan. The sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equipment, supercomputers, pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, fiber optics, robotics, consumer electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and flexible manufacturing systems. (NY Times, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 18/92)
NASA and McDonnell-Douglas announced completion of negotiations of a cost-plus-award-fee contract to provide continuation of Spacelab integration activities. The amount of the contract was $163 million, with four one-year options of $34.6 million, $29.7 million, $28.6 million, and $27.3 million. (NASA Release C92-19)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he would act promptly to implement the recommendations of a Management Review Team for enhanced security at the Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. The team considered Ames high risk for hostile intelligence operations. (NASA Release 92-207; UPI, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 19/92; USA Today, Nov 19/92; W Times, Nov 19/92; P Inq, Nov 19/92; AP, Nov 18/92, 19/92, and 20/92; W. Post, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 22/92; Space News, Nov 23-29/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, speaking at the University of Hartford, Connecticut, said spending on space exploration was an investment in the future, but that the nation's space agency must get more for its money than it had in the past. NASA research has economic benefits for the nation, providing jobs and developing technologies with commercial applications, but just as important is the agency's role in supporting exploration that increases knowledge of the universe and provides hope for a better future, Goldin added. (Hartford Courant, Nov 18/92)
Lockheed Corporation's Space Operations Company unit won the competition for a $200-million-a-year contract to manage the Kennedy Space Center in Cocoa Beach, Florida. NASA said the contract would run for an initial period of four years, plus three two-year options, for a total potential contract period of 10 years. Its estimated value over the 10-year period was $1.9 billion. (WSJ, Nov 19/92; W Post, Nov 19/92; Fla Today, Nov 19/92)
A recent General Accounting Office comprehensive audit of NASA's financial management charged that NASA's internal controls and financial management systems had failed to ensure efficient expenditure of taxpayers' money. According to the report, NASA's fiscal 1991 year-end reports contained more than $500 million in errors. (Antelope Valley Press, Nov 18/92)
Walter Jaffe of the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands said that the Hubble Space Telescope had captured the most detailed view yet of an immense caldron of heat, violence, and energy surrounding what might be called a "black hole," a celestial object 10 million times more massive than the sun. Astronomers said the photograph provided powerful support for the theory of "black holes" by showing several of the features predicted to surround them. The galaxy belongs to the Virgo Cluster of galaxies about 45 million light-years from Earth. (W Times, Nov 20/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; W Post, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 20/92;)
NASA set a December 2d launch date for the year's eighth and last Shuttle flight, a military mission, designated STS-53. Five astronauts, all military men, will release a classified satellite, thought to be a Lacrosse radar-imaging satellite from the Shuttle Discovery. Crew members are David Walker, commander; Robert Cabana, co-pilot; James Voss, Guion Bluford, and Michael Richard Clifford. (W Times, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
A panel of experts recommended that the Air Force assume sole responsibility for developing a new all-purpose national launch system called the "Spacelifter" by the end of the decade. NASA's fleet of Shuttles would be phased out at the earliest opportunity, having become too costly and fragile a system to dominate the space program much longer. The report did not call for a large, heavy-lift vehicle but focused instead on development of lower-cost, medium-size rockets that could satisfy virtually all known payload needs and be tailored to carry cargo or people. (W Post, Nov 19/92 and Nov 21/92; USA Today, Nov 20/92; NY Times, Nov 20/92; LA Times, Nov 20/92; P Inq, Nov 20/92 and Nov 22/92; AP, Nov 20/92; UPI, Nov 19/92)
NASA launched a small satellite on a $19 million mission to help the Pentagon develop its strategic missile detection system. A Scout rocket lifted the Miniature Seeker Technology Integration-1 satellite into orbit. The satellite carried miniaturized cameras and sensors designed to detect an attack by medium-and short-range missiles. (W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; AP, Nov 21/92; P Inq, Nov 22/92)
A Russian space capsule containing a cut-glass replica of the Statue of Liberty and greetings from Russian President Boris N. Yelstin splashed down in the Pacific Ocean off Washington state. The Resource 500 satellite was billed as Russia's first private space launch and honored the 500th anniversary of the voyage of Columbus in 1492. (The Sun, Nov 23/92; P Inq, Nov 23/92 and Nov 25/92; W Times, Nov 23/92; W Post, Nov 23/92; USA Today, Nov 23/92; UPI, Nov 23/92; LA Times, Nov 25/92)
Responding to evidence that Earth's protective ozone layer is thinning or disappearing faster than was forecast, environmental officials from 81 countries met in Copenhagen to consider revising the Montreal Protocol on the control of substances that attack ozone. The main point of the meeting, sponsored by the United Nations Environment Program, was to set a timetable for the phaseout of chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and carbon tetrachloride. (The Sun, Nov 22/92;
General Electric said that it had agreed to sell its aerospace business to defense giant Martin Marietta for $3 billion. The deal would take General Electric out of the defense business and make Martin Marietta the world's largest aerospace electronics company. (USA Today, Nov 24/92; WSJ, Nov 24/92; W Post, Nov 24/92; NY Times, Nov 24/92; W Times, Nov 24/92)
The National Technology Transfer Center announced that it had launched the Strategic Partnership Initiative to fund proposals with matching awards of up to $200,000 for the purpose of fostering new and productive technology transfer and commercialization partnerships between federal laboratories and U. S. industry, research universities, and state and local non-profit organizations. (NASA Release 92-209)
With just over three years left before construction of Space Station Freedom begins in Earth orbit, NASA announced that it would add spacewalks to upcoming Shuttle flights when possible, beginning with one during STS-54 in January 1993. (NASA Release 92-210)
Meeting in Copenhagen, the United Nations environmental conference agreed to phase out some ozone-destroying gases by the end of 1995, four years ahead of a previous deadline. Delegates agreed to phase-out chlorofluorocarbons by 1995 instead of 1999 and to eliminate halons by 1994, six years ahead of a previous deadline, and methyl chloroform by 1996 instead of 2005. (W Post, Nov 26/92; The Sun, Nov 26/92)
The countdown for the December 2 launch of the Shuttle Discovery began, the 10th and allegedly the last Shuttle mission dedicated to U. S. Department of Defense work. Aside from releasing a secret military satellite, astronauts were to conduct a number of military experiments, such as testing a Shuttle laser system and releasing of metal balls to be tracked by space debris researchers. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 28/92 and Nov 29/92; W Times, Nov 28/92; Nov 29/92, and Nov 30/92; CSM, Nov 27/92; P Inq, Nov 30/92; USA Today, Nov 30/92; UPI, Nov 30/92)
Scientists prepared to decide whether Dante, a walking robot, would make a descent next month into an active Antarctic volcano. The project had two goals: testing the prototype robot for possible Mars missions, and getting a rare look at the minerals and gases ejected by the 12,000-foot icebound volcano. Scientists also wanted to learn about the permanent lava lake that bubbles and boils on the crater's floor. NASA, along with the National Science Foundation, was funding the $2 million project. (The Sun, Nov 29/92; W Post, Nov 29/92; P Inq, Nov 18/92)
NASA and NPO-Energia, A Russian company, planned to meet during the next two weeks for a final review on the feasibility of using the Soyuz TM spacecraft as an Assured Crew Return Vehicle for astronauts aboard the Space Station. The Soyuz spacecraft was one of various concepts being considered for use as a return vehicle. (NASA Release 92-212)
In a broad-ranging interview, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that he expected to deal with declining agency budgets by prioritizing and focusing NASA projects. He estimated that a substantial cut had been made in the agency's costs during a review of the last few months--perhaps one-third to one-half of a needed $17 billion in savings--and that new programs would not be multi-billion-dollar projects but would cost in the range of tens to hundreds of millions of dollars. (Aerospace America, Nov 92)
NASA astronomers announced that the Hubble Space Telescope had caught a clear glimpse of more than 300 galaxies clustered four billion light-years away, giving astronomers their first detailed view of galactic structure at a time when the solar system was just beginning. The Hubble images revealed that star-forming galaxies were far more prevalent in the clusters of the younger universe than in modern clusters of galaxies near us today. The findings have important implications for theories of how galaxies have evolved and are continuing to evolve at an apparently rapid rate. The observations also may have uncovered the most distant cluster of galaxies yet seen at a distance of 10 billion light-years, two-thirds of the way back to the presumed origin of the universe. (NASA Release 92-213; NY Times, Dec 2/92; LA Times, Dec 2/92; W Post, Dec 2/92; The Sun, Dec 2/92; USA Today, Dec 2/92; UPI, Dec 2/92)
NASA announced plans to consolidate some management functions for the Space Station Freedom program and to create a contractor-led integration team to ensure the successful building and deployment of the international Space Station. The consolidations affected operations in Reston, Virginia, and at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas. The consolidation came amid charges of cost growth and delays at Johnson Space Center and among the center's team of contractors led by McDonnell Douglas. The problems associated with the $5 billion contract had prompted two audits and one investigation by NASA's inspector general. (NASA Release 92-214; W Post, Dec 2/92; Space News, Dec 7-13/92; AvWk, Dec 7/92)
The Technology 2002 conference, sponsored by NASA, opened in Baltimore to display the wares of federal agencies and private companies that had developed products they hoped to sell or license for use in new products. The conference was billed as a way for entrepreneurs and companies to look over the latest innovations coming out of federal laboratories. Equally important, the conference was a way for the federal government to find practical uses for the technology that had been developed with billions of dollars of taxpayers' money. (The Sun, Dec 23/92)
NASA scientists held the first news conference broadcast live from the southern polar region. The broadcast via satellite to NASA Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, meant that Antarctica researchers would be able to talk with the outside world through electronic means instead of ham radios. More importantly, NASA Ames scientists hoped to use the hookup to employ special technology--"virtual reality" technology--to control remote exploration vehicles probing Antarctica's ice-covered lakes. Scientists hoped to study lake sediments because they might contain life forms similar to ones that might have existed at one time on Mars. In the future, scientists hope to use "virtual reality" technology for Martian exploration. (Peninsula Times Tribune, Dec 2/92; San Jose Mercury News, Dec 2/92)
NASA and several other U.S. and Canadian agencies announced selection of an international team of more than 200 scientists to study the relationships between northern forests and the atmosphere and how those relationships affect the global environment. The study, the Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study, was intended to conduct ground-based, air-borne, and satellite measurements in a four-year, $30-million program. NASA's component is part of Mission to Planet Earth, the agency's long-term effort to study the Earth as a global environmental system. (NASA Release 92-215)
Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off on a secret mission for the Pentagon, carrying what analysts surmised was a spy satellite to monitor troop movements in Eastern Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. Several days of technology and medical experiments were also scheduled for the week-long mission. The launch was delayed 85 minutes while the sun melted a thick coat of ice from its fuel tank. This eighth and last Shuttle mission of 1992, the 52d for NASA's program, concluded NASA's busiest year since 1985, when nine Shuttles flew. It was also the last to carry a classified military cargo.
Astronomers associated with several major observatories in the United States raised concerns anew about light pollution from cities and highways. Astronomers have long said that artificial light threatens their ability to study the heavens from Earth, but some are also saying that the glare threatens everyone's view. The scientists' campaign to curb light pollution has gained a wider audience as non-astronomers have realized that shading lights can save money as well as heavenly views. Efforts to curb excessive light pollution have improved astronomical viewing at such major observatories as Kitt Peak in Arizona. (W Times, Dec 2/92)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronautical Society in San Francisco, California, NASA Administrator Samuel S. Goldin said that NASA should decide within five years whether to replace the Space Shuttle after 2005. A decision in the matter should be made by 1997, Goldin said, although in any event, the space agency would continue to fly the Shuttles until at least 2005. Shuttle costs would have to come down in the meantime, however, even as safety improvements continued. (Space News, Dec 7-13/92)
NASA chief Daniel S. Goldin promised a bolder, "new" NASA that would control costs on its scientific missions in space and support the research and development efforts of domestic aircraft makers. Goldin's promise came at a NASA town meeting at California State University, Dominguez Hills campus, where several hundred people showed up for an opportunity to question Goldin about overpriced components, underfunded programs, and a lack of direction in the nation's space program. It was the fourth town meeting Goldin had hosted around the country since taking over as NASA's chief administrator in April. (LA Times, Dec 9/92)
In a real sign that the "space race" between Russia and the United States was over, the director of the Russian Space Agency, Yuri Koptev, was taken on a tour of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. Koptev was in southern California to familiarize himself with the U.S. space program and to develop contacts with local aerospace companies. The United States and Russia already had plans to cooperate on two unmanned missions to Mars, and American space officials were discussing the possibility of using the Russian Soyuz spacecraft as a lifeboat in space for astronauts aboard Space Station Freedom. (Star-News, Dec 4/92)
NASA sent its remote-controlled robot named "Dante" to Antarctica, where it was scheduled to explore the active volcano Erebus. The $2 million mission was intended to use Antarctica to test possible Mars-bound technology because the harsh climate is as close to that of Mars as occurs naturally on Earth. Upcoming U.S. missions to Mars were expected to land small robots programmed to look around, take samples, and perhaps begin mapping the planet, all tasks "Dante" would test in Antarctica.  (WSJ, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
In the last of a week-long series of talks in California at California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said NASA, its partners, and its contractors, were suffering from a bureaucratic "sickness" and political infighting that had sapped the U. S. civilian space program's will to take risks or to admit mistakes. "We need a complete resurgence of our space program to be bold, to take risks, and accept failure," Goldin said during a lively, two-hour discussion and debate with Carl Sagan, astronomer and founding president of the Planetary Society, based in Pasadena. Sagan agreed that NASA had lost its "sense of direction" and said that the key questions facing NASA were what would be its role in the post-Cold War era and what could it accomplish that was in the national interest in a time of pressing economic problems. (Space News, Dec 14-20/92)
Paul Beaver, editor of the military affairs magazine Jane's Defense Weekly, said in an interview that the U. S. Air Force was operating a new generation of secret spy planes capable of reaching eight times the speed of sound. Code-named "Aurora," the plane was believed to operate at night and to incorporate the latest radar-evading technology. Pentagon officials denied that such an aircraft existed or was contemplated. For years, some scientists and aviation fans had speculated that a successor to the famed SR-71 "Blackbird" spy plane was under development and testing. (The Sun, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 12/92)
Astronomers protested plans by the American military to launch a satellite carrying a Russian nuclear reactor in a test for the "Star Wars" antimissile defense system. The astronomers said radiation from the reactor could disrupt operations of several important present and future science missions in space, as had happened in the past with Soviet nuclear-powered satellites. The scientists were seeking the support of NASA in trying to halt or modify the test flight. (NY Times, Dec 6/92; W Post, Dec 6/92; C Trib, Dec 6/92)
After four days of trying, laser signals beamed up from Florida were received aboard the Shuttle Discovery. That success came a day after NASA had decided to cancel a major experiment in tracking space debris because of a dead battery aboard the Shuttle. (NY Times, Dec. 7/92; The Sun, Dec 7/92; USA Today, Dec 7/92; AP, Dec 7/92; UPI, Dec 5/92; W Post, Dec 7/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92)
The asteroid Toutatis passed within about 2.2 million miles of Earth on its orbit around the sun, the closest an object of that size is known to scientists to have come to Earth. Toutatis is about one to two miles wide, large enough to survive passage through the atmosphere and crash into Earth's surface, potentially causing major ecological and human disaster. (W Post, Dec 8/92; The Sun, Dec 8/92)
The U.S. Air Force said that budget realities had necessitated cuts in plans to have the National Aero-Space Plane reach orbit and fly 25 times the speed of sound. The experimental hypersonic craft's top speed was likely to be cut from Mach 25 to Mach 12 or Mach 15 and its runway-to-space approach might be abandoned in favor of launch from the back of another airplane. Cost was projected to drop from $10 billion to $3 billion. (W Times, Dec 9/92)
NASA's Galileo spacecraft flew by the Earth at 10:09 a. m. EST, completing a three-year gravity-assist program and setting course to reach Jupiter in December 1995. The spacecraft was programmed to measure the near-Earth environment and to observe Earth and the moon during this flyby. (NASA Release 92-217; UPI, Dec 2/92, Dec 7/92, Dec 8/92; Dec 9/92; AP, Dec 1/92, Dec 8/92; NY Times, Dec 8/92; W Post, Dec 9/92; WP, Dec 9/92)
Veteran NASA astronauts Richard O. Covey and Kenneth        Bowersox and ESA astronaut Claude Nicollier were named to the crew for STS-61, the Hubble Space Shuttle Telescope servicing mission scheduled for late 1993. Covey was appointed the mission commander, and Bowersox was to be the pilot. Nicollier was named to be a mission specialist. Three other crew members previously named to the STS-61 mission were payload commander Story Musgrave, and mission specialists Tom Akers, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Kathryn D. Thornton. (NASA Release 92-218)
NASA officials used satellite photos to make a video showing how the ground moved along fault lines during California's strongest earthquake in decades on June 28. Shown at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, California, the video showed how Mojave Desert faults moved during the magnitude-7.5 Landers earthquake. This was the first time fault motion has been observed by using images from space. Other NASA scientists presented evidence on the theory of plate tectonics. Extremely accurate laser, satellite, and other measuring devices have detected what appear to be tectonic movements as small as one-eighth of an inch a year. (WP, Dec 8/92; LA Times, Dec 9/92)
The U.S. Department of Energy and the Mayak Production Association of the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy signed a contract by which the Energy Department would buy Russian-produced plutonium-238 for use as a power source in U. S. spacecraft. The contract provided for the United States to purchase up to 40 kilograms (88 pounds) over five years. The plutonium is not weapons-grade and is to be used by NASA to power unmanned space missions that are being planned. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; W Post, Dec 29/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin issued a call to restore America's leadership in aeronautics that is threatened by failure to invest adequately in research facilities and advanced technology. Goldin told the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics meeting in Arlington, Virginia, that additional spending had to be directed to high speed research, advanced subsonic and systems integration, critical research facilities, and hypersonic research. Top priority needed to be given to developing a hypersonic commercial plane that could carry 300 passengers at least 6,000 miles nonstop at two-and-one-half times the speed of sound by the year 2005. NASA's budget provided for $1.1 billion for aeronautics, or 7.9 percent, Goldin said, a funding level that had to increase. (NASA Release 92-219; The Sun, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 10/92; H Post, Dec 10/92; AvWk, Dec 14-21/92)
McDonnell Douglas Space Systems Company was awarded a three-year extension of its existing contract for payload ground operations services, valued at approximately $561.4 million, at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida. (NASA Release C92-21)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California because of bad weather at Cape Canaveral, Florida. Astronauts had to wait more than two hours before debarking because of toxic fumes from a leaking thruster. The main mission, the deployment of a secret Pentagon satellite, occurred soon after launch in what was the last Shuttle mission for the U. S. military. The day before, the Shuttle had to swerve in orbit to avoid a four-inch piece of space junk, the third such incident in two years. (The Sun, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; UPI, Dec 9/92, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; NY Times, Dec 10/92; WSJ, Dec 10/92; P Inq, Dec 10/92; LA Times, Dec 13/92; USA Today, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 11/92)
Two American scientists presented a new theory on the evolution of Earth's continents and on early mass extinctions of life. Michael Rampino of New York University and Verne Oberbeck, a geologist at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, discussed evidence that suggests that a huge asteroid struck Earth 250 million years ago, helping break up a super land mass called Gondwanaland and contributing to Earth's worst mass extinction of life forms. The new theory, presented during the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco, was met by disbelief and skepticism, even by scientists who believe there is overwhelming evidence that another later asteroid impact wiped out the dinosaurs and other species by disrupting Earth's climate 65 million years ago. (P Inq, Dec 10/92; The Sun, Dec 10/92; W Post, Dec 10/92; AP, Dec 10/92; W Times, Dec 20/92)
Scientists with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration said that the ozone hole over the Antarctic that has formed annually since 1987 had closed up again after setting records for depleting Earth's protective ozone layer. After falling from October 12 to December 5, ozone levels rose above the levels considered to be a "hole" on December 6. The hole formed earlier and lasted longer this year than ever before, the scientists said. (UPI, Dec 10/92)
Britain, Germany, Italy, and Spain agreed today to produce a less expensive version of Europe's most ambitious defense-industry project, the European Fighter Aircraft. Defense ministers from the four countries approved plans for a new fighter that was to cost 30 percent less than the original plane, projected at $38 billion. Flight tests were expected to begin next year, with the new plane in service in 2000. (NY Times, Dec 11/92)
NASA scientists at the American Geophysical Union's fall meeting in San Francisco said that a NASA satellite had provided overwhelming evidence that industrial pollutants were responsible for the hole in Earth's protective ozone layer above Antarctica. The Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite, launched in 1991, also had produced evidence that the Antarctic ozone hole may act as a "sink," sucking in and destroying ozone from much of the Southern Hemisphere. (AP, Dec 10/92)
NASA's Cassini mission to Saturn passed a major milestone with the completion of a project-wide critical design review. The review included a comprehensive examination of the mission and spacecraft. (NASA Release 92-222)
The Russian Space Agency announced plans for three piloted missions and six Progress flights in 1993. The first mission of the series was scheduled for January 24, 1993. (Itar-Tass, Dec 11/92)
Air Force Secretary Donald Rice voiced strong support for designing a National Aero-Space Plane capable of flying into orbit. Rice's statement came in response to news reports about plans to lower the aerospace plane programs' goals in response to Congressional concerns about the cost of the program. France and Russia were also reported to be working jointly to develop aerospace-plane type engines that could threaten America's leadership in the field. Known as the X-30, the plane would be the world's first single-stage-to-orbit vehicle. (Antelope Valley News, Dec 19/92)
NASA announced that scientists from the Ames Research Center, Mountain View, California, and across the United States would participate in a Russian biomedical space mission later this month. The Cosmos '92 "biosatellite" was to be an unpiloted, recoverable spacecraft that carried plant and animal experiments. Cosmos '92 would become the eighth Russian biosatelite mission in which NASA had participated. (NASA Release 92-223)
Researchers at NASA's Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, said that they would take part in a Russian biomedical space mission. Ames scientists expected to use monkeys to study the effect of lengthy space travel on bones, eyes, and inner ear receptors. The space mission would involve experiments from several nations and was expected to be launched December 29. (UPI, Dec 14/92)
NASA officials said that the Galileo spacecraft and its atmospheric probe had passed the half-way mark on their voyage to Jupiter. The first full test results on November 20 and December 2 since launch three years ago showed that the probe's systems were in good working order. Galileo was scheduled to arrive at Jupiter in early December 1995. A major milestone in space communications was achieved recently when NASA scientists successfully transmitted laser signals to Galileo at a distance of 1.3 million miles. (NASA Releases 92-224 and 92-225; AP, Dec 16/92)
In the current issue of the British journal Nature, two scientists, Martin I. Hoffert of New York University and Curt Covey of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California, reported new findings, largely developed from geological studies, on how Earth's climate responded to changes in atmospheric heat-trapping carbon dioxide and other influences in the distant past. Using climatic data from two periods in the past, one 20,000 years ago in the midst of the last ice age, and the other in the mid-Cretaceous period 100 million years ago, the two scientists found that if atmospheric carbon dioxide doubles from its present level, the average global climate will become about 4 degrees Fahrenheit warmer. These findings agree with computer models of climatic change. They are also compatible with earlier work by NASA scientists at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York, whose climatic studies predicted that a doubling of carbon dioxide would reproduce a warming of about 5.4 degrees Fahrenheit. (NY Times, Dec 15/92)
NASA scientists using the Hubble Space Telescope said they had discovered extended disks of dust around 15 newly-formed stars in the Orion Nebula starbirth region 1,500 light-years away. Such disks are a prerequisite for the formation of solar systems like the sun's. Hubble's detailed images confirm more than a century of speculation, conjecture, and theory about the genesis of solar systems. Astronomers said the Hubble data was the strongest evidence yet that planets could exist beyond the solar system and may even be a common occurrence. "We have found a place where it is very possible that there will be planets within the next few million years," said Edward Weiler, program scientist for the space telescope, at a NASA briefing. (NASA Release 92-226; W Times, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec. 17/92; NY Times, Dec 17/92; LA Times, Dec 17/92; CSM Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 17/92; UPI, Dec 17/92; APn, Dec 17/92; Newsweek, Dec 28/92)
In his annual speech to the Aerospace Industries Association, President Donald Fuqua predicted another year of declining production and more layoffs. "The long-term outlook for the aerospace industry is for a continued decline in overall sales volume for the rest of the decade," Mr. Fuqua told industry officials in Washington, D. C. (The Sun, Dec 17/92; USA Today, Dec 17/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; AP, Dec 16/92)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that the end of the Cold War had created a new era of space cooperation with Russia and Western Europe. Goldin spoke to a public meeting at the University of Washington in Seattle. NASA intended to study the possibility of using the Soyuz capsule as a "life raft" for Space Station Freedom and might begin using some Russian booster rockets in the future, he added. At the same time, NASA would have to balance these advantages against the risks associated with such cooperation. (Seattle Post-Intelligencer, Dec 17/92)
NASA continued to prepare for what it called "the most aggressive" space-shuttle mission yet--its mission to repair the Hubble Space Telescope, tentatively set for December 7, 1993. As conceived, it would require four astronauts working in two-person shifts several days to make the repairs. They would need three or possibly four space walks to complete the work. The main task was to install a new camera and a set of corrective mirrors to compensate for spherical aberration in the main 2.4-meter mirror. These and other repairs would, NASA hoped, restore 90 to 95 percent of Hubble's design capabilities. (CSM, Dec 16/92)
NASA unveiled its high-flying, unpiloted atmospheric research aircraft called "Perseus" at Manassas, Virginia. Perseus-A is the first aircraft designed specifically for atmospheric science. It will carry up to 110 pounds of instruments to a maximum altitude of 82,000 feet and is expected to begin flying scientific missions in 1994. Perseus-A was built for NASA by Aurora Flight Services Corporation in Manassas at a cost of $1.5 million. Company engineers expected Perseus to break the world altitude record for unmanned aircraft and the record for altitude in horizonal flight by an airplane. (NASA Release 92-227; W Post, Dec 19/92, Dec 28/92)
NASA hailed 1992 as a "blockbuster year" for NASA space science missions, with scientific discoveries ranging from the beginning of time to black holes to the innermost workings of the human cell. "Given the unprecedented return on science information and the robust launch record, 1992 was the most productive year in the history of space science," said Dr. Lennard A. Fisk, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Space Science and Applications in Washington, D. C. (NASA Release 92-228)
NASA managers set January 13 as the launch date for the first Shuttle mission of 1993. Designated STS-54, the flight was to have two primary objectives--deployment of the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite (TDRS-F) and astronomical observations of invisible x-ray sources within the Milky Way Galaxy with the Diffuse X-ray Spectrometer. The crew was to be comprised of John Casper, commander, Don McMonagle, pilot, and three mission specialists, Mario Runco, Greg Harbaugh, and Susan Helms. (NASA Release N92-110; C Trib, Dec 23/92; AP, Dec 22/92; UPI, Dec 22/92)
NASA scientists released pictures and results from spacecraft Galileo's December 8 flight over the moon's north pole and 189 miles above the southern Atlantic Ocean. The flyby allowed Galileo to practice for Jupiter by studying Earth as if it were an alien planet. The craft detected radio signals that changed frequencies in a repeating, artificial way, indicating intelligent life on Earth. It also detected ice clouds in the stratosphere that help create a hole in the protective ozone layer above Antarctica and found evidence that the moon once was more volcanically active than thought. (AP, Dec 22/92, 23/92; C Trib, Dec 23/92; W Times, Dec 23/92; NY Times, Dec 23/92; UPI, Dec 23/92)
A passenger jet was flown for the first time after undergoing nearly three years of modifications that converted it into a Shuttle landing-gear test aircraft. The modified Convair 990 was in the air for about one hour in the first of three flights planned by NASA in advance of the actual landing gear tests. (Antelope Valley Press, Dec 23/92)
Technicians searching for a leak in a Space Shuttle solid-fuel booster rocket found a 1-inch hair pressed into a secondary seal, a NASA spokesman said. The leak was detected yesterday in a segment of a booster for the Shuttle Columbia, which was being prepared for a February launch date. It was a leak in an O-ring seal that was blamed for the 1986 Shuttle Challenger explosion in which seven astronauts were killed. (W Times, Dec 27/92; W Post, Dec 17/92; The Sun, Dec 27/92)
A group of physicists working at Fermilab near Chicago announced that they had observed a "top quark," the last of the fundamental building blocks of matter to have its existence confirmed in the laboratory. Repeat experiments to confirm the existence of the top quark were underway, but if the findings hold up, the event could become one of the most celebrated in the study of particle physics. (B Sun, Dec 28/92)
NASA scientists began a new attempt to open the stuck antenna on the Galileo space probe by rotating the satellite to point the antenna toward the sun. They hoped the warmth would expand the metal fittings and release the stuck mechanism. If this maneuver fails, they were prepared to turn the antenna's electric motors on and off at rapid intervals to "hammer" the jammed mechanism in a final bid to overpower what they believed were stuck pins and pop open the antenna. (W Post, Dec 26/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; The Sun, Dec 26/92, Dec 30/92, Dec 31/92; USA Today, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92, Dec 31/92; UPI, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92, Dec 30/92; P Inq, Dec 31/92; W Times, Dec 31/92)
Lockheed Corporation formed a joint venture with Russian aerospace firm Krunichev Enterprise to market the Russian-built Proton rocket for commercial satellite launches, a move that could help make Russia one of the dominant forces in the world-wide commercial launch business. Lockheed was to be responsible for marketing the Russian rocket to Western customers and would provide payload integration. Rockets were to be launched from the Baikonur site in Kazakhstan. (WSJ, Dec 29/92; LA Times, Dec 29/92; NY Times, Dec 29/92)
Russia launched a spaceship carrying two monkeys and insects into orbit to conduct radiation experiments on the creatures. Experts from the European Space Agency as well as Italian, German, and other foreign scientists were to oversee the biological experiments. The ITAR-Tass news agency also said that Cosmonauts Anatoly Solovyov and Sergei Avdeyev, who had spent five months aboard the Mir Space Station, were in good condition following routine medical examinations. (AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 29/92)
Astronomers ruled out any possibility that Comet Swift-Tuttle would collide with the Earth on its next pass through the inner solar system in 2126. In October astronomers warned that the comet might hit the Earth during that pass, potentially creating a pall of dust capable of blocking sunlight, disrupting climate, and threatening human civilization. More accurate calculations of Swift-Tuttle's orbit showed that there was no chance of a collision. (NY Times, Dec 29/92; The Sun, Dec 30/92)
The eight-legged rappeling robot Dante was placed in position on the rim of the Antarctic volcano Mt. Erebus in preparation for its exploration of the interior of the crater and its lava lake. NASA and the National Science Foundation hoped that the Dante project would help develop technology and telecommunications capabilities that NASA could use in future explorations of the Moon or Mars or in ongoing research activities in the Antarctic. (NASA Dante Advisor #3; UPI, Dec 28/92; AP, Dec 28/92, Dec 31/92)
