 Furloughed NASA employees returned to work at the end of a federal government shutdown of 14 to 21 days. NASA had allowed some critical employees to return before others. The government shutdown, resulting from a budget stalemate between the Republican Congress and the Democratic White House, forced NASA to cease operations and to clear thousands of its employees from field centers across the country. Upon resuming its normal proceedings, NASA faced a backlog of work because of the disruption. Workers returning to Houston’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) were especially anxious to catch up, because the Center had only three days to prepare for a scheduled Shuttle launch. A snowstorm delayed for a few more hours the return of workers to Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
 A delegation from the U. S. Congress traveled to Russia to meet with Russian Space Agency officials. Representatives Jerry Lewis (R-CA) and F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), members of the subcommittee in charge of NASA’s funding⎯the Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies⎯led the contingent. Their goal was to keep intact the coalition of countries dedicated to making the International Space Station (ISS) a reality. Faced with Russian insistence that the planned space station connect with the Russian space station Mir, the U.S. lawmakers warned Russian officials not to pursue radical changes in the plans for the space station. Sensenbrenner noted that obstinacy on the part of the Russians might result in the coalition’s building the ISS without Russian involvement.(Ben Lannotta, “Congress to Russia: Drop Mir–Station Link Idea,” Space News, 15–21 January 1996, 3, 20.)
 G. Porter Bridwell retired after nearly 40 years of service at MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Bridwell had served as Director of MSFC from 1994 until his retirement. He left the Center with an annual operating budget of US$2.5 billion and more than 3,000 employees. Bridwell had spent most of his career at MSFC, serving briefly as Acting Director of Stennis Space Center in 1987, and at NASA Headquarters from 1993 to 1994. Bridwell had also been a member of the space station redesign team. During his tenure, Bridwell had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, the Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Exceptional Achievement Medal, attaining the rank of Meritorious Executive.3 NASA announced that J. Wayne Littles would take over as the new Director of MSFC.(NASA, “Littles Named Director of Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 96-3, 16 January 1996. 1)
 Republican presidential candidate Patrick J. Buchanan announced that he would cancel a controversial political advertisement using images of the Space Shuttle Challenger accident. Responding to harsh criticism from New Hampshire residents, Buchanan removed the footage of Challenger from the television spot. Buchanan stated that the purpose of the advertisement, his first in the crucial primary state of New Hampshire, was to demonstrate his service to President Ronald Reagan during difficult times. However, in the home state of teacher-astronaut Christa McAuliffe, who had died in the accident, many residents felt that the campaign’s use of the images exploited the event for political gain. The political controversy brought to the foreground the lingering public dismay over the lost Challenger, even as the 10-year anniversary of the tragedy neared.(Howard Kurtz, “Television Ad Backfires on Buchanan,” Washington Post, 12 January 1996; Associated Press, “Buchanan Chastised for Using Challenger Image in TV Ad,” 12 January 1996.)
 Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a mission focused primarily on plucking the Japanese Space Flying Unit from orbit for analysis. Commander Brian Duffy led a six-person crew, which included Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata. Endeavour also carried a small satellite to deploy. KSC officials delayed Endeavour’s launch for 23 minutes because of a series of communications problems between the Shuttle crew and the flight-control team. Endeavour’s flight was the first of eight Shuttle missions planned by NASA for 1996.(Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Blasts Off in Pursuit of Satellite After Slight Delay,” Houston Chronicle, 12 January 1996. 7 Associated Press, “Lockheed Martin Cuts Shuttle Program Jobs,” 16 January 1996.)
 Lockheed Martin announced its intention to cut 200 jobs at its facility for the production of external fuel tanks for NASA’s Space Shuttle. NASA’s budget reductions had caused the layoffs, according to Lockheed. Lockheed Martin’s facility in New Orleans employed more than 2,500 workers in 1996.
 NASA released time-lapse photographs taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), making the images immediately available on the Internet. Based on these images, lauded as the deepest images of the universe ever taken, scientists raised their estimate of the number of galaxies in the universe from 10 to 50 billion; “Suddenly, Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” the New York Times reported. Using a narrow “keyhole” view and focusing the HST on a portion of the sky only the width of a dime, telescope operators probed deep into the universe. The images revealed the process of a star’s death, as well as new information about how galaxies evolve. HST astronomer Howard E. Bond estimated that the Sun would die out in about 5 billion years.(John Noble Wilford, “Suddenly Universe Gains 40 Billion More Galaxies,” New York Times, 16 January 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Takes Portrait of Universe,” Washington Post, 16 January 1996; NASA, “New Hubble Images Available,” news release N96-2, 17 January 1996.)
 Space Shuttle Endeavour’s crew used the spacecraft’s 50-foot (15-meter) robotic arm to snare NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology Flyer (OAST-Flyer) satellite. The OAST- Flyer, valued at US$10 million, weighed 2,600 pounds (1,200 kilograms).(Associated Press, “Shuttle’s Astronauts Grab a 4-Ton Japanese Science Satellite from Its Orbit,” 17 January 1996; Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Dodges Military Satellite on Way To Retrieve Japanese Craft,” Houston Chronicle, 13 January 1996; Michael Cabbage, “Satellite Stowed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1996.)
 Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour tested new NASA spacesuits in extreme cold. In preparation for work on the ISS, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott stood nearly motionless in space for 35 minutes, in temperatures nearing 100° below 0°F (-73.33°C), to test the suit’s insulating capacity. In completing the exercise, Scott became the second African American man to walk in space. The newly improved suits, produced at a cost of US$10 million each, proved an effective barrier against the cold. The gloves and the boots of the suits contained heating elements. NASA made the thermal improvements to the spacesuits after the astronauts became cold during the February 1995 spacewalk, causing its early termination.(Michael Cabbage, “Staying Warm in Cosmic Cold,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 January 1996; Jet Magazine, “Navy Captain Winston Scott Becomes Second Black To Walk in Space,” 5 February 1996, 24. 11 Kathy Sawyer, “Two Planets Discovered that Might Sustain Life,” Washington Post, 18 January 1996.)
 At a conference of the American Astronomical Society in San Antonio, Texas, a team of U.S. astronomers announced the discovery of two new stars with the characteristics to sustain life within their solar systems. The astronomers identified the bodies, both visible to the naked eye, as star 70 Virginis in the constellation Virgo and a star orbiting 47 Ursae Majoris in the Big Dipper. Geoffrey Marcy and Paul Butler, researchers affiliated with the University of California at Berkeley and San Francisco State University, spent nine years monitoring 120 Sun-like stars in order to discover the two stars.
 Space Shuttle Endeavour landed safely after a successful nine-day mission. The Shuttle crew accomplished its primary task of capturing a Japanese satellite. The early-morning landing, in which the Shuttle returned to Earth under a shroud of darkness, was a rare occurrence.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
 NASA released its analysis of the data from the Galileo probe mission to Jupiter, information that had caused scientists to rethink their theories about Jupiter’s formation. The data suggested that Jupiter does not have the three-tiered cloud structure scientists had anticipated, and that the amount of helium present on Jupiter is half of scientists’ projections. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Wesley T. Huntress Jr. touted the data collected as beyond NASA’s highest expectations. The Galileo probe had been one of NASA’s most challenging missions undertaken to obtain scientific data. According to NASA, the probe had made the most difficult planetary atmospheric entry ever attempted, surviving entry speeds of more than 100,000 miles (160,000 kilometers) per hour and temperatures twice as hot as the surface of the Sun.
 George W. S. Abbey became the seventh Director of JSC in Houston, Texas. Abbey had been Acting Director since Carolyn Hunter had stepped down from the post on 4 August 1995. According to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, Abbey’s distinguished NASA career made him the right man for the job. Administrator Goldin announced, “George Abbey is uniquely qualified to lead the Johnson team into the future. Over the course of his eminent career with NASA, he has distinguished himself as an innovator and pioneer at all levels of Agency management.” Abbey had begun working at NASA in 1967 after serving as a pilot in the U.S. Air Force. He had worked on the Apollo Spacecraft Program before becoming Director of Flight Operations. NASA had recognized Abbey’s superior service by awarding him its Exceptional Service Medal and two Distinguished Service Medals.(NASA, “Abbey Named Director of Johnson Space Center,” news release 96-11, 23 January 1996. 3)
 NASA commemorated the 10-year anniversary of the Challenger tragedy. In advance of the anniversary, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin reaffirmed NASA’s dual commitments to exploring the frontiers of the universe and to maintaining the highest safety standard possible. According to Goldin, “the best way to honor the memories of the crew of Challenger, and of all the men and women, who have given their lives to explore the frontiers of air and space, is to continue their bold tradition of exploration and innovation.” In the decade following the accident, NASA had instituted multiple safety changes in the Shuttle program, including the nine changes in the program’s structure recommended by the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission). By the end of January 1996, NASA had launched 49 Shuttle missions since the Challenger accident and had successfully deployed the HST. Memorial observances at KSC and JSC took place at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger exploded.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Changes and Accomplishments Since 1986,” news release, January 1996; NASA, “Administrator Goldin Issues Statement on Challenger Observance,” news release 96-2, 16 January 1996.)
 NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that the United States and Russia had reached an agreement to extend the Shuttle–Mir collaboration until 1998, with both countries reaffirming their commitments to building the ISS. At the time of the agreement, Russia was continuing to negotiate with the international space community to maintain the Russian station Mir as a long- term portal to the ISS. Through additional Shuttle flights to the Mir outpost, the United States planned to deliver thousands of pounds of materials to space, which otherwise would have required Russian launches. The United States offered Russia this significant assistance in the hope that the cash-strapped country would be able to keep its commitments to the ISS project. Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin announced concurrently that U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev would be the first crew members to live aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA and RSA Agree To Extend Shuttle–Mir Activities,” news release 96-18, 30 January 1996; Warren E. Leary, “U.S. To Help Defray Russia’s Expenses for the Space Station,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
 NASA announced completion of the exterior of the U.S. modules constructed to house the astronauts aboard the ISS, as well as more than 80,000 pounds (36,000 kilograms) of flight hardware for the station. With the completion of the modules, the United States successfully attained the first benchmark in the long and expensive process to complete its part of the ISS. Boeing workers had completed the project at MSFC. NASA planned to launch the first node of the ISS in December 1997.(NASA, “Exterior of US Space Station Modules Completed; Flight Hardware on Track for Launch in 1997,” news release 96-17, 30 January 1996; NASA, “United States’ Space Station Modules Are Right on Track,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 3; The Boeing Company, “Exterior of U.S. Space Station Modules Completed Flight Hardware on Track; First Launch in 1997,” news release, 5 February 1996.)
 NASA announced that, in collaboration with industry leaders and university scholars, it had developed an instrument that generates the world’s most intense source of commercial x-rays, more than 100 times stronger than conventional x-rays. “This new optical instrument provides something never before possible; a capability to control the direction for x-ray beams,” said Walter M. Gibson, professor at State University of New York at Albany. Using capillary optics, the instrument could focus more precisely on a target in a research or medical situation. Daniel C. Carter, Director of MSFC, postulated that the new instrument would have numerous medical and commercial applications, including improvements in drug research, medical imaging, and forensic science.(NASA, “NASA Helps Invent Revolutionary X-ray Instrument,” news release 96-19, 31 January 1996; NASA, “NASA Helps Invent Revolutionary X-ray Device,” HQ Bulletin, 4 March 1996, 3.)
 Astronomers at California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of what they believed to be the most distant galaxy ever glimpsed from the Earth. The team of scientists, including Thomas A. Barlow, Limin Liu, Wallace L. W. Sargent, and Donna S. Womble, had stumbled across the unnamed galaxy while studying a quasar silhouetted by the galaxy’s light. The team used the W. M. Keck Observatory atop the Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii. In comparison to other documented galaxies, their find was a relatively young galaxy⎯probably formed less than 1 billion years after the Big Bang. The galaxy resides near the constellation Virgo. Ironically, since the galaxy lies 14 billion light-years away from Earth, the scientists had no way of knowing whether their discovery still actually existed. The scientists hoped that their discovery would offer new understanding of the period when stars began to congregate into galaxies.(California Institute of Technology, “Astronomers Discover the Most Distant Galaxy,” news release, 31 January 1996; Reuters, “Scientists Discover Farthest Galaxy Yet,” 1 February 1996; John Noble Wilford, “New Galaxy May Shed Light on Universe,” New York Times, 1 February 1996.)
 Space Shuttle Program Director Bryan D. O’Connor announced his resignation from NASA, effective at the end of February 1996. O’Connor stated that the transition in Shuttle management had presented him with an opportunity to leave NASA without causing undue disruption. In the months before his resignation, O’Connor had voiced some concerns about NASA’s planned transfer of responsibility for Shuttle flight operations to United Space Alliance, a private contractor formed by Lockheed Martin and Rockwell International. In announcing his departure, O’Connor praised NASA workers and astronauts for their exemplary service. After the 1986 Challenger accident, O’Connor had played an important role in restoring the Shuttle program and restructuring NASA. O’Connor, a former U.S. Marine Corps pilot and astronaut, had directed a major overhaul of the space station program, taking over as Director of the Space Shuttle Program in 1994.(NASA, “O’Connor To Leave NASA,” news release 96-23, 2 February 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Space Shuttle Director Resigns,” Washington Post, 3 February 1996.)
 NASA announced its plan to shift authority over the Shuttle program from NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, to Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. JSC also would take control over construction of the International Space Station. The shift was one of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin’s efforts to restructure NASA and remove layers of bureaucracy. Goldin’s mission centered on controlling costs and improving efficiency. With the change in organization, key managers at JSC and other regional centers such as Kennedy Space Center (KSC) gained new authority to act without consulting Goldin or other officials at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The change caused some observers to comment that NASA was shifting back to the less strictly hierarchical model of operation that had characterized it before the Challenger accident. In response to the Challenger tragedy and the ensuing Report of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission Report), NASA had centralized some of its operations, to avoid the poor communication between regional centers that had contributed to the tragedy.(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Begins Migrating Functions to the Centers,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 1; Associated Press, “NASA Shifts Shuttle, Station Authority from Washington to Houston,” 7 February 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin’s Plan To Decentralize NASA Raises Challenger Concerns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1996.)
 Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) experienced a setback when one of its prototypes for a small, robotic spacecraft landed in the ocean and sank. The Japanese officials had anticipated the ocean landing immediately after the launch of the Hyflex shuttle, the Hope-X, from an island in southern Japan. In spite of the loss of its shuttle, NASDA did not consider the exercise an entire failure. The Hope-X had launched successfully, separated from its rocket at a height of 70 miles (113 kilometers), and then returned to Earth 19 minutes later, as planned. The problem occurred when the craft splashed into the ocean, and a rope connecting the 1-ton (900- kilogram or 0.9-tonne) shuttle to its flotation device broke, causing it to sink. NASDA reported that it had intended to collect data during the flight to test the shuttle’s fitness for reentry, but had been unable to procure much of the information needed. Japan had manufactured the US$37 million shuttle domestically, planning the exercise as a part of its effort to bolster its fledgling space program.(Associated Press, “Japanese Shuttle Sinks,” 12 February 1996.)
 NASA announced the selection of eight proposals for its newly inaugurated Advanced Concepts Research Projects (ACRP) program. NASA had received more than 100 proposals for the program, founded in September 1995 to identify and support new ideas and technologies that might eventually improve the U.S. space program. The ACRP program, allowing up to US$250,000 in support for each selected proposal, included proposals covering a wide spectrum of technologies and fields, such as: “fusion-based space propulsion, optical computing, robotics, interplanetary navigation, materials and structure, ultra-lightweight large aperture optics, and innovative modular spacecraft architectural concepts.”(NASA, “Innovative Space Concepts Selected for Negotiations,” news release 96-28, 12 February 1996.)
 The television series Home Improvement aired an episode showing members of Shuttle Columbia’s crew in scenes shot in space. The Shuttle’s crew had captured the film during Mission STS-73 in October 1995. The airing marked the first time that NASA had allowed the filming of operations in space, specifically for a television series. The NASA crew included Kenneth D. Bowersox, Catherine G. Coleman, Frederick W. Leslie, Kathryn C. Thornton, and Albert Sacco Jr. Bowersox, who had appeared previously on Home Improvement, praised the event as a public relations achievement for NASA.(Ann Hodges, “‘Home Improvement’ Project Takes On a New Kind of Space,” Houston Chronicle, 12 February 1996.)
 NASA launched a space probe aimed at a faraway asteroid only about twice the size of Manhattan Island. Scientists intended the probe, called Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR), to reach the asteroid in three years. If the mission succeeded, NASA planned for the probe to orbit the asteroid for nearly one year before eventually crashing into the rock. Astronomers hoped that the data gathered during the exercise would provide new information about the formation of the universe. With a budget of US$120 million, the probe mission was a relatively cheap foray into the gathering of space data. The probe’s restricted budget was necessary because the new Discovery program had cost US$150 million, and NASA had a three- year cap on the development of new spacecraft. Johns Hopkins University successfully engineered the craft within the stringent guidelines.(NASA, “NEAR Sent To Study Eros,” HQ Bulletin, 20 February 1996, 3; Associated Press, “Asteroid Visit,” 17 February 1996.)
 Receiving congratulations from the rest of the international space community, Russia celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the Russian space station Mir. The pathbreaking spacecraft had hosted a steady stream of astronauts for long-term stays in space throughout the late 1980s and 1990s, transcending many of the changes in the political structure of its home country. The Soviet space program had launched the first Mir module on 20 February 1986 from the desert of Kazakhstan, but because of Cold War tensions, the Soviets had not released specific information about the station as it entered orbit module by module. Rockets had transported the individual modules into space, where cosmonauts assembled them. The fully assembled space station weighed 130 tons (120,000 kilograms or 120 tonnes). As tensions between the United States and the former Soviet Union lessened, Shuttle missions to Mir had become frequent. During the 1990s, many countries, including the United States, had paid the fledgling Soviet space administration, which became the Russian Space Agency, hundreds of millions of dollars to send their astronauts to Mir. Thus, Mir had provided the USSR with a needed source of revenue. However, since the fall of the Soviet Union, the Russian space program had received only one-fifth of the government funding provided to the Soviet space program. In 1996, even with Mir in an advanced state of decline, Russian officials remained committed to preserving the aging craft’s lifespan. Marcia S. Smith, an aerospace expert with the Congressional Research Service, described Mir’s state as akin to “a car that has 200,000 miles [320,000 kilometers] on it.” Nevertheless, the space station had provided scientists with the only spacecraft in space consistently occupied by humans for a decade, a significant contribution that deserved commemoration.(European Space Agency, news release, 15 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 20 February 1996; Associated Press, “Russian Space Program Drifting Toward Disaster?” 19 February 1996.)
 Russia launched the Soyuz spacecraft carrying two cosmonauts. The Russian Space Agency intended the mission to Mir to bring Mir residents Yuri P. Gidzenko, Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Thomas Reiter back to Earth after their lengthy stay aboard the space station.(NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1996), p. 102.)
 Mission STS-75, the 19th mission of Shuttle Columbia, launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral,
 Florida. A seven-person crew embarked on the mission, scheduled to last 13 days. Scott J.
 Horowitz, the first Shuttle pilot with a PhD, captained STS-75. NASA astronauts Andrew M.
 Allen, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz; Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier; and
 two Italian astronauts, Umberto Guidoni and Maurizio Cheli, made up the crew. One of the
 mission’s priorities was to place in flight the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS), which
 scientists had designed to harness new sources of power for the Space Shuttle. An attempt in
 1992 to deploy the TSS had failed when a bolt in the system’s reel mechanism caused the tether
 to jam. The U.S.- Italian satellite had cost US$443 million to produce. The satellite, extended on
 a 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, had the potential to use its orbit to create electrical power for
 other spacecraft. NASA planned to fly the satellite for 22 hours. To retrieve the satellite, the
 crew intended to retract the tether until the satellite was about 2 miles (3 kilometers) from the
 Shuttle, allowing it to hover at this distance while the Shuttle maneuvered into position to pick it up.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-75—Press Kit,” news release 96-27, February 1996; William J. Broad, “Shuttle Blasts Off for High-Wire Act To Unfurl 12.5 Miles of Electrical Cable in Space,” New York Times, 23 February 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Mission To Deploy Space Power Ball on 12.5-Mile Tether,” Washington Post, 23 February 1996.)
 NASA announced that the tethered satellite experiment had failed. The 12-mile (19-kilometer) tether, attaching the 0.5-ton (450-kilogram or 0.45-tonne) satellite to Shuttle Columbia, broke unexpectedly just as the tether had nearly reached its full extension. Before the tether broke, the experiment to use an orbiting satellite to produce electricity had been proceeding smoothly. The astronauts had been in the process of extending the satellite from the Space Shuttle for more than 5 hours, when they noted a decrease in tension and realized that the tether and satellite had broken away. NASA Commander Andrew M. Allen responded to the break immediately, directing the Shuttle away from the satellite to prevent a collision. However, the satellite never came close to the Shuttle; it was more than 18 miles (29 kilometers) away only a few minutes after breaking free. NASA officials could not immediately identify the cause of the break. The astronauts aboard the Shuttle managed to record images of the satellite trailing away from the Shuttle. This footage, a black and white rendering of the tether disappearing into space, reached Flight Command Center in Houston, Texas, shortly after the event. “Those are some tether dynamics we did not want to see,” stated one Mission Control operative. NASA dismissed the idea of attempting to retrieve the satellite, explaining that, although it was technically possible, such a mission would be too dangerous and too costly in consumption of fuel.(NASA, “STS-75 Mission Control Status Report No. 10,” 26 February 1996; Steve Marshall, “Satellite Tether Snaps; Shuttle Safe,” USA Today, 26 February 1996; William Harwood, “Science Satellite Is Lost as Shuttle Tether Breaks,” Washington Post, 26 February 1996.)
 NASA formed an independent panel to review the failure of the tethered satellite experiment and the loss of the satellite. NASA selected Kenneth J. Szalai, Director of Dryden Flight Research Center, to chair the panel. The formation of such an investigative body in the wake of a costly loss conformed to standard practice under NASA’s Space Flight Operations Contingency Plan. In a NASA press release announcing the panel’s formation, Szalai stated, “given the public investment in the tethered satellite, it is important that we find out what went wrong.”(NASA, “NASA To Form Independent Review Panel,” news release 96-39, 26 February 1996.)
 Continuing its efforts to cut costs by using private contractors, NASA awarded McDonnell Douglas Aerospace a US$500 million, eight-year contract to provide “fixed-price medium-light (Med-Lite) class expendable launch vehicle services.”31 NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center managed the program, and the Orbital Sciences Corporation served as the major subcontractor. At the time of the agreement, NASA had planned three Med-Lite missions launching from both the East Coast and the West Coast.
 NASA scientist Benjamin F. Chao explained to the New York Times the results of his research on Earth’s orbit. A geophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, Chao attributed the Earth’s slightly changed orbital pattern to the increased construction of dams. As the planet’s population has grown, people had attempted to maximize use of Earth’s limited water resources by building reservoirs. Using geophysics, international data, and theoretical calculations, Chao postulated that this increase in impounded water on the Earth’s surface had actually helped speed up the Earth’s orbit. Chao first made public his findings in the Geophysical Research Papers. Some members of the scientific community challenged his conclusions.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Dams for Water Supply Are Altering Earth’s Orbit, Expert Says,” New York Times, 3 March 1996.)
 Columbia astronauts set a series of small fires inside the Shuttle to help NASA scientists improve their design of smoke detectors and fire extinguishers for use in a weightless environment. The fires spread quickly within the enclosed vehicle. Astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman marveled at the behavior of the flames, which was completely different in a weightless environment from that typically observed on Earth. The fires scattered quickly and burned much more intensely than on Earth. NASA had never before tested the fire-detection equipment in a space environment. The fire equipment worked properly, and the crew put out all fires without incident.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Set Fires To Check Safety Equipment,” 3 March 1996.)
 The Communist Party of China acknowledged for the first time that a failed satellite launch occurring on 15 February 1996 had killed six people and injured 57 others. The Long March 3B rocket had exploded, destroying the 15 Intelsat satellite and damaging 80 homes. The secretive government of the People’s Republic of China had denied the major accident, announcing simply that a setback had occurred. However, foreign news sources had captured video footage of the launch rocket as it careened out of control and exploded in a highly populated area. The Chinese government ended the news blackout, which had prevented its own citizens from learning of the disaster, stating China’s intention to delay future launch plans.(Reuters, “China: Fiery Launch Killed 6, Injured 57,” 4 March 1996.)
 Henry McDonald became Director of Ames Research Center (ARC) in Mountain View, California. NASA had selected McDonald for the position in January 1996 after the selection of former Director Ken K. Munechika as NASA’s first Director of Moffett Federal Airfield. A former professor of mechanical engineering at Pennsylvania State University, McDonald brought to NASA both industrial and academic experience.(NASA, “McDonald Named Director of Ames Research Center,” news release 96-8, 19 January 1996. 37 Associated Press, “Campus Takes Control of Shuttle Experiment,” 5 March 1996.)
 For the first time in its history, NASA allowed a researcher to direct an experiment from his home university, rather than from Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). Martin Glickman led a group of scientists from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, taking control of a crystal experiment aboard Shuttle Columbia. Both NASA and the scientific community praised the experiment as a crucial step in the relationship between astronauts and academic scientists. Because they did not have to travel to NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, the scientists were able to use their own instruments and data systems. Using remote control, they repeatedly cooled and heated the crystal samples on the Shuttle. Scientists hoped that allowing universities to control experiments from their own institutions would facilitate greater student participation in experiments conducted in space.
 NASA released Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images revealing much of the surface of Pluto for the first time. The Pluto imaging team declared the quality of the pictures better than they had expected. “Hubble has brought Pluto from a fuzzy, distant dot of light, to a world which we can begin to map, and watch for surface changes,” remarked Marc W. Buie, a member of the team. The HST took snapshots of nearly the entire surface of the planet during 6.4 days of its rotation. The pictures showed Pluto’s complexity, revealing nearly a dozen distinct provinces, and confirming the existence of a polar ice cap, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to verify. NASA officials were optimistic that the images would pave the way for a proposed Pluto flyby mission in the coming years. Pluto remained the only planet not yet visited by a spacecraft.(NASA, “Hubble Reveals Surface of Pluto for First Time,” news release 96-43, 7 March 1996.)
 NASA agreed to restructure and extend its contract with USBI Company, which had previously assembled and refurbished the Shuttle’s solid rocket boosters. The new contract extended the partnership for 45 months, paying US$500 million to USBI to support the Shuttle program. Based on the terms of the agreement and on USBI’s production schedule, NASA estimated that the partnership would cover approximately seven Shuttle missions annually for the duration of the contract.(NASA, “NASA Restructures/Extends USBI Contract for Solid Rocket Booster Elements,” news release C96-c, 8 March 1996.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia touched down at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 16-day mission clouded by the disappointment of losing a tethered satellite. NASA delayed the landing for one day because of poor weather on the coast of Florida.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Lands Safely After Trying Mission,” 10 March 1996.)
 Having received 550 proposals, NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications awarded US$17 million to 168 scientists from 32 different states, to conduct microgravity research. NASA and the scientific community hypothesized that further investigation into the effects of low gravity on physical processes would lead to major advances in fluid physics and material sciences. The scientists hoped that if they could control the process of the formation of materials, they could develop and improve a wide range of materials and products, including metal alloys, semiconductors, ceramics, glasses, and polymers.(NASA, “Scientists Receive Microgravity Research Grants,” news release 96-44, 12 March 1996.)
 NASA announced that it had developed a prototype for new software to teach pilots how to fly commercial aircraft. The improved technological capabilities of computers had allowed Steve Casner, a scientist at NASA’s ARC, to develop a program imitating the flight management system of an automated “glass” cockpit and allowing pilots to use their laptops to simulate flying. Pilots could load the program onto their own computers, supplementing the training they had received through classroom instruction and flight simulators. The program featured five windows: “a control/display unit, mode control panel, two maps showing the aircraft’s lateral track and its vertical track, and a flight mode enunciator showing which flight systems [were] currently controlling the airplane.”(NASA, “NASA Develops New Laptop Pilot Training Tool,” news release 96-47, 13 March 1996.)
 NASA selected astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence to replace Charles J. Precourt as Director of Operations, Russia, making Lawrence the primary contact between NASA and Russian Space Agency officials. As Director of Operations, Russia, Lawrence became responsible for overseeing the training and preparation of U.S. astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia, outside of Moscow. Lawrence was the sixth astronaut to serve in this position.(NASA, “Lawrence To Replace Precourt as NASA Manager in Russia,” news release 96-49, 13 March 1996.)
 NASA released its blueprint for the future, the “NASA Strategic Plan 1996.” The plan laid out NASA’s vision for the United States’ space exploration; noted its history; and discussed possible changes in strategy, committing NASA to a threefold mission: scientific research, space exploration, and development and transfer of technology. Furthermore, the plan outlined NASA’s quest to address science’s fundamental questions, such as, how did the universe, galaxies, stars, and planets form and evolve? and, does life in any form, however simple or complex, carbon-based or other, exist elsewhere than on planet Earth? NASA intended the document as the starting point for future decisions regarding the allocation of its resources.(NASA, “NASA Strategic Plan 1998,” NASA policy directive (NPD)-1000.1, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/ NSPTOC.html (accessed 5 February 2008); NASA, “NASA Releases Strategy for the Future,” news release, 14 March 1996.)
 At the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Adriana C. Ocampo, a geologist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, announced the discovery of a chain of impact craters in Chad. According to a team of scientists, the presence of the craters suggested that a sizable comet or asteroid might have struck ancient Earth. Scientists discovered the craters using the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C (SIR-C), which flew on Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994. The impact craters were only the second chain of large craters ever discovered on Earth and the first impact craters found using the SIR-C technology. Ocampo warned that scientists still needed to excavate the ground extensively before they could be sure that the craters were indeed impact structures.(NASA, “Chain of Impact Craters Suggested by Spaceborne Radar Images,” news release 96-55, 20 March 1996. 46 NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-76—Press Kit,” news release 96-46, March 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Takes Off for Russian Mir Linkup,” Washington Post, March 23, 1996.)
 Shuttle Atlantis launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, setting out for the Mir space station. Space Shuttle Mission STS-76 was the third Space Shuttle–Mir docking mission. The Shuttle carried six astronauts, including Shannon W. Lucid, destined for a five-month stay on the Russian space outpost. Complications arose when flight controllers at Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas, detected a potential problem during the launch. A minor leak had occurred in one of the Shuttle’s three hydraulic systems used to move the wing flaps. After analyzing the extent of the problem, however, NASA officials determined that the mission could go on as planned. NASA planned the mission to last nine days, connecting with Mir on the third day.
 Former NASA astronaut Robert F. Overmyer died while test piloting the experimental Cirrus VK-30 aircraft near Duluth, Minnesota. Overmyer was performing a series of stalls at an altitude of more than 8,000 feet (2,400 meters) when the aircraft “departed from controlled flight.” Overmyer had served in the U.S. Marine Corps from 1959 to 1986, becoming a NASA astronaut in 1969, and piloting Shuttle Mission STS-5 in 1982. After leaving NASA and the Marine Corps in 1986, Overmyer worked for McDonnell Douglas Aerospace.(Edward H. Phillips, “Overmyer Dies in Crash,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 144, no. 14 (1 April 1996): 29.)
 NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid became the first female resident of the Mir space station. Lucid traveled aboard Shuttle Atlantis to reach Mir, planning to remain on the Russian station for five months. She joined Russian cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev for the long-term stay. Atlantis’s crew unloaded more than 5,000 pounds (2,300 kilograms) of supplies and 1,000 pounds (450 kilograms) of experiment samples and equipment during the Shuttle’s docking. Lucid replaced U.S. astronaut Norman E. Thagard, who had spent 110 days with the Russian crew. Lucid’s arrival generated some controversy. In attempting to convey Russia’s openness to having a woman aboard Mir, cosmonaut Yuri N. Glazkov commented that the crew would appreciate Lucid’s presence, because “we know women love to clean.” Not surprisingly, some people resented his remark.(William Harwood, “U.S. Woman To Start Stay on Russian Space Station,” Washington Post, 24 March 1996; Associated Press, “Female Astronaut Settles In on Mir,” 25 March 1996.)
 NASA astronauts Michael R. “Rich” Clifford and Linda M. Godwin made an historic spacewalk outside the orbiting Mir space station. For the first time, astronauts exited Mir with the Shuttle docked at the station. Clifford and Godwin, wearing jet packs as a precaution, scaled the passageway connecting Shuttle Atlantis with the Mir complex, installing several experiment boxes on the outside of the space station. Some of these boxes were “cosmic dust catchers,” meant to gather samples of the materials that might smash into orbiting space stations. The spacewalk and associated experiments were part of ongoing research in preparation for the construction of the new International Space Station. NASA regarded the spacewalk as more dangerous than usual, because the Shuttle was docked with Mir and, thus, unable to give chase quickly if one of the astronauts broke away from the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Spacewalking Astronauts Venture Outside Atlantis-Mir Complex,” 27 March 1996; Todd Halverson, “Walkers Prepare for Historic Trek Outside Mir Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 March 1996. 50 Houston Chronicle, “United Space Alliance Taps New Top Officers,” 27 March 1996.)
 Preparing to take over the administration of the Shuttle program from NASA, the Rockwell- Lockheed Martin joint venture, United Space Alliance (USA), named James C. Adamson as its chief operating officer. Adamson came to USA from Lockheed Martin, where he had served since 1994 as a group vice president and general manager of Lockheed’s Engineering and Science Services. Adamson had served as an astronaut at NASA from 1984 to 1992, spending more than 334 hours in space as a part of Missions STS-28 and STS-43.
 Shuttle Atlantis landed at Edwards Air Force Base in California’s Mojave Desert. The nine-day mission nearly came to an abrupt halt when Atlantis’s crew had difficulty opening the Shuttle’s cargo bay doors during descent. After considering an emergency landing, NASA controllers directed Atlantis’s crew to open the doors manually. The crew successfully performed this necessary maneuver only to confront dangerous weather that prevented their landing at Kennedy Space Center.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Back Safely After Mir Mission,” 1 April 1996. 13)
 An international team of researchers announced that, while tracking Comet Hyakutake in March 1996, they had discovered x-rays emitting from the comet. German scientists working at Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had collaborated on the project with NASA scientists based at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Konrad Dennryl, who had directed the use of Germany’s ROSAT (Röntgensatellit) for the project, called the discovery of the x-rays “a thrilling moment.” The comet emitted far stronger radiation signals than the scientists had expected, about 100 times brighter than anticipated. The scientists could not explain why the comet gave off such intense x-rays, but offered two preliminary hypotheses: 1) the gaseous molecules surrounding the comet absorbed x-rays from the Sun before reemitting the same x-rays; or 2) violent collisions between the comet material and the supersonic wind and particles from the Sun produced the extraordinarily strong x-rays. The scientists vowed to ascertain conclusively why the comet x-rays behaved as they did.(NASA, “First X-rays from a Comet Discovered,” new release 96-66, 4 April 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Seek Explanation for X-rays Seen from Comet,” New York Times, 5 April 1996.)
 Rockwell International Corporation pled guilty to charges of violating federal law in disposing of hazardous waste. Federal prosecutors had charged the company with violating the law after a 1994 explosion at a Rockwell rocket-testing facility in Southern California killed scientists Otto K. Heiney and Larry A. Pugh. Rockwell’s Chief Executive Officer Donald R. Beall called the incident “a corporate failure for which we accept responsibility.” By pleading guilty, Rockwell acknowledged liability and agreed to pay a US$6.5 million fine. According to the U.S. Department of Justice, the case was only one aspect of a long-term investigation into Rockwell’s compliance with environmental regulations, an investigation that Rockwell’s guilty plea did not end. Federal auditors were also looking into the possibility that Rockwell had overcharged NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense for disposal costs.(Andy Pasztor, “Rockwell Probe To Continue After Unit Pleads Guilty to Waste-Disposal Charge,” Wall Street Journal, 9 April 1996; Mark Reed, “Firm Agrees To Pay Fine in Fatal Blast,” Los Angeles Times, 9 April 1996. 54 New York Times, “NASA Research Plane Aids in Waste Cleanup,” 9 April 1996.)
 NASA made its high-altitude research plane available to the disaster-recovery team responsible for containing hazardous leakage at the California Gulch Superfund site in Leadville, Colorado. The ER-2 plane, a U-2 spy plane adapted for civilian use, captured thousands of measurements per second, and its spectrometer mapped hundreds of square miles during each reconnaissance flight. Scientists used NASA’s plane to map minerals and other substances, to help them detect the location of acid leaks from mines and heavy-metal contamination. Officials estimated that the ER-2 plane’s identification of contaminated areas had saved cleanup agencies about one year and more than US$500,000.
 The U.S. Space Foundation inducted into its Space Technology Hall of Fame three technologies that NASA had originally developed for its astronauts: antishock trousers, flame-retardant seat materials, and the radiation barrier. The Space Foundation recognized the technologies as pathbreaking discoveries that had enhanced the quality of life on Earth. Scientists and engineers at Ames Research Center had developed the first two technologies, and members of the Apollo program at Johnson Space Center (JSC) had discovered the radiation barrier. NASA employees had often referred to the dual use of its technologies as spin-offs, recognizing that such inventions served to validate the expenditure of taxpayers’ funds on NASA’s research projects. According to a NASA spokesperson, the technologies “are not merely secondary applications. They provide direct, quantifiable, and invaluable benefits to the American taxpayer and the domestic economy.” The U.S. Space Foundation made the inductions at the National Space Symposium, in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The Foundation had inducted 25 technologies into the Hall of Fame since the establishment of the awards in 1988.(NASA, “NASA Life-Saving Technologies Enter Space Hall of Fame,” news release 96-69, 10 April 1996.)
 NASA and the scientific community celebrated the 15th anniversary of the Space Shuttle program. NASA had adopted the Shuttle as a means of controlling the costs of exploring space. However, NASA conceded that, since its deployment, the Shuttle had flown only nine times per year, compared with the 24 to 60 Shuttle flights per year anticipated. Furthermore, the cost of flying the Shuttle had reached almost US$500,000 more per mission than expected. During its first 15 years, the Shuttles had flown 76 missions, including 51 following the Challenger accident. The Shuttles had transported 545 tons (490,000 kilograms or 490 tonnes) of payloads to space, bringing back to Earth 18.5 tons (17,000 kilograms or 17 tonnes) of payloads. During the same period, 440 astronauts from 12 countries flew aboard the Shuttles. NASA experts predicted that the Shuttle would remain the primary vehicle of space exploration well into the 21st century.(Martin Burkey, “A Lean, Mean Teen: Shuttle Turns 15,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 April 1996; Seth Borenstein, “Costly History Dogs Shuttle on Anniversary,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 12 April 1996.)
 NASA completed the first step in its transition to using a single contractor to conduct all Shuttle operations, signing two novation agreements with the newly formed United Space Alliance (USA). NASA had announced in 1995 that it would consolidate its Shuttle operations under a single contract with USA, on a noncompetitive basis. When Rockwell International Corporation and Lockheed Martin Corporation developed USA as a joint venture, the two companies already held nearly 70 percent of the dollar value of all Shuttle-related contracts. NASA officials expected that the move to a single contract would reduce costs by eliminating duplicative work and streamlining management.(NASA, “Shuttle Contracts Take First Step Toward Consolidation,” news release 96-73, 12 April 1996.)
 NASA disclosed the startling discoveries of Rice University astronomer C. Robert O’Dell and graduate student Kerry P. Handron, who had used images captured by the Hubble Space Telescope to pinpoint thousands of gigantic, tadpole-shaped objects surrounding a dying star, the first time that scientists had observed the forms in such abundance. The scientists hypothesized that the final outbursts of the dying star probably caused the gaseous knots, each several billion miles across. O’Dell concluded that if a dying star caused the gaseous knots, then trillions of these forms might litter the universe.(NASA, “Hubble Finds Thousands of Gaseous Fragments Around Star,” news release 96-74, 15 April 1996.)
 With funding from NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications and the Utah Agricultural Experiment Station, researchers at Utah State University successfully developed a strain of wheat suitable for growth in space. The space wheat, called USU-Apogee, produced a yield equivalent to 600 bushels of grain per acre (21,000 liters of grain per 4,100 square meters), a rate three times more than the rate achieved in previous experiments. Researchers had worked for more than a decade developing the wheat. During the tests, USU- Apogee had thrived under the difficult conditions of artificial sunlight and high levels of carbon dioxide. In conditions approximating the environment in space, the wheat grew on short stalks, produced an unusually large number of seeds, and maintained green leaf tips (reflecting proper calcium levels). Scientists hoped that astronauts would be able to grow the wheat in the future International Space Station, as a more economical means of providing food for long-term space residents than frequent Shuttle supply missions.(NASA, “Utah State University Develops Space Crop,” news release 96-75, 15 April 1996.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin informed employees that NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC, would reduce its staff by more than 50 percent, citing “increasing budget pressures.” Under the reduction plan, staff at NASA Headquarters would decrease from 1,430 to between 650 and 700, in less than one year’s time. The Clinton administration had continued to push for government-wide budget cutbacks throughout the 1990s. Don Fuqua, President of the Aerospace Industries Association, described the staff reduction as a case of the federal government following the example of the private sector. According to Fuqua, before NASA decided to reorganize, most commercial aerospace business had already reorganized for greater efficiency.(NASA, “Additional Personnel Reductions Planned for Agency Headquarters,” news release 96-76, 17 April 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Speeds Up Downsizing,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Mike Causey, “NASA To Lighten Pay Load,” Washington Post, 18 April 1996; Warren Ferster and Jennifer Heronema, “NASA Cuts Headquarters Jobs Deeper, Faster,” Space News, 22−28 April 1996, 4−5.)
 Chinese scientists attending a conference under the direction of the World Monuments Fund announced that space radar images had allowed them to locate and study two ancient, previously undetectable sections of the Great Wall of China. Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar, aboard Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59, produced the images in 1994. Diane L. Evans, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, called the discovery an unexpected benefit of NASA’s research: “Archaeology wasn’t one of our original science objectives, but the imaging radar data has been found to be very useful for this type of research.” Because the radar images penetrated vegetation and loose sand, archaeologists were able to use the images to explore the site without excavation. The radar images revealed sections of the wall built in two different periods⎯one during the Ming Dynasty and the other during the Sui Dynasty.(NASA, “Space Radar Reveals Ancient Segments of China’s Great Wall,” news release 96-77, 18 April 1996; Associated Press, “Shuttle Found Lost Sections of the Great Wall in ’94,” 22 April 1996.)
 Russia successfully launched the 21-ton (19,000-kilogram or 19-tonne) Priroda module, the last major component of the aging Mir space station, aboard a robotic rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Russian scientists designed the Priroda module primarily as a laboratory for observing Earth. The module also contained equipment for NASA astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s stay aboard the station. NASA officials at JSC monitored the launch. Priroda carried a magnetically levitated experiment platform, a spectrometer, and a “glove box,” allowing astronauts to handle potentially hazardous material. The module was the sixth major portion of the Mir complex launched by Russia since the Soviet Union began the project in 1986. Budget shortfalls in the Russian space program had caused some concern that the final module might not reach Mir as planned.(Mark Carreau, “Russia Launches Final, Major Mir Component,” Houston Chronicle, 24 April 1996.)
 Without holding any subcommittee hearings on the matter, the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology voted to trim NASA’s budget for 1997 by US$450 million. NASA operated under a US$13.8 billion budget in 1996. Most of the cuts were from the budget of the initiative Mission to Planet Earth.(Brett Davis, “Panel Sets $450 Million NASA Budget Cut,” Huntsville Times (AL), 25 April 1996.)
 Harry C. Holloway resigned from his post as NASA Associate Administrator for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications. Holloway was the first person to hold the appointment after Administrator Daniel S. Goldin created the position in March 1993. Holloway planned to return to the School of Medicine at Uniformed Services University. During his tenure, Holloway had established programs to conduct experimental studies in orbit and instituted the strategic plan for the Human Exploration and Development of Space. Holloway had been instrumental in strengthening ties between NASA and the National Institutes of Health, overseeing the signing of 10 agreements between the two agencies.(NASA, “Science Head To Leave NASA,” news release 96-80, 30 April 1996.)
 At the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the American Astronomical Society, astronomers working with NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) spacecraft announced the discovery of the fastest vibrations ever recorded in a star system. The vibrations occur when massive neutron stars begin to die out, expelling the outer layers of their solid crusts and creating powerful x-rays. The astronomers working with the RXTE recorded x-rays flickering at up to 1,130 times per second. Scientists were unsure why this process occurred. According to NASA, “the possibility that the RXTE has detected actual waves in neutron stars or a very fast rotation period of one such star is of great scientific interest.”(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Discovers Fastest Stellar Vibrations Yet,” news release 96-81, 30 April 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Instrument Detects Fastest Vibrations Yet Seen in Universe,” 30 April 1996.)
 NASA announced its 1996 astronaut candidate class, which included the first set of identical twins ever selected⎯Mark E. Kelly and Scott J. Kelly. The sibling U.S. Navy pilots joined 33 other astronauts in the class. NASA selected 10 pilots and 25 mission specialists from an applicant pool of more than 2,400 candidates, including members of the U.S. Army, Air Force, Coast Guard, Marine Corps, and Navy. Six members of the class held PhDs in their respective fields, and one was an MD. NASA selected the astronaut class, the largest in nearly 20 years, from 16 different states; in addition, one astronaut candidate had been born in Argentina and another in the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Selects Astronaut Class of 1996,” news release 96-84, 1 May 1996; Marcia Dunn, “In NASA First Identical Twins Selected for Astronaut Corps,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 May 1996.)
 Joseph B. Gurman of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced the pathbreaking discoveries of a team of scientists monitoring the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. According to Gurman, SOHO had revealed unexpected activity on the Sun, as well as the best images yet of the plume-like structures, extending from the Sun. SOHO’s scientists were excited and surprised to find that “movies made from SOHO ultraviolet data show that there is continuous motion and action everywhere on the Sun.” The scientists observed that the Sun’s plumes extend more than 13 million miles (21 million kilometers) into space. NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA) collaborated on the SOHO project.(NASA, “Unexpectedly Active Sun and New Insights into Solar Plumes Found,” news release 96-87, 2 May 1996. 68 U.S. Newswire, “Norman Y. Mineta Receives NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal,” 2 May 1996.)
 Former U.S. Representative Norman Y. Mineta received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, the highest civilian honor awarded by NASA. Mineta had served 21 years in the U.S. Congress, representing California’s Silicon Valley in the House of Representatives. As chairperson of the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, he had played a vital role in bolstering the nation’s transportation infrastructure and fostering technological research. Mineta remarked that serving over the long term as the senior member of the House Committee on Science and Technology had given him the opportunity to see firsthand NASA’s significant achievements. When he accepted the award at a private ceremony, Mineta said, “I’m deeply honored to be recognized by NASA for any contributions I made furthering the mission of our nation’s space operations.”
 NASA’s Galileo spacecraft discovered a giant iron core taking up half of the diameter of Jupiter’s moon Io, as well as a large hole in Jupiter’s magnetic field. Galileo Project Scientist Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) identified Io as the most “geographically active body in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Galileo scientists also measured the intense heat Jupiter generates, noting that the planet has a massive gravity field. Galileo managed to come within 559 miles (900 kilometers) of Jupiter during its 1995 flyby, allowing scientists to locate the iron core and the hole in the magnetic field. Although they were still grappling with the significance of the “completely unexpected finds,” scientists reported their early analysis of the data in Science magazine.(J. D. Anderson, W. L. Sjogren, and G. Schubert, “Galileo Gravity Results and the Internal Structure of Lo,” Science 272, no. 5262 (3 May 1996): 709−712; NASA, “Galileo Finds Giant Iron Core in Jupiter’s Moon Io,” news release 96-89, 3 May 1996.)
 At Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA announced that it had taken a major step forward in preparations for the International Space Station (ISS): the station’s air purification system had passed a month-long test. NASA scientists tested the ISS’s air pressure and the ability of its air system to regulate the mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen that the astronauts would breathe. In the simulation, scientists used a 6,200-cubic-foot (176-cubic-meter) module from which they had removed the oxygen. The air system not only proved it could maintain the proper levels of both oxygen and carbon dioxide, but also performed satisfactorily at a reduced power level. Engineers hoped to reduce the power level of the ISS during its nighttime orbit. The system, called the Atmosphere Revitalization Subsystem, demonstrated that it could provide healthy working and living conditions for the astronauts on board the ISS.(NASA, “Space Station Air Purification System Completes Major Test,” news release, 10 May 1996.)
 NASA and the ESA made available images taken of Comet Hyakutake as it approached the Sun. The U.S. Naval Research Laboratory had captured the pictures during the appearance of the comet in late April 1996. The Naval Research Laboratory had built a special instrument⎯the Large Angle Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO)⎯to record the images. Operating aboard SOHO, LASCO suppressed the glare of the Sun, exposing the comet and its tails. In addition, the instrument produced the equivalent of a time-lapse movie of Hyakutake, thereby documenting the comet’s tails as they changed direction in reaction to the Sun’s forces. LASCO also allowed scientists to observe coronal mass ejections⎯the expulsion of hot gases. Researchers used the data to learn more about how comets interact with the Sun and about the behavior of comet tails.(NASA, “SOHO Images Comet Hyakutake’s Close Encounter with the Sun,” news release, 15 May 1996. 72 Paul Hoversten, “A Space Race with a Lofty Goal: Cash,” USA Today, 17 May 1996.)
 Peter H. Diamandis, President of Angel Technologies Corporation, an aerospace firm located in St. Louis, Missouri, offered a US$10 million prize to the first private aviators to complete a suborbital flight into space. Diamandis stated that the object of the prize was to motivate private companies to invest in space exploration, someday making spaceflights open to the public. “We’re looking to spark a constructive competition,” Diamandis explained. To claim the prize, the privately financed and built aircraft would have to ascend to 62 miles (100 kilometers) high, twice within a period of two weeks, delivering three passengers safely to space and back. Diamandis claimed that creating an entirely reusable Space Shuttle would considerably decrease the cost of going to space, opening the space frontier to people who had not trained as professional astronauts. Diamandis intended to announce the winner of the “X Prize” on 18 May, beneath the St. Louis Gateway Arch. Creator of the Voyager and top contender for the prize Burt Rutan, as well as NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, planned to attend the award ceremony.
 Shuttle Endeavour lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-77, scheduled to last 10 days. John H. Casper, making his fourth spaceflight, commanded the crew, and Curtis L. Brown Jr. piloted the Shuttle. Four mission specialists, Daniel W. Bursch, Marc Garneau, Mario Runco Jr., and Andrew S. W. Thomas, completed the flight crew. NASA planned various science experiments for the mission, including deployment of a retrievable satellite to test the feasibility of using satellites with inflatable parts. NASA’s Office of Space Access and Technology sponsored most of the payloads aboard Endeavour. The Shuttle also carried a privately developed SPACEHAB module, holding nearly 3,000 pounds (1,400 kilograms) of science experiments. NASA had contracted with SPACEHAB Inc. in 1990 to construct research laboratories. Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau was making his second trip into space.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Begins 10-Day Technology Flight,” New York Times, 20 May 1996; NASA, “Space Commercialization and Technology Demonstrations Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-77,” news release 96-83, May 1996.)
 Endeavour’s crew successfully tested a giant inflatable antenna, deploying the structure and gathering data during its orbit. Project Manager Steven Bard, a NASA scientist at JPL, called the successful test a giant step toward developing lightweight, cost-effective equipment for space research. The silver, inflatable antenna, about the size of a tennis court, cost US$14 million to develop. The Shuttle astronauts used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to launch the small satellite carrying the antenna. The crew situated Endeavour about 400 feet (122 meters) immediately above the antenna, to observe its behavior after deployment, but when the antenna made some unexpected tumbling rotations, the astronauts moved the Shuttle to a safer distance. After completing the test, the astronauts set off a series of small explosions to cut loose the antenna. Before the mission began, NASA officials had determined that deflating and recapturing the antenna would be too risky and costly to attempt.(William Harwood, “Inflatable Antenna Passes Test,” Washington Post, 21 May 1996; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Deploys Giant Antenna,” Washington Times, 21 May 1996.)
 The Boeing Company, Honeywell Space Systems, and the S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), based in Kaliningrad, Russia, announced a new venture to reduce significantly the cost and time involved in transporting payloads to the Mir space station. Boeing estimated that the service would save one year and would cut the cost of transporting a standard payload to space by at least US$7 million. The three companies split duties to maximize efficiency. Boeing assumed control of the overall management and payload-system integration; Honeywell accepted responsibility for providing payload-interface units and payload-integration support; and RSC Energia signed on to provide launch services and to oversee installation on Mir. Decreasing the expenses involved in sustaining Mir had become urgent in the 1990s, when both Russian and American space agencies had to respond to their governments’ respective budget cuts.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Honeywell, and Energia Join in Offering New Commercial Payload Service to Russian Space Station,” news release, 21 May 1996.)
 Scientists revealed that their analysis of the data from NASA’s Galileo probe had offered new insights into Jupiter’s climate. The probe found winds of 400 miles (640 kilometers) per hour, extending about 10,000 miles (16,000 kilometers) from the planet’s core to its cloud top and producing storms that could last for centuries. The findings indicated that heat at Jupiter’s core fueled the winds. Galileo released a probe, which parachuted 400 miles (640 kilometers) through Jupiter’s atmosphere to gather its data, enduring temperatures ranging from -171°F to 305°F (- 113°C to 152°C). The probe exploded after gathering and transmitting the data.(Paul Hoversten, “Jupiter’s Winds: 10,000-Mile-Deep ‘Giant Flywheel’,” USA Today, 22 May 1996. NASA, “Galileo Probe Data Spurs New Concepts for Jupiter’s Circulation and Formation,” news release 96-103, 21 May 1996.)
 The trend of commercializing space exploration continued, as Pepsi-Cola Company announced the company’s plan to use Russian cosmonauts aboard the Mir space station to record the first TV advertisement filmed in space. PepsiCo planned to record images of a giant replica of a Pepsi can in space. PepsiCo’s Chief Marketing Officer Massimo F. d’Amore called space “the ultimate frontier of global marketing.” The Russian Space Agency expected to receive nearly US$5 million for the advertising stunt, providing a welcome infusion of cash for the struggling, postcommunist space program. In response to its competitor’s advertisement plans, the Coca- Cola Company furnished Endeavour’s Mission STS-77 with a soda dispenser equipped for use in space. The machine cost Coca-Cola Company US$1.5 million to develop.(Melanie Well, “Pepsi, Coke Go into Orbit,” USA Today, 22 May 1996.)
 NASA revealed that the joint U.S.-Italian team investigating the failure of the Italian tethered satellite system (TSS) had determined that the tether experiment conducted aboard Mission STS- 75 had revealed numerous fundamental flaws in space physics and plasma theories. The TSS experiment had ended with the tether breaking before reaching its full 13-mile (21-kilometer) length. The scientists concluded that a number of theoretical models, widely accepted for as long as 30 years, were incorrect and in need of revision. According to Noble Stone, a NASA scientist at MSFC, the team’s most significant finding was that tether current flows between the satellite and the orbiter were three times greater than theoretical models had predicted. Because the amount of power generated was directly proportionate to the current, the harnessed energy had the potential to furnish thrust for rebooting a space station, satellite, or shuttle in a decaying orbit. Stone suggested that tether systems might some day supplement solar arrays as sources of power for long-term space platforms.(NASA, “Early Findings from Tethered Satellite Mission Point to Revamping of Space Physics Theories,” news release 96-106, 23 May 1996; NASA Marshall Space Flight Center “Fall Science Meeting Highlights Tether Satellite Results,” http://spacescience.spaceref.com/newhome/headlines/ast15oct96_1.htm (accessed 27 October 2008).)
 Shuttle Endeavour made a smooth sunrise landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, bringing to its close a fruitful 10-day research mission. The Shuttle crew celebrated their record achievement of 21 hours flying in close proximity to the satellites they had released. NASA planned to move Endeavour to Palmdale, California, for refurbishing.(Stefanie Asin, “Welcome Back, Endeavour, Shuttle Lands at Kennedy Space Center After 10-Day Mission,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 1996.)
 A team of NASA and university researchers announced the discovery of large quantities of ethane and methane gases in Comet Hyakutake, the first time scientists had detected such gases in a comet. The discovery led researchers to postulate that at least two basic types of comets exist. If validated by further research, the hypothesis would have significant ramifications for scientific theories regarding the formation of the Sun and planets. Michael J. Mumma, the lead researcher on the project, called the discovery of ethane in the comet “a blinding surprise.” The team of researchers included Karen Magee-Sauer of Rowan College, New Jersey, and NASA scientists Neil Dello Russo, David X. Xie, and Charles Kaminski.(NASA, “Chemical Measurements of Comet Hyakutake Suggest a New Class of Comets,” news release 96-108, 31 May 1996.)
 NASA and the Italian Space Agency released the investigative report on the failed tethered satellite system (TSS) experiment conducted during Shuttle Columbia’s Mission STS-75 in February 1996. The 358-page report, produced by a board established to investigate the incident, concluded that a breach in the layer of insulation surrounding the tether conductor, possibly the result of contact with debris, led to the failure. According to the report, the breach in insulation allowed an electrical current to jump from a copper wire in the tether to an electrical ground, causing the breakage: “the tether failed as a result of arcing and burning of the tether, leading to a tensile failure after a significant portion of the tether had burned away.” The board noted that NASA scientists had already announced findings regarding tether current and voltage measurements, concluding that the unexpected breakage of Columbia’s tethered satellite did not indicate any fundamental problem with the concept of the TSS. Furthermore, the board recommended that during future experiments, scientists should take greater precautions to ensure that neither debris nor high-voltage arcing compromised the tether’s strength.(NASA, “Tethered Satellite Investigation Report Released,” news release 96-112, 4 June 1996; Reuters, “Damaged Insulation Ruined Test in Space,” 5 June 1996; Associated Press, “Study Finds Metal Debris Punctured Tether Pulled by Satellite,” 5 June 1996.)
 Arianespace, the commercial arm of the European Space Agency, suffered a major setback in its bid to maintain control of the satellite-launching market in the face of competition from U.S. companies. Only seconds after the launch of Ariane 5, a huge rocket intended to launch satellites, Arianespace had to blow up the rocket when it veered severely off course. Arianespace had spent 10 years and more than US$7 billion to develop the 674-foot (205-meter), 821-ton (750,000- kilogram or 750-tonne) vehicle. Also lost in the explosion were satellites valued at more than US$500 million. Arianespace had projected a launch reliability of 98.5 percent for the rocket, considering failure so unlikely that the company had guaranteed a free launch to customers if the launch failed. A spokesperson for Arianespace acknowledged the disappointment of the failed test, but promised that the company would continue as the world’s leader in launching satellites. Aerospace industry analysts predicted that U.S. companies such as Lockheed Martin would likely gain an increased foothold in the market because of the European company’s misfortune.(Kathleen Day, “Losing a Rocket and a Satellite Edge?” Washington Post, 5 June 1996; Craig Whitney, “Costly Failure: Space Launch Is Aborted,” New York Times, 5 June 1996.)
 The experimental DC-XA flight vehicle completed a successful test flight, flying nearly 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the desert of the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico and landing safely. NASA researchers and administrators hoped that the rocket would one day replace the Space Shuttle as the primary means of space exploration. The reusable, unpiloted rocket, taking off and landing from a vertical position, would cut significantly the costs of delivering payloads into orbit. NASA announced that the vehicle had been renamed Clipper Graham, in honor of Lieutenant General Daniel O. Graham. Graham, who died on 31 December 1995, had served as an advisor to President Ronald Reagan and had been an early proponent for the development of reusable rockets. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed optimism that NASA would be able to replace the Shuttle with the DC-XA flight vehicle: “We are going to fly the [S]huttle safely until we can replace it. But, by God, we are going to replace the [S]huttle.”(NASA, “Revolutionary New Launch Vehicle Renamed for Space Pioneer,” news release 96-114, 7 June 1996; Associated Press, “Reusable Rocket Ends Flight,” 7 June 1996.)
 A team of astronomers announced at the American Astronomical Society convention that they had discovered ordinary vinegar in a stellar cloud 25,000 light-years away from Earth. The presence of an organic molecule, which may have played a role in the formation of life, excited scientists. “Acetic acid could have been one of the first steps toward the chemicals of life,” explained Lewis E. Snyder, a member of the research team that made the discovery. Scientists had discovered complex molecules in space before, but formic acid, discovered in 1975, was the only other basic molecule detected before the discovery of the vinegar.(John Noble Wilford, “Whiff of Organic Stuff Found Between Stars,” New York Times, 11 June 1996; Associated Press, “Vinegar Found in Far Away Space,” 11 June 1996.)
 Kennedy Space Center (KSC) scientists began the most comprehensive testing to date on how plants produce food and oxygen in space. The experiment, part of NASA’s development of a Controlled Ecological Life Support System, called for the analysis of 128 potato plants and 6,500 wheat seeds. NASA scientists planned for the study to last from one to three years. NASA agricultural engineer John Sager, praising NASA’s earlier success in producing crop species for space, explained the experiment’s significance: “If we plan to live in space . . . we must determine if this system will be as successful over longer periods of time.” Scientists were using KSC’s Biomass Production Chamber to test the crops in a space-like environment. NASA had begun in 1987 to test strains of crops and plants for their ability to produce oxygen and food in space.(NASA, “NASA Begins Study on Reliability of Space Life Support System,” news release 96-120, 12 June 1996. 86 Rowan Scarborough, “Engen To Head Air and Space,” Washington Times, 13 June 1996.)
 The Smithsonian Institution named former U.S. Navy pilot and aviation executive Donald D. Engen as Director of the National Air and Space Museum. Engen succeeded Martin O. Harwit, who had resigned amidst criticism of an exhibition about the Enola Gay atomic bomb mission. Some World War II veterans had deemed the exhibition too sympathetic to Japan, and some members of Congress had faulted the National Air and Space Museum for deviating from its mission of exhibiting the history of the United States’ aeronautical achievements. Smithsonian employees praised Engen’s appointment, suggesting that he would restore the museum’s credibility.
 The U.S. Space Walk of Fame, based in Titusville, Florida, recognized with a two-day celebration the 20,000 men and women who worked on the Gemini space program. NASA had launched 10 Gemini missions between 1965 and 1966, each spacecraft carrying two astronauts. Many staff members and astronauts involved in the Gemini program went on to work on the Apollo Moon program. Gemini astronauts included Neil A. Armstrong, Jim Lovell, and Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. The event organizers celebrated the achievements of the Gemini missions, in addition to raising funds to establish a permanent monument to the Gemini program.(Marilyn Meyer, “History-Making Gemini Team To Reunite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 June 1996.)
 Shuttle Columbia lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking upon Mission STS-78. The Shuttle carried U.S. astronauts Terrence T. Henricks, Kevin R. Kregel, Richard M. Linnehan, Susan J. Helms, and Charles E. Brady Jr.; French astronaut Jean-Jacques Favier; and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thrisk. NASA planned to use an orbiting research laboratory to conduct a variety of experiments during the mission. In addition to its human cargo, the Shuttle transported the payload for the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences, used to conduct research on musculoskeletal physiology and on the responses of living organisms to a low- gravity environment.(NASA, “Life and Microgravity Science Research Highlight Shuttle Mission STS-78,” news release 96-116, June 1996; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President, Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 103.)
 Russian officials announced that the necessity of cutting costs at the Russian Space Agency had caused a 40-day delay in returning cosmonauts Yuri I. Onufrienko and Yury V. Usachev from the Mir space station to Earth. Russian budget cuts had slowed the production of the Soyuz booster rockets needed to fuel a return trip for the cosmonauts. Because Mir was deteriorating, Russia could not leave it without a crew. This was the second time that financial and technical difficulties had led Russia to delay the return of the two men. The episode signaled a deepening crisis for the Russian space program, the United States’ key partner in building the International Space Station (ISS).(USA Today, “Russian Cosmonauts,” 24 June 1996; Associated Press, “Moscow,” 21 June 1996.)
 Astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia conducted an overnight experiment on the effects of space travel on the body’s biological clock. Four astronauts slept with special caps equipped with electrodes to monitor their brain and muscle activity. Astronauts in space have no exposure to the once-daily rising and setting Sun, which helps trigger a regular sleep pattern on Earth. In space the Sun rises and sets more than a dozen times each “day.” NASA administrators planned the experiment because they recognized the value of restful sleep for astronauts working in space and were concerned that sleep loss would become a greater disadvantage the longer an astronaut stayed in space. With the ISS on the horizon, NASA researchers considered the possible effects on astronauts of record-setting stays in space a significant issue. “Sleep disruption is something that has to be taken seriously,” said Timothy H. Monk, the lead researcher on the project.(Reuters, “Shuttle Mission Probes Body Clock,” 24 June 1996.)
 Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) identified what they believed to be the most distant objects observed to date. Researchers based at State University of New York at Stony Brook found several dozen galaxies so far away that they might have existed when the universe was less than 5 percent of its present age. The team of astronomers made its calculations on the distances of the galaxies from the Earth by relying on the relationship between speed and distance in the expanding universe. According to the scientific understanding of the speed-distance relationship, “the expansion of the universe causes the light from distant galaxies to be ‘redshifted’,” meaning that, because of the expansion of space, light leaving a distant galaxy as blue arrives at the HST as red light. The redshifting phenomenon allows researchers to tentatively measure the distance the light has traveled. Noting that other factors, such as dust, also might make a galaxy’s light red, Mark E. Dickinson of the Space Telescope Science Institute categorized the study as “enticing,” but also clarified, “it’s not a proof.”(Associated Press, “Hubble Scope Peers into Universe’s Past with Aid of Starlight,” 27 June 1996; NASA, “Findings from Hubble Deep Field Home in on Distant Galaxies,” news release 96-123, 26 June 1996.)
 NASA’s Galileo spacecraft completed a flyby of Jupiter’s largest moon, Ganymede, passing only 519 miles (835 kilometers) above the moon’s surface. NASA had equipped Galileo with 10 scientific instruments to gather data from the expedition. The instruments began making measurements on 23 June, as the probe approached Ganymede. Images revealed an icy surface, with bright, clean ice covering part of the moon and darker, dirty ice covering the rest. This was the first data gathered during a collection mission planned for 1996 and 1997, in which Galileo would pass Ganymede before completing 11 orbits of Jupiter and surveying the planet’s other moons. NASA monitored Galileo’s progress through its Deep Space Network, using control stations in California, Spain, and Australia. Scientists and engineers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had built the Galileo spacecraft.(NASA, “Galileo Readies for Close Flyby of Jupiter’s Biggest Moon,” news release 96-122, June 1996.)
 NASA successfully launched its Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite, via an Orbital Sciences Pegasus XL launch vehicle from Vandenberg Air Force Base. A jet flying roughly 7 miles above the California coast released the rocket that was carrying the satellite, placing the TOMS-EP in a successful orbit. The McMurdo Sound Tracking Station in Antarctica acquired the satellite almost immediately and determined that the spacecraft was functioning properly. After it reached a circular orbit, the TOMS-EP was ready to conduct its scientific mission.(NASA, “Pegasus/TOMS Launch Successful from Vandenberg AFB,” news release, 2 July 1996; Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 July 1996.)
 Paul F. Holloway, Director of Langley Research Center (LARC) in Hampton, Virginia, announced his retirement. Holloway had served at LARC for his entire aerospace career, beginning in 1960. He became the Center’s Director in 1991, overseeing 4,500 employees and a budget of more than US$600 million. During his tenure, Holloway published 42 technical articles in the fields of hypersonic aerodynamics; boundary layer transition and flow separation; analysis of entry flight mechanics; and Earth orbital and planetary space missions. NASA awarded Holloway its Outstanding Leadership Medal, Exceptional Service Medal, Distinguished Service Medal, and Equal Employment Opportunity Medal. Holloway also received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Service and two Senior Executive Service Distinguished Presidential Rank Awards. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin summarized Holloway’s contributions to NASA, saying that his “career spans almost the entire history of the Space Age, and his many achievements at Langley are a tribute to his talent, his professionalism, and his dedication to the importance of NASA aeronautical programs.”(NASA, “NASA Langley Director Paul F. Holloway To Step Down,” news release 96-127, 2 July 1996.)
 Lockheed Martin won the contract to design and build the X-33 test vehicle, a scaled-down model of the reusable launch vehicle (RLV) that NASA planned as an eventual replacement for the Space Shuttle. NASA set a budget of US$941 million for the project. In announcing the new contract, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed NASA’s high hopes for the project: “We want to develop technologies that will allow industry to build a vehicle that takes days, not months, to turnaround; dozens, not thousands of people to operate; reliability ten times better than anything flying today; and launch costs that are a tenth of what they are now. Our goal is a reusable launch vehicle that will cut the cost of sending a pound of payload to orbit from [US]$10,000 to [US]$1,000.” Lockheed planned to invest US$220 million in the RLV project. The X-33 plan built upon the successful engineering of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA), launched from White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The agreement between NASA and Lockheed Martin split the risk between government and industry. Although NASA passed over Rockwell International for the contract, Rockwell designed the vehicle’s engine.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build X-33,” news release 96-128, 2 July 1996; Jeff Cole, “Lockheed Wins $1 Billion Pact for the Shuttle,” Wall Street Journal, 3 July 1996; Curt Suplee and Steven Pearlstein, “Lockheed Martin Gets Spacecraft Project,” Washington Post, 3 July 1996.)
 Reuters News Service published an internal NASA memorandum written by an independent safety commission, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, cautioning NASA against cutting the budget for the Shuttle program too quickly. According to the panel’s analysis, NASA’s attempts to reduce costs by conducting fewer Shuttle safety inspections and by transferring responsibility for day-to-day operations of the Shuttle program to United Space Alliance had demoralized NASA’s workforce at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). The memo made clear the opinion of the safety inspectors: “Overall, it was the clear consensus of the team that a cooling off period is absolutely necessary if KSC operations are to continue safely . . . without this hiatus the safety risk is likely unacceptable.”(Reuters, “Warning Light for NASA’s Shuttle Program—Memo,” 4 July 1996.)
 In a study released in the journal Science, Charles P. Sonett detailed the results of his research measuring changes in the motion of Earth. Sonett reported that tidal forces from the gravitational force of the Moon had caused the Earth’s rotation to slow gradually over a period of millions of years. About 900 million years ago, according to Sonett, the length of the Earth’s day was only about 18 hours. The gravitational pull of the Moon, Sonett explained, “acts like a brake on the Earth.”(C. P. Sonett et al., “Late Proterozoic and Paleozoic Tides, Retreat of the Moon, and Rotation of the Earth,” Science 273, no. 5271 (5 July 1996): 100−104; Associated Press, “Astrodynamics: A Brake on the Earth’s Spin,” 8 July 1996.)
 Shuttle Columbia landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, ending the longest Space Shuttle mission ever. The mission, lasting nearly 17 days, set a new space endurance record for the crew. The astronauts had bested their previous record by nearly 7 hours. Columbia had carried into space a torch for the 1996 Olympic relay, and upon landing, two members of the crew joined the Olympic torch relay team in a special ceremony. The astronauts had overcome several small malfunctions to conduct the successful mission and land the Shuttle on time. Less than 2 hours before the Shuttle’s scheduled arrival, the crew had discovered a clogged cooling line, but the astronauts were able to flush ice from the system to clear the line. In addition, the mission brought to light a potential ongoing problem for Columbia. In studying the launch, NASA officials had observed gas and flames issuing from the rocket boosters, probably through the O- ring joints used to connect the booster’s fuel segments. Although Columbia’s crew was not in danger, NASA officials decided that the Shuttle would not launch again until scientists had determined how well the new water-based adhesive would function under extreme heat. NASA had discontinued the adhesive used previously on the rocket boosters, because the adhesive was an ozone-depleting agent.(William Harwood, “Record Shuttle Flight Ends; Problem May Delay Next Launch,” Washington Post, 8 July 1996; Associated Press, “Columbia Ends 17-Day Mission,” 8 July 1996.)
 NASA announced the recipients of the 1996 Software of the Year Award, honoring those individuals who had created software enhancing NASA’s mission and the U.S. aerospace industry. Linked Windows Interactive Data System, developed by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and the Tetrahedral Unstructured Software System, developed by LARC, won the 1996 awards. The former system allowed scientists to examine geophysical and climatological data gathered from satellites, and the latter aided researchers in studying problems with “spacecraft, rotorcraft, automotive, turbomachinery, and medical analysis and design.”(NASA, “NASA Announces 1996 Software of the Year Award Recipients,” news release, 9 July 1996.)
 NASA announced the six-week delay of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid’s return from her outpost aboard the Mir space station. NASA made the schedule change because of concerns about the reliability of the joint sealant used on the Shuttle’s reusable rocket boosters during the June launch of Columbia. NASA planned to replace the booster before launching Atlantis, scheduled to retrieve Lucid. The reusable rocket boosters, packed with fuel, launch the Shuttle. After pushing the Shuttle into space, the boosters fall off and descend, attached to parachutes, into the ocean. Upon retrieving the rocket boosters, engineers disassemble them into smaller pieces, repack them with fuel, and rebuild them for a new Shuttle launch, sealing each of the rocket’s three field joints with an O-ring. NASA sought to fortify these joints further, and the adhesive used to secure them, before launching another Shuttle mission. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated that NASA remained confident in the overall design of the rocket booster and in the joint, but wanted to take no avoidable risks.(William J. Broad, “Astronaut’s Ride Home Is Delayed for 6 Weeks,” New York Times, 13 July 1996.)
 Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid established a new American record for the longest space mission. Lucid conducted a news conference from the Mir space station marking her record of 115 days and 44 minutes, which eclipsed the record of her predecessor aboard Mir, Norman E. Thagard. With the changed date for the rendezvous between Shuttle Atlantis and Mir, NASA predicted that Lucid would also break the record number of 170 days spent by a woman in space.(NASA, “Shannon Lucid Breaks a Record; The 20th Anniversary of the Viking Mission to Mars,” video advisory V96-84, 15 July 1996; Associated Press, “With One Record Down, She’s Still Up,” 16 July 1996.)
 NASA named the crew members for Mission STS-84, the sixth scheduled docking mission between the Space Shuttle and Russia’s Mir space station. NASA selected Charles J. Precourt as Mission Commander and Eileen M. Collins as Shuttle Pilot, with Mission Specialists Edward T. Lu and Carlos I. Noriega and European Space Agency astronaut Jean-François Clervoy rounding out the crew. The scheduled Atlantis mission also included Mission Specialist C. Michael Foale, who planned to stay on Mir for four months.(NASA, “Crew Named to Sixth Shuttle–Mir Docking Mission,” news release 96-139, 15 July 1996.)
 NASA released new images of Io, one of Jupiter’s moons, obtained by the Galileo spacecraft. Michael J. S. Belton of the National Optical Astronomical Observatories pointed out that radical changes had occurred on the moon during the 17 years between Galileo and the first observation of Io, via the Voyager spacecraft in 1979. According to Belton, active volcanoes had altered the color of the moon’s surface, forming deposits of sulfur and sulfur dioxide that painted the surface white.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Big Changes on Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon Io,” news release 96-143, 18 July 1996.)
 NASA commemorated the 20th anniversary of Viking 1’s landing on Mars, the first time that a spacecraft had successfully descended to the surface of the planet. NASA marked the occasion with an address from Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and the celebration of Mars Day at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Viking 1 had searched for life on Mars, but at the end of its quest, scientists had found no evidence of life on Mars. As it celebrated its accomplishments, NASA continued its efforts to learn more about Mars throughout its 20th anniversary year, with the development of Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Pathfinder.(NASA, “Activities Planned To Commemorate 20th Anniversary of First Mars Landing,” news release 96-141, 15 July 1996.)
 While constructing a piping trench, two surveyors at NASA’s LARC located the fossil remains of a 3.5 million-year-old, 30-foot (9-meter) baleen whale. The workers found the whale’s skull, tympanic bulla, vertebrae, and rib fragments. Langley loaned the remains to the nearby College of William and Mary. Gerald H. Johnson, a geologist at the College of William and Mary, suggested that the discovery provided a clue to the history of the Langley site, indicating that the Atlantic shoreline probably used to be located 30−40 miles (48−64 kilometers) west of its present location.(NASA, “Ancient Whale Surfaces at NASA Langley,” news release 96-145, 22 July 1996.)
 As Congress prepared to vote on NASA’s budget, Thomas J. Shulz of the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) testified before a U.S. Senate committee that NASA would likely exceed its projected budget for constructing the International Space Station (ISS) and making it operational. NASA refuted the claim. GAO’s report suggested that NASA had made unrealistic cost estimates and that its system to monitor costs and schedule was inadequate. The report also outlined GAO’s concerns about Russia’s continued commitment to the ISS endeavor. Shulz testified that “in a worst-case situation, these issues could threaten the future of the program, especially if they result in significantly higher cost estimates and substantial schedule delays.” NASA’s spokesperson on the issue Wilbur C. Trafton defended NASA’s projected budget and its relationship with Russia. Trafton pointed out that Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had procured a new agreement during a July meeting in Russia, indicating the solidity of the partnership between the United States and Russia. GAO’s critique occurred against the backdrop of the continuing quest during the mid-1990s to make NASA more cost effective.(William E. Clayton Jr., “GAO Criticizes NASA’s Estimate on Cost of Building Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 25 July 1996; Larry Wheeler, “Report: NASA Budget Much Too Rosy,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 July 1996.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Jeremiah F. Creedon as Director of LARC. Creedon succeeded Paul F. Holloway, who had served for 36 years at LARC. With this appointment, Creedon moved up from his position as LARC’s Director of the Airframe Systems Program Office to return to the research center where he had begun his engineering career 33 years earlier. During his career at NASA, Creedon had received the Presidential Rank of Meritorious Executive in the Senior Executive Service, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, and the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive in Senior Executive Service.(NASA, “Dr. Jeremiah Creedon Named Director, Langley Research Center,” news release 96-152, 31 July 1996.)
 The Boeing Company announced that it had purchased most of the aerospace and defense holdings of its competitor Rockwell International Corporation. The US$3 billion deal restructured the two companies in drastically different ways, permitting Boeing to increase significantly its potential to win government aerospace contracts, while Rockwell International turned its attention to the lucrative commercial market in automation. Whereas Boeing solidified its established dominance in the commercial jetliner construction business, Rockwell left behind its signature industry⎯the company had been nearly synonymous with NASA’s piloted space program. However, in the face of dwindling government contracts, Rockwell had been concentrating for years on developing its commercial product lines. Although the merger was not a surprise, the sale of the company responsible for engineering the Apollo spacecraft and the B-(NASA, “NASA Headquarters Regroups After Longest Federal Shutdown,” HQ Bulletin, 5 February 1996; John Makeio, “Federal Employees Face Backlog Here,” Houston Chronicle, 9 January 1996.)
 bombers marked the end of an era in the aerospace industry. The Wall Street Journal estimated that Boeing’s share of aerospace and defense revenues would increase to US$8−9 billion annually.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Acquire Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Units,” news release, 1 August 1996; NASA, “NASA Comment on Boeing Corporation Acquisition of Rockwell Aerospace and Defense Businesses,” news release N96-51, 1 August 1996; Associated Press, “Boeing To Buy Rockwell International’s Aerospace Holdings,” 1 August 1996; James F. Peltz, “Rockwell To Sell Space and Defense Divisions to Boeing,” Los Angeles Times, 2 August 1996; Jeff Cole and Steven Lipin, “Boeing Deal Will Strengthen Company,” Wall Street Journal, 2 August 1996.)
 NASA scientist Jay R. Hermon published an article in Geophysical Research Letters, claiming that he had used NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer spacecraft to demonstrate the dramatic increase, between 1979 and 1992, of solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation reaching the Earth’s surface. The article, “UV-B Increases (1979−1992) from Decreases in Total Ozone,” explained that the ozone necessary to protect the Earth from the Sun’s harmful UV rays was declining. Herman found that annual UV-B exposure had increased 6.8 percent per decade at 55o north latitude and 9.9 percent per decade at 55o south latitude. Both latitudes had significant population centers that emitted harmful emissions destructive to the ozone layer.(J. R. Herman et al., “UV-B Increases (1979−1992) from Decreases in Total Ozone,” Geophysical Research Letters 23, no. 16 (1996): 2117−2120; NASA, “Surface Ultraviolet Radiation Levels Have Increased from 1979 to 1992,” news release 96-153, 1 August 1996.)
 NASA and the U.S. Air Force unveiled to the public an “intelligent” aircraft, using a computerized system to “learn as it flies.” Researchers had engineered the hypersonic aircraft to take inventory of flight maneuvers performed while operating under remote control, eventually using its acquired knowledge to develop the capability to fly itself. According to the flight researchers, the aircraft’s control system would create a continually altering set of “control laws,” to optimize flight performance. After the aircraft had perfected its system, it could assist pilots in performing such tasks as landing partially damaged planes. The intelligent aircraft could also enable flight at speeds and altitudes that human pilots could hardly ever achieve, while still maintaining adequate control of an aircraft.(NASA, “Intelligent Test Aircraft Unveiled in Wisconsin Today,” news release 96-154, 2 August 1996.)
 NASA convened a five-member investigation board to determine the cause of the postlanding explosion of the Clipper Graham (DC-XA) rocket on 31 July 1996. The Clipper Graham had successfully flown a 2-minute, 20-second flight profile, but had tipped over and caught fire after landing when one of its four landing gears failed to deploy. The DC-XA had tested successfully three times before the explosion destroyed it. Former astronaut Vance Brand chaired the panel, bringing together representatives from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center, Marshall Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Kennedy Space Center. Researchers hoped the investigation would illuminate any flaws in the Clipper Graham’s design, allowing engineers to make necessary adjustments in future prototypes.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Investigation Board Convenes,” news release 96-158, 5 August 1996.)
 NASA reported that a team of scientists from Johnson Space Center and Stanford University had found evidence that “strongly suggested” that primitive life existed on the planet Mars. During a two-year study, the researchers discovered what they believed to be organic molecules of Martian origin on a potato-sized meteorite, which members of the National Science Foundation’s Antarctica Meteorite Program had found in 1984. Scientists estimated that the meteorite was about 4.5 billion years old. According to the team’s report, published in Science magazine, the remnants on the meteorite shared several mineral characteristics indicating biological activity, possibly even containing microscopic fossils of primitive, bacteria-like organisms. The minute scale of the evidence required the careful research of the team of specialists in the fields of microbiology, mineralogy, and chemistry. The largest of the possible fossils measured about 1/100th the diameter of a human hair. Only with recently developed technological instruments, including a dual-laser mass spectrometer, were the scientists able to make any substantial observations.112 The announcement generated immediate excitement in the scientific community and in the mass media, although some scientists responded with a multitude of critical questions. The researchers carefully qualified their report, stating, “It is very difficult to prove life existed 3.6 billion years ago on Earth, let alone on Mars.”113 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin pledged to make samples of the meteorite available to scientists throughout the world, to encourage a full scientific investigation.(McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars,” 924–930; NASA, “Meteorite Yields Evidence”; Sawyer, “NASA Releases Images.”)
 NASA released images from its Galileo spacecraft, indicating that water might have existed on Jupiter’s moon Europa in the past, or might still exist there. According to scientists studying the images, Europa may have “warm ice” on its surface. Finding such ice would help scientists determine whether Europa’s climate could support life. “What we are really looking for is niches that could support life,” Ronald Greeley, a Galileo team scientist clarified, at a press briefing releasing the images. At first glance, the pictures, shot from a distance of about 95,700 miles (154,000 kilometers), seemed to depict a series of white stripes stretched across Europa’s landscape. However, the stripes were actually ice glaciers, long of interest to scientists. Researchers had long suspected that Europa might be one of the places in the universe possessing water and, therefore, an environment that could support life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin expressed “skeptical optimism” at the Europa findings and urged the scientific community to examine the pictures further, in a tempered reaction similar to his stance regarding the discovery, one week earlier, of microbiological evidence of life on Mars.(NASA, “Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Release of New Galileo Spacecraft Images of Europa,” news release 96-166, 13 August 1996; Reuters, “Galileo Hints at Water on Europa,” 14 August 1996; NASA, “Jupiter’s Europa Harbors Possible ‘Warm Ice’ or Liquid Water,” news release 96-164, 13 August 1996; Kathy Sawyer, “Jupiter Moon May Contain Ice Floes, Sea,” Washington Post, 14 August 1996.)
 The Russian spacecraft Soyuz TM-24 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri and the first female French astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. The crew of Soyuz planned to resupply Mir’s long-term crew.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 514, 25 August 1996, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx514.html (accessed 29 July 2008); Milwaukee Journal Sentinel (WI), “Russian Spaceship Heads for Space Station,” 18 August 1996.)
 The Russian Soyuz TM-24, which launched on 17 August, arrived at Mir, carrying France’s first female astronaut, Claudie André-Deshays. André-Deshays, a rheumatologist, joined Russian cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri on the flight from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. She planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the human body during her stay aboard Mir. The crew of Soyuz joined Shannon W. Lucid, the American astronaut who had been aboard the Russian space station since March. Reporting the safe arrival of André-Deshays at Mir, the head of France’s space program also announced that France would likely end its short-term space missions conducted aboard Russian vehicles. France intended to focus on longer, less frequent missions, facilitating more detailed research programs. The change in policy went into effect immediately, with France canceling two French-Russian missions planned for 1998 and 1999.(Craig Covault and Pierre Sparaco, “French Astronaut Joins Russian/U.S. Mir Crew,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 69; Associated Press, “Russian Spaceship Docks with Orbiting Station,” 19 August 1996; Associated Press, “Fifth Joint French-Russian Mission May Be Last, Official Says,” 19 August 1996.)
 NASA launched its Fast Auroral Snapshot (FAST) Explorer from a test range near Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Engineers had designed the FAST vehicle to travel about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers) above Earth, measuring energetic particles, and magnetic and electric fields, at high altitudes where auroras form, to explore the “physical processes that produce aurora borealis and aurora australis.” NASA’s Small Explorer Project, tasked with providing frequent and low-cost research missions for astrophysics investigations, had carried out the FAST mission as the second in a series of five missions.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “FAST Status Report #1: Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release, 21 August 1996; Bruce Smith, “Fast Launched Successfully,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 71.)
 NASA’s analysts at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), who had investigated the causes of the Challenger explosion, joined the probe into the crash of TWA flight 800, which exploded near Long Island, New York, on 17 July 1996. NASA offered the services of its MSFC investigative team to analyze why the center fuel tank of the Boeing 747 had exploded. Officials from the National Transportation Safety Board led the investigation, with support from a variety of other agencies, including NASA, the U.S. Navy, and the FBI.(Robert Davis, “Challenger Experts Aid in TWA Probe,” USA Today, 23 August 1996; Eric Malnic, “Experts at NASA Join Probe of TWA Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 23 August 1996.)
 The Galileo spacecraft lost some of its collected data when a problem with one of its computer processors caused a shutdown of nonessential systems. Project Manager William J. O’Neil said that much of the lost data was of little consequence to researchers, but that data from Galileo’s continuous study of Jupiter’s magnetic field had suffered a significant loss, creating an information gap of about one week. The episode, which occurred in the midst of NASA’s string of impressive research achievements, highlighted the difficulty of directing a data-gathering probe thousands of miles from Earth’s surface.(Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft in Orbit Around Jupiter Loses Data,” Washington Post, 27 August 1996; Associated Press, “Computer Error on Spacecraft Exploring Jupiter,” 28 August 1996. See also Michael Meltzer, Mission to Jupiter: A History of the Galileo Project (Washington, DC: NASA, 2007).)
 NASA and Orbital Sciences Corporation signed a contract, which was not a cooperative agreement, whereby Orbital Sciences would build a new X-34 reusable launch vehicle, smaller than that originally planned. NASA had first made public the original X-34 program in 1994. NASA had intended the program, also known as the Reusable Small Booster Program, to stimulate the development of a reusable commercial launch vehicle to place smaller payloads in low orbit. In addition, NASA planned for the X-34 program to demonstrate that an industry-led partnership between NASA and the aerospace industry could accomplish this objective within 30 to 36 months and within a fixed government budget. On 12 January 1995, NASA released a final cooperative agreement notice for the X-34 program, and in March 1995, NASA selected Orbital Sciences Corporation as its industry partner. Over the next eight months, as design of the X-34 progressed, problems arose over the selection of an appropriate rocket engine, resulting in NASA’s temporarily shutting down the program on 2 November 1995. In January 1996, Orbital Sciences Corporation suggested that NASA explore the potential of a smaller vehicle. Orbital Sciences then issued stop-work orders to all its X-34 subcontractors, effectively ending the program. Because NASA wanted to use remaining federal dollars to develop a smaller vehicle, capable of demonstrating various reusable launch technologies, it rebid the contract in March 1996. On 10 June 1996, NASA selected Orbital Sciences to build the new X-34.(NASA History Division, “X-33 History Project, Fact Sheet #7: The Policy Origins of the X-33, Part VII: The X- 34,” March 25, 2000, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/pao/History/x-33/facts_7.htm.)
 More than 200 experts met in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to plan the design and implementation of a new fleet of radar satellites. The group emphasized the recent geological discoveries made with data from radar satellites, especially from those satellites tracking the movements and shifts in Earth’s plates that have been impossible to track until recently. The U.S. Geological Survey and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory sponsored the event. Geophysicist Howard A. Zebker described the satellites as a “great leap forward. It’s like suddenly having [x]-rays to see inside a body.”(William J. Broad, “Satellite Radar Unveils Subtle, Slow Wrinkling of the Planet’s Surface,” New York Times, 3 September 1996.)
 Hurricane Fran delayed the launch of Shuttle Atlantis. NASA managers decided to move the Shuttle off the launchpad when it became clear that the hurricane’s path lay through the southeast region of the United States. Because of the slow rollback of the vehicle from the launchpad to the assembly building, managers determined that they would not be able to meet the scheduled 14 September departure date.(NASA, “Atlantis Moved to VAB; STS-79 Delayed,” launch advisory 96-181, 4 September 1996.)
 Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope identified 18 star clusters that they believed to be embryonic galaxies. According to the New York Times, because the clusters resided 11 billion light-years from Earth, essentially, the scientists had glimpsed back in time. The observations supported a theory that galaxies begin with stars grouping together. The astronomers from Arizona State University and the University of Alabama called the discovery “the first page in an otherwise blank book.”(Lee Bowman, “Possible View of Galaxies Being Born,” Washington Times, 5 September 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Looking Back 11 Billion Light-Years, a Glimpse at Galaxy Birth,” New York Times, 5 September 1996. 125 NASA, “Lopez-Alegria To Replace Lawrence as NASA Manager to Russia,” news release 96-182, 5 September 1996.)
 NASA named astronaut Michael Lopez-Alegria to replace astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as NASA’s Director of Operations at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in Star City, Russia. The job of the director was to coordinate the training of U.S. astronauts headed for the Mir space station and to act as liaison between NASA and the Russian Space Agency.
 NASA awarded grants to fund 19 studies that researchers had proposed in response to a NASA research announcement. NASA awarded a total of US$2.9 million for the studies, which focused on innovative mission concepts in space physics. NASA expected most of the studies to last one or two years and to cost about US$100,000 each year. NASA planned to use the studies in forming its space science strategic plan and in considering future missions.(NASA, “NASA Selects 19 Innovative Space Physics Mission Concepts,” news release 96-184, 6 September 1996.)
 Because of delays in launching Shuttle Atlantis, astronaut Shannon W. Lucid broke Elena V. Kondakova’s record for longest single flight in space by a woman. NASA engineers had delayed the launch because they suspected that the O-rings on the solid rocket boosters were faulty and wanted to replace them. During Lucid’s stay in space aboard Mir, she and the two Russian cosmonauts had conducted a variety of scientific experiments.(NASA, “Lucid To Break Record; Latest Images of Hurricane Fran,” video advisory V96-111, 6 September 1996.)
 NASA announced that engineers from NASA and Lockheed Martin had completed successful tests on a prototype, lightweight, external fuel tank for the Shuttle. The tests measured the tank’s strength and reliability under conditions exceeding recommended flight certification. NASA’s External Tank Project Manager Parker V. Counts reported that the tests had demonstrated that the unique composition of the very lightweight tanks did not reduce their strength. NASA had awarded Lockheed Martin the contract to produce the lighter tanks, to enable the Shuttle to carry cargo to the high inclination orbit where the International Space Station (ISS) would reside. To build the tanks, NASA had used aluminum lithium, a material both lighter and stronger than the metal alloy used in previous tank construction. NASA had designed the tanks to weigh 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) less than the models used on earlier Shuttles.(NASA, “Shuttle Super Lightweight Fuel Tank Completes Tests,” news release 96-186, 11 September 1996. 129 NASA, “First Global Image of Total Atmospheric Ozone Obtained from NASA Instrument Aboard Japanese Satellite,” news release 96-188, 16 September 1996.)
 Scientists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) received the first images from the United States’ Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS), as the instrument orbited aboard the Japanese Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS). GSFC scientists noted the superior quality of the initial images. ADEOS continued a long line of satellites launched to aid scientists in observing total levels of ozone and volcanic sulfur dioxide. Because of data obtained from the TOMS instruments deployed by NASA, millions of Americans became aware of the ozone hole and began to use ozone as a household word. The latest TOMS instrument joined a series of instruments aboard ADEOS, including the Improved Limb Atmospheric Sounder, the Interferometric Monitor for Greenhouse Gases, and the Retroreflector in Space.
 In Marshall Space Flight Center’s (MSFC’s) underwater weightless simulator, NASA began testing a remotely controlled robot created by a team of researchers from the University of Maryland. Team leaders nicknamed the robot Ranger, predicting that it would one day assist astronauts aboard the Shuttle or the ISS. Project Manager Joseph Parrish pointed out that astronauts often use valuable spacewalk time completing mundane tasks, such as collecting tools, establishing footholds, and cleaning up. Scientists hoped Ranger could perform such tasks under the command of an operator located in space or even that of an operator at NASA’s command center. The 8-foot-long (2.4-meter-long), 1,700-pound (770-kilogram) robot used gas thrusters, robotic arms, lights, and cameras. The academic project filled a void in experimental robot design, a program affected by NASA’s budget cuts. Allowing university researchers and professors to design and test the robot cost NASA about US$8 million, far less than NASA would pay for similar projects contracted through an aerospace firm. During the tests, the University of Maryland’s team operated Ranger remotely from its campus hundreds of miles away from MSFC’s facility in Huntsville, Alabama.(Martin Burkey, “Ranger Gets a Workout,” Huntsville Times (AL), 13 September 1996.)
 Shuttle Atlantis launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Hurricane Fran had delayed the launch and the subsequent Shuttle–Mir rendezvous. The mission was the fourth Mir docking mission for a U.S. Space Shuttle. William F. Readdy commanded the six-astronaut crew aboard Atlantis, including Pilot Terrence W. Wilcutt and Mission Specialists Jay Apt, Thomas D. Akers, Carl E. Walz, and John E. Blaha. During Mission STS-79, the Shuttle crew planned to retrieve astronaut Shannon W. Lucid from Mir, leaving astronaut John Blaha as her replacement. The Shuttle carried 4,600 pounds (2,090 kilograms) of supplies to Mir. Mission STS-79, the 17th flight of Shuttle Atlantis, entailed the largest transfer of supplies ever made to Mir.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-79—Press Kit,” news release 96-179, September 1996; William Harwood, “Shuttle Arrives for Astronaut’s Long-Awaited Pickup,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996.)
 The White House released a new national space policy, the first such directive since the Cold War. White House policy advisors constructed the plan over an 18-month period, amidst government-wide calls for tightening NASA’s budget. The policy statement called for controlling costs by using private-sector industry to build, develop, and operate selected space technologies. The directive also advocated drawing together civilian and military space activities, and forging closer ties with foreign countries conducting space research. The Clinton administration reversed several decisions of President George H. W. Bush, most noticeably the former President’s call to land an astronaut on Mars. Space experts called the initiative too costly and dangerous. Instead, the Clinton plan relied on robots to explore Mars and targeted the ISS as the hub of human-based space exploration, as well as enshrining the “faster, better, cheaper” mantra of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. Congress planned to hold a funding summit in the months following the release of the policy, to bring together key political, military, and science officials.(Kathy Sawyer, “White House Releasing New National Space Policy,” Washington Post, 19 September 1996; Associated Press, “Space Policy,” 19 September 1996; The White House National Science and Technology Council, “Fact Sheet: National Space Policy,” 19 September 1996, http://history.nasa.gov/appf2.pdf.)
 Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid returned to Earth after her record-setting space sojourn on Russia’s Mir space station. Space Shuttle Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, delivering Lucid home to a celebration honoring her 188 days spent in space, most of it aboard Mir. During her mission, Lucid had traveled 75 million miles (121 million kilometers), the equivalent of 157 trips to the Moon and back. Doctors stood by to greet the Shuttle, expecting Lucid to experience some muscle weakness as her body re-accustomed itself to the effects of gravity. President William J. Clinton called to congratulate Lucid, saying, “We are all so proud of you.”(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 26 September 1996; Associated Press, “Remarks by President Clinton in Conversation with Astronaut Lucid,” 26 September 1996; United Press International, “Lucid’s Six-Month Mission Ends,” 26 September 1996.)
 During a top-level meeting between officials of the United States and Russia, NASA made public a shift in its policy, announcing that U.S. astronauts would not always have command aboard the ISS. In a compromise meant to encourage Russia to build its portion of the station, NASA conceded that astronauts from other countries would have the opportunity to command the ISS for significant periods.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Command of Space Station Will Be Shared by Other Nations,” 28 September 1996.)
 Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) at Edwards Air Force Base in California commemorated its 50th anniversary with a celebration called Discovery Through Flight Research. The Center got its start when five aeronautical engineers from Langley Research Center arrived to explore flight beyond the speed of sound, in preparation for the X-1 tests, featuring pilot Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager at the controls. Researchers at DFRC contributed to a wide variety of aeronautical achievements, including breaking the sound barrier and helping launch the Space Shuttle program. At the age of 50, DFRC employed 900 government and civilian contractor employees.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Marks Half-Century of Achievements,” 25 September 1996. 136 Associated Press, “Ancient Spacecraft,” 1 October 1996.)
 With the push of a button at GSFC, NASA discontinued use of the International Ultraviolet Explorer satellite, which had been in orbit since 1978. When NASA sent a signal to the satellite to empty its fuel, the satellite effectively went to sleep, spinning off into space. Although NASA had originally designed the satellite to spend only three years in space, scientists continued to use it to gather data far beyond the spacecraft’s anticipated lifespan. NASA ended control of the satellite to save between US$1 and US$2 million annually in operating costs. GSFC had operated the satellite as part of a three-way agreement with the European Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom. More than 2,000 researchers from around the world had made observations from the satellite, research that had directly led to the publication of more than 3,200 papers in peer-reviewed scientific journals.
 United Space Alliance (USA), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin Corporation and Rockwell International, took over daily operations of NASA’s Space Shuttle fleet. NASA had previously used private contractors. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin marked the occasion as “the first day of a new space program in America.” Financial experts forecast that the government-private industry pact might be worth as much as US$12 billion by the end of its 10-year venture. According to the agreement, USA shouldered the responsibility for the 12 Shuttle-related contracts carried out at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, and Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. NASA stated that USA might take over additional tasks in the future. NASA had decided to consolidate the Shuttle operations with USA to improve cost efficiency, a vital step in light of congressional budget cuts. Kent Black, the CEO of USA, predicted that the move would save NASA as much as 20 percent of its operating budget for the Shuttle in the first year of the contract alone. Even with the turnover, NASA maintained complete control over planning Shuttle missions, selecting astronauts, and approving launches of the Shuttle. NASA planned to take on an oversight role similar to that of the Federal Aviation Administration, rewarding USA with bonuses for savings and imposing monetary penalties if the company failed to achieve “very good” safety ratings.(Associated Press, “NASA Turns Shuttle Operations Over to Private Industry,” 30 Sept 1996; Reuters, “NASA Signs $7 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 30 September 1996; United Press International, “NASA signs $12 Billion Shuttle Pact,” 1 October 1996.)
 NASA introduced a new technology with the potential to make much smaller and more efficient electronic devices: the Thin-Layer Composite-Unimorph Piezoelectric Driver and Sensor (THUNDER). Researchers at Langley Research Center (LARC) recognized the potential of piezoelectric material, because of its well-known capability to generate movement when subjected to an electric current. NASA hoped that the THUNDER technology would improve devices in “electronics, optics, jitter (irregular motion) suppression, noise cancellation, pumps, valves and a variety of other fields.” LARC’s interdisciplinary team had improved upon already available commercial-grade piezoelectric material, producing a more durable, cheaper, and more effective product. R&D Magazine announced that it would honor THUNDER as one of its top 100 most technologically significant new products of the year. Six companies signed agreements with NASA to develop THUNDER, and a dozen other companies expressed interest in negotiating similar pacts.(NASA, “NASA Rolls Out Award-Winning ‘Thunder’,” news release 96-197, 1 October 1996.)
 China announced it would participate in an international collaborative space research project for the first time in its history. Chinese scientists planned to assist their colleagues from Russia and the United States in the future Discovery mission. Although China had no plans to send an astronaut on the Shuttle, Chinese aerospace engineers volunteered to construct the sophisticated magnets needed to build a magnetic spectrometer. The project was the first time the usually secretive Chinese space science program had opened itself to outside scrutiny.(United Press International, “China To Assist U.S. Space Program,” 3 October 1996.)
 NASA discovered the second of two misplaced hand tools left inside the propulsion system of the recently landed Shuttle Atlantis. Although the Shuttle had experienced no problems during its 10-day flight, NASA formed an investigative panel to determine who had left the tools inside the Shuttle’s engine compartment after completing work. Inspectors had discovered the first missing tool inside the electronic control compartment of the Shuttle’s reusable rocket booster when they retrieved the booster from the Atlantic Ocean shortly after the launch. Workers discovered the second tool during a routine postflight inspection of Atlantis’s rocket engine compartment. Although the tools likely posed no threat to the safety of the Shuttle crew, a NASA representative said that, for safety reasons, NASA intended to find out how workers had made the error and, if possible, to identify the Shuttle contractor responsible.(Mark Carreau, “Another Wrenching Experience for Shuttle,” Houston Chronicle, 3 October 1996.)
 President William J. Clinton signed legislation ending funding for the federal helium reserve. The United States, through the Bureau of Mines, had bought and stockpiled helium since the 1960s⎯expending more than US$250 million. Experts estimated that the U.S. government’s helium reserve could supply the world for more than 10 years and the federal government for 80. The legislation to end the reserve, spearheaded by U.S. Representative Christopher Cox (R-CA), closed down the helium facility outside Amarillo, Texas. NASA planned to sell the helium slowly, over a period of 18 years, so that the sales would not destabilize the worldwide helium market. The closure had the potential to affect NASA, the federal government’s largest user of helium. At the time of the reserve’s closure, NASA was using about 70 million cubic feet (2 million cubic meters) of helium annually to pressurize Shuttle fuel tanks, among other uses.(Associated Press, “Clinton Signs Law Killing Federal Helium Reserves,” 9 October 1996.)
 NASA researchers at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) completed the testing of the F- 16XL at Edwards Air Force Base. The tests had taken more than one year to complete. Scientists were studying how the modified F-16 flew with US$14 million laminar-flow gloves on its wings. The data they collected demonstrated that the glove had reduced the turbulent layer of air that passes over an airplane’s wing during flight. Project Manager Carol A. Reukauf called the tests successful. NASA hoped the results would provide manufacturers with a new technology that would improve aeronautical design, decreasing air drag on airplanes and, consequently, reducing the fuel required to fly.(Jay Levine, “Laminar Flow Tests Successful,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 10 October 1996. 143 NASA, “The X-Planes: 50 Years of High Desert ‘Right Stuff’,” news release 96-204, 10 October 1996. 144 Reuters, “Russia Postpones Mir Supply Rocket Mission,” 16 October 1996.)
 NASA marked the 50-year anniversary of the Bell X-1 aircraft’s first flight, which took place at the site of Edwards Air Force Base, home of NASA’s DFRC. According to Jay Miller, the author of The X-Planes: X-1 to X-33, the X-1 had given flight researchers and engineers their first full- scale tool to study transonic aerodynamics. The Bell Aircraft Corporation, the U.S. Army Air Forces (predecessor of the U.S. Air Force), and NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, had collaborated to get the first test plane off the ground. The X-1 test not only provided aeronautical data, but also pioneered the test methods later adopted by DFRC flight researchers.
 Russia postponed the scheduled launch of Progress M-33, a cargo vehicle loaded with supplies for the two Russian cosmonauts and the one American astronaut aboard the Mir space station. The delay highlighted once again the severe budget crisis of the Russian Space Agency. A lack of funding held up the production of the rocket booster needed to send the craft into space. The crew on Mir had sufficient supplies aboard the space station, but missed the visit from Earth. Besides supplying food, regular planned visits provided needed contact for the space dwellers. The postponement was the fourth time in 1996 that Russia had delayed the scheduled launch to Mir because of problems paying for the production of Soyuz-U boosters. Reuters announced that because of the delay, a group of laboratory monkeys, already wired to monitor the effects of space travel, would die without ever leaving Earth.
 NASA announced the completion of a major benchmark in the development of its Advanced X- ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as engineers completed the delicate task of assembling the high-resolution, cylindrical mirrors needed for the facility’s telescope. Engineers aligned and cemented the mirrors into place at the facility in Rochester, New York. Unlike optical telescopes, the AXAF used a series of shallow mirrors shaped like cylindrical cones to produce its image. AXAF’s mirrors were the largest set of such mirrors ever constructed.(NASA, “Completion of Mirror Assembly Marks Milestone for NASA’s Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility,” news release 96-212, 18 October 1996.)
 For the first time in its 30-year history, KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, welcomed the public for an open house. Nearly 40,000 visitors came to KSC for the occasion. NASA allowed visitors to drive directly down the road used by the astronauts and up to Shuttle Columbia, sitting on the launchpad. Many visitors commented on how worn the Shuttle looked, after its many launches and reentries. The details of the Shuttle’s appearance were not visible to viewers watching the Shuttle on television. NASA officials also opened the Vehicle Assembly Building, one of the largest structures in the world. Astronauts were available to greet the public.(Reuters, “Kennedy Space Center Opens Doors to Fans,” 21 October 1996.)
 NASA announced the retirement of Jay F. Honeycutt, Director of KSC. A search for Honeycutt’s successor began immediately following the announcement. Honeycutt had joined NASA in 1966 after working as an engineer for Redstone Arsenal. He had begun as an engineer in flight operations and had worked at JSC, later training Apollo astronauts for the lunar landings, and had moved to NASA Headquarters in 1981. Honeycutt had transferred to KSC in 1989 as Director of Shuttle Management and Operations and had become Director of KSC in 1995. Honeycutt had won two Exceptional Service Medals, the Special Achievement Award, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, NASA’s Equal Employment Opportunity Award, and the Meritorious Executive Presidential Rank Award.(NASA, “KSC Director Jay Honeycutt To Retire,” news release 96-215, 22 October 1996.)
 DFRC test pilot Edward T. Schneider received the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Chanute Flight Test Award for his work testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle at extremely high angles of attack. The Institute honored Schneider at the World Aviation Congress and Exposition, held in Los Angeles, California. Schneider had participated in NASA’s Attack Research Program, meant to improve the control and maneuverability of high- performance aircraft. He tested the thrust-vectoring control system installed in the F-18, which allowed pilots to make high-angle motions and still maintain control of their planes. Schneider spent nine years testing the F-18 High Alpha Research Vehicle during his distinguished 18-year career as a test pilot. Schneider had received NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal in 1996.(Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), “Dryden Pilot Receives Flying Award,” 25 October 1996, http://www.nasa.gov/lb/centers/dryden/news/Biographies/Pilots/bd-dfrc-p014.html (accessed 5 August 2007).)
 A NASA research team published in the Journal of Geophysical Research its findings on urban- like pollution over the tropical South Atlantic Ocean. The team used data gathered from an experiment called the Transport and Chemistry near the Equator of the Atlantic (TRACE-A), conducted with the Brazilian Space Agency and scientists from South Africa. The scientists suspected that the high concentrations of ozone, like those found in densely populated urban areas, resulted from seasonal burnings in South America and Africa. According to the NASA researchers, the presence of pollution over the tropical ocean confirmed that humans had extended their negative impact on “traditionally pristine air” far beyond reaches directly above land. According to one researcher, the results of TRACE-A greatly improved the scientific community’s understanding of the atmospheric chemistry of the Southern Hemisphere.(NASA, “NASA Team Finds Urban-Like Pollution in Tropical South Atlantic,” news release 96-220, 30 October 1996.)
 NASA released images taken with the Hubble Space Telescope, revealing a dust storm on Mars nearly the size of the state of Texas. The storm appeared in the pictures of the planet as a 600- mile-long (965-kilometer-long), salmon-colored patch. Scientists believed this was the first time that one of the huge storms had neared the planet’s northern polar ice cap.(Reuters, “Hubble Shows Texas-Size Dust Storm on Mars,” 4 November 1996.)
 A team of scientists from the United States, the United Kingdom, and Australia discovered new evidence that pushed back considerably the scientifically estimated date of the origin of life on Earth. The researchers projected that the Earth’s age might be 350 million years older than previously thought. The research team, led by Gustaf Arrhenius, published its findings in the 7 November issue of Nature. The scientists argued that the presence of apatite (basic calcium phosphate) in Earth’s oldest known sediment sequences suggested that life had emerged on Earth 3.85 billion years ago. The scientific community met these findings with both excitement and skepticism.(S. J. Mojzsis et al., “Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800 Million Years Ago,” Nature 384, no. 6604 (7 November 1996): 55; Malcolm W. Browne, “Evidence Puts Date for Life’s Origin Back Millions of Years,” New York Times, 7 November 1996.)
 NASA spacecraft managers reported the failure of two scientific satellites. NASA had designed the Scientific Applications Satellite-B (SAC-B), launched three days earlier from NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility, to survey solar flares and gamma-ray bursts. The project was a cooperative effort between NASA and Argentina. NASA scientists had intended the second satellite, HETE (High Energy Transient Experiment), to remain dormant until it detected sunlight, at which time it would deploy, transmitting signals. Scientists doubted this would ever occur, because the satellite had fallen into a tumbling pattern. Officials hypothesized that the satellites had not deployed properly and, therefore, had orbited uselessly, lacking electrical power. NASA valued both satellites at more than US$20 million. The launch failure was the third miscue in two years for the Pegasus rocket program. The Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, developed and ran the program.(John Mintz, “Orbital Sciences Fails in Another Launch,” Washington Post, 5 November 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Reports Failure of Scientific Satellites,” 7 November 1996; NASA, “SAC-B/HETE Spacecraft No Longer Operational,” news release 96-231, 7 November 1996.)
 NASA launched into space its unpiloted Mars Global Surveyor, the first in a series of missions to explore the Red Planet further. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission and vehicle embodied a shift in the United States’ approach to space exploration. With the expressed intent to make exploration as affordable and reliable as possible, NASA had developed the smaller Mars Global Surveyor, measuring 5 by 5 by 10 feet (1.5 by 1.5 by 3 meters) and designed to carry less fuel than Mars Observer. Mars Global Surveyor cost NASA US$150 million to develop, whereas Observer had cost nearly US$1 billion and had failed to reach Mars after its 1992 launch. Surveyor’s ability to function with less fuel than previous models heightened the chances that it would succeed in its mission. NASA predicted that after ascending to the desired 235-mile-high (378-kilometer-high) orbit, the robotic Global Surveyor would have to travel nearly halfway around the Sun before catching up with Mars in September 1997. The spacecraft would then begin mapping the Martian atmosphere and surface, a survey planned to last 687 days. Mission objectives included searching for evidence of life on Mars, gathering data about the Martian climate, learning more about the planet’s geology, and determining what resources were necessary to support future human missions to Mars. According to NASA, the search for water was the unifying theme of all missions to Mars. The Mars Global Surveyor Mission continued the exploration of Mars that NASA had begun with the Mariner and Viking missions of the 1960s and 1970s.(Associated Press, “Mars Probe Heads for Mapping,” 8 November 1996; Paul Hoversten, “Surveyor Sets Off for Mars,” USA Today, 8 November 1996; NASA, “1996 Mars Mission—Press Kit,” news release 96-207, November 1996.)
 In its annual contest, Popular Science magazine honored NASA’s experimental flight-control system as one of the best technological developments of 1996. NASA had installed the system, developed for the use of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, in a remotely piloted aircraft called LoFLYTE (Low Observable Flight Test Experiment). On board the aircraft, the system used techniques involving neural networks to “learn” to fly, actually acquiring flight skills by mimicking the actions of the pilot controlling the plane from the ground. Neural networks are systems that learn skills by doing them. Scientists hoped the technology might eventually have an impact on commercial and military aviation.(NASA, “Aircraft Flight-Control System Wins ‘Best of What’s New’,” news release 96-233, 12 November 1996. 155 David Colker, “Pilotless Test Plane Blown Up After It Veers Off Course,” Los Angeles Times, 13 November 1996; Jim Skeen, “Pilotless Aircraft Crashes at Edwards,” Antelope Valley News (Palmdale, CA), 13 November 1996.)
 A malfunction in an unpiloted test plane forced NASA officials to detonate the plane high above Edwards Air Force Base in California. The lightweight plane, dubbed Theseus, veered out of control during a routine test flight. Aurora Flight Systems had developed the US$5 million plane for long-term flights to observe climatic conditions from altitudes as high as 60,000 feet (18,300 kilometers). A spokesperson for Aurora indicated that the company had insufficient data to determine the cause of the failure. NASA had contracted with Aurora Flight Systems to develop the plane as part of its Mission to Planet Earth initiative. At the time of the forced detonation, NASA had not designated funds to develop any subsequent Theseus models.
 NASA appointed Samuel L. Venneri as Chief Technologist at NASA Headquarters, reporting directly to Administrator Daniel S. Goldin. The appointment placed Venneri in charge of all of NASA’s technology policy initiatives and programs. Venneri had served at NASA since 1981, after working as an aerospace consultant for Swales and Associates and as an engineer for Fairchild Space Electronics.(NASA, “Venneri Named NASA Chief Technology Officer,” news release 96-240, 15 November 1996.)
 A Russian nuclear-powered Mars probe crashed into the South Pacific Ocean, about 500 miles (800 kilometers) southeast of New Zealand. The U.S. Space Command, located in Colorado Springs, Colorado, monitored the descent of the disabled craft, but was unsure exactly when and where the probe had hit the ocean. Russian space scientists assured NASA that no danger of nuclear contamination existed. A handful of experts, however, cautioned that in an extremely unlikely, worst-case scenario, the impact could result in a small but lethal plutonium cloud. President Clinton, vacationing in Australia at the time, offered the services of U.S. teams trained to locate and recover stray nuclear materials. Russian officials believed that the probe, named Mars-96, had failed to reach orbit because of a malfunction during the fourth stage of the Proton- K rocket’s ascent. Mars-96 carried plutonium pellets the size of eraser heads, designed to withstand the pressures of entering Mars’s atmosphere. The probe’s failure was a setback for the international effort to explore Mars, as well as for the Russian space program. Donna L. Shirley of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the chief of the U.S. Mars effort, called the failure a “terrible, terrible tragedy” for researchers. Some people speculated that the crash would prompt a rebirth of protests against using nuclear materials in spacecraft.(Warren P. Strobel, “Russian’s Mars Probe Crashes,” Washington Times, 18 November 1996; Richard Boudreaux and K. C. Cole, “Failure of Mars Mission Called Scientific Tragedy,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 1996.)
 NASA officials confirmed that tense negotiations with Russia over the composition of the first crew to travel to the International Space Station (ISS) had resulted in Russia’s withdrawing one of its most senior and well-trained cosmonauts from consideration. NASA had selected U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the 1998 mission and veteran space traveler Anatoly Y. Solovyev to accompany Shepherd. Each country strongly insisted that its own astronaut lead the international venture. In a letter to Russian Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, Russian space officials stated, “Despite the Russian efforts to make experienced cosmonaut Solovyev the crew commander, the American side is [pre]emptorily insisting on the candidacy of American astronaut Shepherd.” Because the United States had insisted that Shepherd command the mission, Russian officials threatened that Russian Space Agency cosmonauts would not cooperate, claiming, “experienced Russian crew commanders doubt the expediency of their participation.” The standoff highlighted the diplomatic difficulty of holding together the international coalition necessary to construct the ISS.(Reuters, “Tug of War Knocks Cosmonaut off Crew,” 18 November 1996.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2:55 p.m. (EST). In addition to a five-day delay because of the weather, NASA had delayed the mission for a week so that its engineers could conduct a careful check of possible problems with the rocket nozzles. News agencies reported that the fifteen-year-old Columbia, the nation’s oldest Space Shuttle, was carrying into space sixty-one-year-old F. Story Musgrave, the oldest astronaut. With his sixth spaceflight, Musgrave became the first astronaut to fly on all five of NASA’s Shuttles. In Mission STS-80, NASA’s final Shuttle flight of 1996, the crew planned to deploy and retrieve two free-flying spacecraft, conduct spacewalks, and carry out a number of microgravity research experiments. Additionally, NASA and the National Institutes of Health planned to collaborate on tests further exploring how the human body reacts to the space environment. Only hours after Columbia’s launch, Shuttle crew released the U.S.-German Orbiting Retrievable Far and Extreme Ultraviolet Spectrometer, designed to make as many as 300 observations of stars and interstellar gas during the Shuttle’s mission.(Reuters, “Shuttle Crew with Oldest Astronaut Is Set To Fly,” 19 November 1996; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Mission with 2 Scientific Satellites,” New York Times, 20 November 1996; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-80—Press Kit,” news release 96-206, November 1996; Associated Press, “Astronauts Release Ultraviolet Telescope,” 20 November 1996.)
 The European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat) launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas 2A rocket, a satellite aimed at serving the burgeoning European television market. The satellite Hot Bird 2 cost US$100 million to develop and was powerful enough to beam television images throughout Europe and the Middle East. Eutelsat led a consortium of co-owner companies from the 45 different countries that co-own the satellite. Eutelsat assumed responsibility for operating Hot Bird 2, calling it “the most powerful commercial satellite launched to date.”(Todd Halverson, “Atlas Sends $100 Million Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 November 1996.)
 NASA returned the record-setting, solar-powered, research aircraft Pathfinder to flight-testing at Dryden Flight Research Center. Pathfinder had set an altitude record of more than 50,000 feet (15,000 meters) during a flight on 11 September 1995. Wear and tear during previous operations, as well as a ground accident inside a hangar, had damaged the craft. NASA had hired AeroVironment to repair the remotely piloted plane. AeroVironment made several improvements and rebuilt the damaged portions of the aircraft. The company installed stronger rib structure and higher-efficiency solar cells. NASA had adopted Pathfinder in the 1980s after the aircraft’s release from a classified military program.(NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Returns to Skies,” news release, 25 November 1996.)
 NASA canceled a spacewalk for the astronauts aboard Shuttle Columbia when the astronauts could not open the outer air lock. After communicating for more than 2 hours with Mission Control in Houston, with officials instructing them to “put as much force as you feel comfortable applying to the handle,” Columbia’s crew ended preparations for the spacewalk. During the spacewalk, the astronauts had intended to test a large crane and various power tools planned for the ISS.(William Harwood, “Spacewalk Called Off as Air Lock Hatch Won’t Open,” Washington Post, 28 November 1996.)
 The Russian-built Tu-144LL supersonic passenger jet, which U.S. and Russian aerospace industries and NASA had modified for commercial purposes, performed well in its first test flight after refurbishment. The aircraft took off from the Zhukovsky Airfield south of Moscow. During the Tu-144LL flight, researchers studied the impact of excessive speeds on the aircraft’s internal and exterior surfaces, engine temperature, and handling. The aircraft’s body, constructed primarily from light aluminum alloy, held up well during the initial test. The Tu-144LL project supported NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, which had begun in 1990, to encourage the development of technologies supporting supersonic commercial travel. The Boeing Company had led the U.S. industry involvement in the project, with support from McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Rockwell International Corporation, Pratt & Whitney, and General Electric Company. The project’s aim was to prepare flight-research facilities to adapt to market demands of the future. Aviation experts predicted that a commercial market for advanced supersonic transport would evolve early in the 21st century.(NASA, “First Flight of U.S.-Russian Supersonic Testbed Scheduled for Nov. 29,” news release N96-78, 26 November 1996; “Russian Tu-144LL SST Joint NASA Flying Laboratory—Flight November 29, 1996,” http://nix.larc.nasa.gov/info;jsessionid=1f4kro1asktqm?id=EC96-43859-2&orgid=7 (accessed 1 August 2007).)
 President William J. Clinton awarded the Congressional Space Medal of Honor to astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, the first woman to receive the award. Praising Lucid as a “determined visionary,” President Clinton presided over the Oval Office ceremony, as the fifty-three-year-old astronaut recounted her 188 days aboard the Mir space station. Lucid recalled fondly her time spent with the two Russian cosmonauts, a period characterized by “working together, laughing together, and having a good time together.” Lucid’s husband Michael attended the ceremony, along with U.S. Senators John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) and Conrad Burns (R-MT), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, and Russian Ambassador Yuli Vorontsov. The U.S. Congress had created the Space Medal of Honor in 1969, awarding it to eight astronauts before Lucid. The award is distinct from the Medal of Honor, awarded for the highest acts of military service and extraordinary heroism on the field of combat.(Associated Press, “President Clinton’s Remarks in Awarding Medal to Shannon Lucid,” 2 December 1996; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Medal to Record-Setting Astronaut,” 2 December 1996. For more information, see NASA History Division, “Congressional Space Medal of Honor,” 28 April 2006, http://history.nasa.gov/ spacemedal.htm.)
 Scientists announced the discovery of frozen water on the Moon, calling into question the long- held belief that the Moon lacked any form of hydration. The Clementine spacecraft had found the ice while using radar signals to examine the depths of the Moon’s craters. The discovery was the by-product of a US$75 million mission, co-sponsored by NASA and the U.S. Department of Defense, to test the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization’s “Star Wars” sensors developed to detect and track missiles. The possible ice deposit, composed of the suspected ice crystals mixed with dirt and spread over a vast landscape, was termed a dirty lake. The scientists discovered the ice in a massive, extremely deep crater. One scientist described the crater as twice the size of Puerto Rico and deeper than the height of Mount Everest. Scientists discussing the significance of the discovery postulated that the presence of water on the Moon might be a boon to future space exploration, perhaps enabling the construction of a “filling station” on the Moon. Other scientists offered a more sober opinion of the findings, referring to reports that the presence of water on the Moon might someday allow for colonization as “hyperbole.”(John Noble Wilford, “The Moon May Have Water, and Many New Possibilities,” New York Times, 4 December 1996; Associated Press, “Deep Within Lunar Crater, Small Frozen Lake Is Found,” 3 December 1996; Joyce Price, “Prospect of Ice on Moon Fires Hopes of Scientists,” Washington Times, 4 December 1996; Curt Suplee, “The Moon’s ‘Dirty Lake’ Makes Waves,” Washington Post, 4 December 1996.)
 NASA launched its second unpiloted craft, Mars Pathfinder, less than a month after the first, continuing its concentrated program of Mars exploration. The US$196 million Pathfinder lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta II rocket, on a mission planned to cover more than 300 million miles (480 million kilometers). NASA researchers expected the six-wheeled craft to land on Mars, on 4 July 1997, and to journey across the planet’s surface, gathering images of rocks and soil. Depending on how useful the images were, scientists planned for Pathfinder to roam Mars for at least one week and perhaps for months, straying no farther than approximately 60 feet (18 meters) away from its landing site.(John Noble Wilford, “U.S. Launches Second Craft on a Mission To Study Mars,” New York Times, 5 December 1996.)
 NASA officials announced that a funding crisis in Russia would delay the human occupation of the International Space Station (ISS) up to eight months. Before the announcement, NASA had learned that the financial problems of the Russian Space Agency had virtually halted Russia’s work on the orbiting laboratory’s nerve center. Without Russia’s contribution to the station, the crew of the ISS would have nowhere to stay during the construction of the station in space. NASA officials remained hopeful that Russia would release funding for the project and keep its commitment to the effort. Nevertheless, NASA officials began revisiting contingency plans to address reductions in funding. Russian Space Agency officials planned to meet with their NASA counterparts to discuss the situation.(William Harwood, “Funding Crisis To Delay Occupation of Space Station,” Washington Post, 6 December 1996.)
 Scientists at the University of Texas at Dallas revealed their discovery of an ancient river channel buried beneath the Sahara Desert in Africa, publishing their findings in Science magazine. The discovery offered an answer to a question that had long perplexed the scientific community, why does the Nile River, as it flows through the world’s largest desert (in Sudan) make a huge, looping bend in its course? The Nile generally flows toward the north, except at the Great Bend’s turning, where the river flows toward the southwest for more than 200 miles (320 kilometers). After this detour, the Nile resumes its course toward the Mediterranean Sea. The researchers had used the images taken by the Spaceborne Imaging Radar C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR), which had flown with Shuttle Endeavour’s Mission STS-59 in 1994, to study the ancient structures in the Precambrian rock, guiding the river’s course. The SIR-C/X-SAR radar waves had penetrated the sand to reveal unseen structures, not visible without the satellite images. Diane L. Evans, SIR-C Project Manager at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), called the discovery “one of the most exciting discoveries from the SIRC/XSAR mission to date.” JPL was managing the program as a part of NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth initiative.(Robert J. Stern and Mohamed Gamal, “The Origin of the Great Bend of the Nile from SIR-C/X-SAR Imagery,” Science 274, no. 5293 (6 December 1996): 1696−1698; NASA, “Space Radar Unearths Secrets of the Ancient Nile,” news release 96-251, 6 December 1996.)
 Shuttle Columbia landed at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Forced to remain in space an additional day because of bad weather, Columbia and its crew had set an endurance record of nearly 18 days in space, only one day short of the previous record of 17 days. Heavy fog in Florida was the cause of the landing delay.(Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Sets a Record for a Mission,” 7 December 1996.)
 NASA announced the completion, on time and on budget, of the first major component of the ISS. Russia’s Khrunichev Industries and the Boeing Company had combined efforts to construct Functional Cargo Block (known by its Russian abbreviation FGB), a 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18-tonne) pressurized module. Members of the international space team planned to launch the spacecraft from Russia in November 1997. FGB formed the initial building block of the ISS, featuring computer equipment, thermal controls, fire detection tools, and navigational apparatus. Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center and Boeing Defense and Space Group received US$190 million for developing and building the craft. According to the plan, the ISS team would add many other components to FGB.(NASA, “Station’s First Module Assembled; Ready for Testing,” news release 96-253, 9 December 1996.)
 In a postflight inspection, NASA engineers discovered that one loose screw had caused the hatch on Shuttle Columbia to jam, preventing the astronauts from taking their scheduled spacewalks. The screw had probably dislodged during takeoff, falling into the gears of the hatch. NASA had decided to cancel the spacewalks, rather than force the hatch open and risk damaging it permanently. With the Shuttle scheduled to launch again in one month, NASA faced the question of whether to remove and replace the gearboxes on all the hatches inside the Shuttle as a precautionary measure.(Associated Press, “Loose Screw Caused Stuck Hatch on Shuttle,” 12 December 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Hatching Up Plan in Case Emergency Spacewalk Is Needed,” 2 December 1996.)
 Researchers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center announced that tests aimed at improving the efficiency of Space Shuttle engines would likely translate into substantial savings for commercial airlines as well. Researchers had learned that locating an engine’s turbine airfoils in the “optimum position” could cut down the flow of fluttering wakes of gases. When wakes occur, an engine requires additional energy to run and generates higher temperatures. NASA researchers predicted that the findings would have special application for the Boeing 777. Improving efficiency by a half percent would save hundreds of gallons of fuel per flight. The researchers had based the new positioning of the turbines upon the simple principle evident when a bike racer drafts behind a competitor⎯because the first rider takes the full brunt of the wind, the second can travel equally as fast with less exertion. The engineers found that by aligning turbines in the most efficient positions, the engine derived a similar drafting.(NASA, “Applying NASA Shuttle Engine Test Findings May Save Airlines Millions in Fuel Costs,” news release 96-254, 12 December 1996.)
 New audio recordings, gathered from the excursion of NASA’s Galileo spacecrafts to Jupiter’s large moon Ganymede, contained a “soaring whistle and hissing static,” suggesting that the moon possesses a planet-like magnetosphere. According to Donald A. Gurnett, who had conducted the experiments using Galileo’s plasma wave instrument, the data “is kind of like looking at a musical score.” The sound patterns mimic those found on Earth, Saturn, and Jupiter. Gurnett suggested that the new findings would have broad significance for the scientific community, possibly allowing scientists to draw further conclusions about the interplay between magnetic forces and matter throughout the universe.(D. A. Gurnett et al., “Evidence for Magnetosphere at Ganymede from Plasmawave Observations by the Galileo Spacecraft,” Nature 384, no. 6609 (12 December 1996): 535; NASA, “Big Icy Moon of Jupiter Found To Have a ‘Voice’ After All; Europa Flyby Next for Galileo,” news release 96-255, 12 December 1996.)
 NASA announced the successful harvest of the first crop of healthy plants grown completely in space. Grown aboard the Russian space station Mir, the super-dwarf wheat grew robustly in the microgravity of space. Researchers at NASA’s Ames Research Center termed the successful harvest a step toward a greater human presence in space. “The development of plant-based, regenerative life support systems is critical to sustaining a crew during long-duration missions such as the Mars exploration,” NASA’s David Bubenheim explained. The space station crew had raised the plants aboard Mir in a greenhouse designed by a team of Russian and Bulgarian engineers. Florescent lights had provided sufficient light for the plants, and the astronauts had injected water directly into the soil.(NASA, “NASA Harvest of Mir Space Wheat Marks U.S.-Russian First,” news release 96-256, 12 December 1996.)
 The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel reported its findings on the safety of the Space Shuttle program, concluding that aggressive cost-cutting measures had not increased risks. The review responded to critics who had suggested that measures, such as outsourcing flight operations, had been too drastic, causing a precipitous decline in NASA workers’ morale. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, responsible for making NASA a more fiscally lean organization, praised NASA’s “clean bill of health.” However, the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel warned NASA about challenges that would arise during the assembly of the ISS, cautioning those in favor of cutting the budget against trimming NASA’s funds too drastically.(NASA, “Panel Review Finds Space Shuttle Safe,” news release 96-257, 13 December 1996.)
 The Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation announced that McDonnell Douglas would merge with Boeing in a stock-for-stock transaction. The merger, the biggest in aerospace history, positioned Boeing to compete with Europe’s Airbus Industrie for nearly all commercial airline contracts. The merger also strengthened Boeing’s position as one of the most influential companies, both domestically and internationally, in the United States. The US$13.3 billion deal would place under a single umbrella nearly 200,000 employees, producing annual revenues in excess of US$48 billion. The Boeing Company also emerged from the deal with improved chances of winning major military contracts, whereas, previously, the company had few ventures involving the military aerospace industry. However, McDonnell Douglas had been the main supplier to the military of F/A-18 and F-15 Eagle-model fighter jets to the military. Thus, the merger brought together leaders in the commercial and military sectors of the aerospace industry, creating what one industry analyst called an “800-pound gorilla.” McDonnell Douglas stock rose 20 percent on the first day of trading following the announcement.(The Boeing Company, “McDonnell Douglas To Merge with Boeing, Combination To Be the World’s Largest Aerospace Company,” news release, 15 December 1996; Peter Kaplan, “Mission Inevitable,” Washington Times, 17 December 1996; David E. Sanger, “A Giant in Jets and Foreign Policy,” New York Times, 17 December 1996.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin hosted members of Congress and other government and aviation industry leaders at a ceremony marking the start of NASA’s General Aviation Propulsion program. NASA launched the endeavor to encourage the development of technologies and manufacturing practices that would create more cost-effective and environmentally friendly aviation-propulsion systems. NASA selected as its partners William International and Teledyne Continental Motors, along with the Federal Aviation Administration and the Industry Advanced General Aviation Transport Experiments Consortium. Aviation leaders praised the collaboration as the beginning of a movement to revolutionize aircraft engines and, consequently, the aviation industry.(NASA, “Signing Ceremony To Initiate Development of Revolutionary Aircraft Engines,” news release N96-80, 10 December 1996.)
 Astronomer and Pulitzer Prize winner Carl Sagan died after a long fight against a bone marrow disease; he was 62 years old. Since 1971, Sagan had directed Cornell University’s Laboratory for Planetary Atmospheres and Surfaces, where he forged his reputation as an expert in exobiology. Sagan helped plan the Mariner, Viking, and Voyager missions, receiving NASA’s Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement in 1972. Sagan also helped popularize modern science with his widely viewed television series Cosmos. Sagan described the television series as an endeavor “to show that science is a delight and to end people’s artificial alienation from it.” Sagan’s The Dragons of Eden (1977) won the Pulitzer Prize. Throughout his work, Sagan had also argued for the possibility of extraterrestrial life.(Cornell University, “Carl Sagan, Cornell Astronomer, Dies Today (Dec. 20) in Seattle,” news release, 20 December 1996; United Press International, “Astronomer Carl Sagan Has Died,” 20 December 1996.)
 Russia launched a satellite carrying two monkeys and a collection of insects, snails, and plants. The satellite Bion-11 launched from the Plesetsk Cosmodrome, 600 kilometers (373 miles) north of Moscow. The Russian Space Agency planned to study the effects of weightlessness on the animal “crew.”(Reuters, “Russia Launches Satellite with Monkeys, Insects,” 24 December 1996.)
