 The Clipper Graham (DC-XA) Incident Investigation Board released its final report concerning the explosion of the vehicle at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The Board, chaired by former astronaut Vance Brand, determined that a disconnected brake line on the secondary landing gear had prevented the gear from fully extending. The DC-XA, a prototype developed by McDonnell Douglas for NASA, had flown successfully in its fourth test flight on 31 July 1996, before failing on landing. NASA’s director of space transportation noted that the failure, which occurred as part of ongoing research into reusable launch vehicles, had strengthened NASA’s resolve to reduce costs and to achieve efficient reusability, safety, and reliability, ideally using a combination of automation and human control.(NASA, “Clipper Graham Incident Report Release,” news release 97-3, 7 January 1997.)
 NASA reported that one of the two monkeys sent into space aboard the Russian Bion-11 flight in December 1996 had died upon completing postmission tests in Moscow. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced that they would investigate the death. According to observers, both monkeys aboard the mission returned to Earth alert and active. The purpose of the flight was to investigate further the effects of spaceflight on the musculoskeletal system.(Associated Press, “Russian Space Monkey Multik Dies,” 12 January 1997; NASA, “Monkey Dies After Completing 14-Day Bion Mission,” news release 97-8, 9 January 1997.)
 In the first spaceflight of 1997, Shuttle Atlantis launched for a linkup mission with the Mir space station. Mission STS-81 was the fifth Shuttle voyage to bring supplies and new crew members to the Russian space station. Atlantis carried the SPACEHAB module in the payload bay of its orbiter, with experiments for Atlantis’s crew, as well as equipment for Mir. Michael A. Baker, making his fourth Shuttle flight, commanded the mission, with Brent W. Jett Jr. serving as Pilot. Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger was also aboard, set to replace astronaut John E. Blaha as the representative of the United States aboard Mir. Blaha had spent nearly four months aboard the orbiting station, roughly the same tenure planned for Linenger. So that Atlantis could rendezvous with Mir, the Shuttle had launched at precisely 4:27 a.m. (EST). Atlantis would spend two days orbiting, periodically firing its engines to draw closer to Mir, approximately 240 miles (386 kilometers) above Earth. The United States and Russia planned for the Shuttle–Mir missions to contribute to the international team’s development of procedures and techniques for use on the International Space Station (ISS). NASA and the Russian Space Agency referred to the missions as Phase I of the ISS effort.(NASA, “Fifth Shuttle–Mir Docking Flight Highlights STS-81 Mission,” news release 97-2, January 1996; William Harwood, “Atlantis Roars into Orbit, Begins Chasing Mir for Tuesday Linkup,” Washington Post, 13 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis en Route to Russian Station After ‘Gorgeous Launch’,” 12 January 1997.)
 An international team of astronomers announced the discovery of three black holes in three nondescript galaxies, suggesting that nearly all galaxies may in fact have massive black holes. Using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), the researchers took a census of 27 galaxies to find a series of black holes massive enough to consume millions of Sun-like stars. The findings, which the scientists presented in full at the 189th meeting of the American Astronomical Society, provided insight into the origin and evolution of galaxies, as well as clarifying the role of quasars in the galaxy. Douglas O. Richstone of the University of Michigan, who led the research team, stated that two of the black holes had “weighed in” at 50 million and 100 million solar masses, respectively. Scientists remained divided on why black holes exist so abundantly in space. One theory suggested was that, at the center of most or all galaxies, supermassive black holes exist, where gases ignite to the hottest temperatures known, sending nearby stars spiraling in new directions. Ralph Narayan of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics called the black holes “the ultimate victory of gravity.(Paul Recer, “Astronomers Find Stronger Evidence of Massive Black Holes,” Huntsville Times (AL), 14 January 1997; NASA, “Massive Black Holes Dwell in Most Galaxies, According to Hubble Census,” news release 97-9, 12 January 1997.)
 Henry C. Ferguson, an astronomer at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, announced the discovery of stars residing outside of any defined galaxy. Scientists had long suspected that such stars existed, but Ferguson and his team were the first to confirm the theories. They did so using images captures by the HST, which revealed as many as 600 stars in the seemingly blank spaces among the Virgo cluster of galaxies, approximately 60 million light-years away from Earth. Ferguson suspected that many more stars⎯perhaps as many as 1 trillion Sun-like stars⎯are adrift in the galaxies of Virgo. The astronomers theorized that galactic mergers, or the tidal forces of nearby galaxies, had displaced the stars from their home galaxies.(John Noble Wilford, “Hubble Detects Stars that Belong to No Galaxy,” New York Times, 15 January 1997.)
 Shuttle Atlantis safely docked with the Russian space station Mir, while both spacecraft orbited at speeds of more than 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour. Russian cosmonauts greeted the six-person American crew with the traditional Russian welcoming gift of bread and salt. Communication problems delayed the opening of the connection hatch temporarily, before American astronaut John E. Blaha, who had been aboard Mir for four months, was able to greet his fellow compatriots and his replacement. Blaha reported that the arriving Shuttle looked like a “shiny star” as it approached Mir. On hearing Atlantis’s approach, Blaha, ready to go home, reported, “All bags are packed. Ready for transfer.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin took the opportunity to congratulate Blaha on his contributions to space exploration and to improved international relations. “We spent 50 years aiming weapons at each other,” Goldin stated, and he praised the United States and Russia for cooperating in sustaining Mir and planning for the ISS.(Associated Press, “Atlantis and Mir Make Docking Astronauts Meet for Crew Swap,” 15 January 1997; Associated Press, “Atlantis Closes in for Late-Night Docking with Russian Station,” 14 January 1997.)
 Johnson Space Center (JSC) awarded BRSP Inc. a US$128 million, five-year contract to provide base-operation support services, including plant maintenance and operations, logistics support, and security services for JSC’s Houston, Texas, facility. BRSP, a joint venture of Brown and Root Services and Pioneer Contract Services, had formed to bid for the JSC contract.(NASA, “BRSP Chosen for JSC Base Operation Contract,” news release C97-b, 16 January 1997.)
 Fred C. Adams and Gregory P. Laughlin, astrophysicists at the University of Michigan, presented their theory of a “Dying Universe,” at the American Astronomic Society conference. Adams and Laughlin had projected the future of the universe based upon quantitative theory, concluding that the Earth would die out with a whimper. According to their theory, the Sun will eventually die out, and the light of all stars will vanish. The projection was so far off in the distance (10,000 trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion years from now) that it drew a mixture of criticism, amusement, and intrigue from the scientific community. Adams and Laughlin insisted that recently acquired insights into cosmic evolution had allowed them to draw conclusions about the end of the universe, albeit in broad terms. Previously, scientists had lacked even the basic data and theoretical framework necessary to undertake the task. The two researchers emphasized that they made no claim to foresee when the universe would end, but rather offered the first long-term, science-based deduction on how the universe would evolve through four periods of expansion⎯the star-filled era (the present), the degenerate era, the black- hole era, and the dark era. The ultimate result of such a progression was too difficult to estimate, according to the scholars.(John Noble Wilford, “At Other End of ‘Big Bang’, Finale May Be Big Whimper,” New York Times, 16 January 1997; Tim Friend, “We’ve Got 100 Trillion Years Until ‘Lights Out’ in Universe,” USA Today, 16 January 1997; Associated Press, “End of It All,” 16 January 1996.)
 NASA announced that planned major modifications of Space Shuttle Atlantis, as well as routine inspections, would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. United Space Alliance, the company contracted for the maintenance and operation of the Shuttle program, had recommended the changes. According to estimates of the U.S. General Accounting Office, completing the renovations in California, rather than in Florida, would cost NASA an additional US$20 million because of higher labor costs. NASA explained that if the engineers had done the work in Florida, the launch schedule at KSC, along with the need for Atlantis to make a prolonged stay for extensive modifications, would have threatened future Shuttle flights. The changes planned, including rerouting the Shuttle’s fuel lines, involved more than routine maintenance. NASA also pointed out that its most experienced engineers worked at the Palmdale facility, and that workers at the facility had already made similar modifications to Shuttles Discovery and Endeavour. Moreover, NASA maintained that permitting KSC to focus on Shuttle launches and missions would be the most efficient use of its resources. Nevertheless, immediately after the announcement, some observers criticized NASA’s continued use of Boeing’s private facility in preference to that of the government-owned KSC. NASA’s previous intimation that the Palmdale facility would be “mothballed” for Shuttle repair and maintenance intensified critics’ reaction to the announcement.(Seth Borenstein, “Despite Boost in Cost, Atlantis To Get Tuneup in California,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 January 1997; NASA, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Modification Work To Be Performed at Palmdale Facility,” news release 97-11, 16 January 1997; Todd Halvorson, “Atlantis Overhaul To Be Done Out West,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 January 1997.)
 NASA released images taken from Galileo as it soared just 430 miles (690 kilometers) above the surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. The images revealed the apparent traces of massive ice volcanoes. According to early analysis of the pictures, ice volcanoes and the movement of tectonic plates had reshaped the surface of Europa, one of the bodies in the universe that scientists believed might once have hosted life. The presence of water, organic compounds, and adequate heat, all of which would be present if ice volcanoes existed on the moon, had led scientists to focus on Europa as a location for possible development of life. According to Galileo team member Robert J. Sullivan, the apparent traces of ice volcanoes supported the even more significant possibility that an ocean might exist below the surface of Europa. Because NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) managed the Galileo Mission, the scientific community credited JPL with providing the vital new images of the surfaces of Europa and Jupiter that had led to further discussion about the possibility of life beyond Earth.(NASA, “Ice Volcanoes Reshape Europa’s Chaotic Surface,” news release 97-12, 17 January 1997.)
 Astronaut John E. Blaha, just returning from a four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, reported that he had experienced feelings of depression and anxiety during his long deployment in space. Blaha indicated that the conditions aboard Mir, rather than any elements of the space environment, had caused his difficulty. According to Blaha, the lack of private quarters for U.S. astronauts, who unlike the Russian cosmonauts did not have even small personal quarters, was one of the most difficult aspects of his stay aboard Mir. He also reported that, although relations with his Russian counterparts always had remained respectful, the tension of getting to know men who spoke a different language in such tight quarters created “another element of psychological pressure and stress,” aside from the inevitable feelings of isolation. Blaha reported that he had experienced psychological depression, especially during his first month aboard the Russian space station. He made these remarks aboard Shuttle Atlantis as it returned him to Earth, in the course of radio communications with four people living inside an airtight chamber at JSC in Houston, who were taking part in a 60-day experiment for future ISS deployments.(Associated Press, “Astronaut Tells of Down Side to Space Life,” New York Times, 22 January 1997.)
 John E. Blaha became the first astronaut to leave the U.S. Space Shuttle carried by medical personnel. Blaha was experiencing weakness upon his return to Earth’s gravitational conditions, and NASA’s doctors wanted to gauge immediately the effects of long-term weightlessness on his body. Blaha remarked upon landing that he could hardly move, saying that he was “absolutely stunned” at the difficulty of returning to a gravity-controlled environment. NASA’s doctors focused specifically on Blaha’s dizziness and on his weakened bones and muscles, hoping to learn how to improve health plans for astronauts living aboard the ISS. Blaha had maintained an arduous schedule of exercise aboard Mir, to mitigate the weakening effects of the weightless environment. In addition, he had made the return flight aboard Atlantis lying down in a Shuttle seat, to minimize the crush of gravity.(William Harwood, “Atlantis Astronaut Wobbly on His Return to Gravity,” Washington Post, 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Carried off Shuttle, a First for NASA,” 23 January 1997; Associated Press, “Returning Astronaut Sheds Right Stuff Image, Is Carried off Shuttle,” 22 January 1997.)
 NASA announced the promotion of Gretchen W. McClain to the position of Acting Director of Space Station Requirements. As Director, McClain took over responsibility for establishing policy and standards for the ISS, as NASA continued to plan for the space station, with ongoing support from the Russian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, Japan, and Canada.(NASA, “NASA Names Acting Space Station Director,” news release, 97-15, 23 January 1997.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Roy D. Bridges Jr., retired U.S. Air Force Major General and Shuttle astronaut, as Director of KSC. Goldin called Bridges “the right person to take KSC into the next century.” As Director of KSC, Bridges assumed responsibility for the only site for launches of the Shuttle. At the time of Bridges’s appointment, about 2,000 employees worked at KSC, along with 14,000 contractors. Bridges’s appointment followed years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Air Force and NASA. Graduating with distinction from the U.S. Air Force Academy, he had served in several leadership positions in the Air Force and had received recognition as a distinguished graduate of the U.S. Air Force Pilot Training and Test Pilot Schools. Among other awards, he had received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Defense Service Medal with oak leaf cluster, the Legion of Merit with oak leaf cluster, the Distinguished Flying Cross with two oak leaf clusters, the Meritorious Service Medal, the U.S. Air Force Commendation Medal, and NASA’s Flight Space Medal.(NASA, “Roy Bridges Selected as KSC’s New Center Director,” news release 97-17, 24 January 1997.)
 Space News reported that the Italian Space Agency had decided not to participate in construction of the International Space Station (ISS) because of NASA’s insistence that Italy meet previously established deadlines. The Italian firm Alenia Aerospazio had expressed interest in building, on behalf of Italy, two nodes, the pieces of hardware used to connect different sections of the orbiting laboratory. The Italian Space Agency had requested more time to investigate the feasibility of participating, after it determined that funding the $150 million project, solely in return for additional future use of the ISS, might strain its budget for other scientific projects. Gretchen W. McClain, Acting Director of Space Station Requirements, said that, although NASA regretted the loss of Italy’s participation in the ISS, placing the project on hold while the Italian Space Agency made its decision would result in significant schedule shortfalls. The development highlighted the difficulty of fostering international participation and, at the same time, maintaining the target delivery date of the ISS.(Peter B. de Selding and William Harwood, “Italian Nodes for Station Unlikely,” Space News, 3−9 February 1997.)
 Flight International published a story claiming that, more than 10 years after the explosion of Challenger, aerospace engineer Ali Abu Taha had discovered new evidence in Time-Life photographs demonstrating that a breach and a fire in Challenger’s right solid rocket booster (SRB) had caused the explosion. One photograph, taken about 20 seconds after liftoff, revealed a 3-meter-long (10-foot-long) flame issuing from an SRB joint, and another clearly showed a white object separating from the same SRB seconds later. The discovery seemed to support Taha’s controversial theory that the booster had caught fire at liftoff and burned continuously until the explosion occurred. In contrast to Taha's findings, which focused on dynamic liftoff loads, the congressionally mandated Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission) had reported that faulty O-rings caused the tragedy. Automatic cameras set up around the Cape Canaveral, Florida, launch site had taken the photographs that Taha used as evidence for his theory, images never released to the public. Taha’s photographic analysis also revealed that the explosion had propelled Challenger’s crew compartment thousands of meters away from the explosion, partially explaining why investigators had taken 40 days to locate the shell. Taha suggested that a shock wave had killed the crew instantly, although NASA had never found evidence of a shock wave. News of the photographs and of Taha’s research kept alive the debate surrounding the decade-old accident.(Tim Furness, “New Evidence Reveals Fire on Doomed Challenger’s Booster,” Flight International, 5−11 February 1997.)
 President William J. Clinton released his budget proposal, which included a request for US$75 million to develop the Space Infrared Telescope Facility. NASA had argued that the infrared telescope would aid scientists in answering some of the universe’s most fundamental questions including, what is the energy source for the universe’s brightest stars? and, where is the universe’s missing dark matter? Presidential support for the initiative led NASA to hope that it might finally receive the funding necessary to begin building the last of four space-based telescopes proposed as a part of the Great Observatories program. In addition to the highly publicized Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had successfully placed in orbit the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and had immediate plans to launch the nearly completed X-ray Astrophysics Facility. NASA expected the four telescopes, using various kinds of cosmic radiation to survey the atmosphere, would provide an unprecedented view of the universe. The four telescopes operating together would allow us “to look at the universe at all ages at once,” explained Michael Werner, a scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Upon the program’s conception in 1991, the National Academy of Sciences had called the Great Observatories the “highest priority for any major new program in space-based astronomy,” but a steady stream of budget cuts had made it increasingly difficult to realize the project.(Paul Hoversten, “NASA Seeks $75 Million for Another Eye in the Sky,” USA Today, 6 February 1997.)
 NASA Administer Daniel S. Goldin praised the Clinton administration’s budget proposal for 1998 as a sign that NASA’s deep budget cuts were leveling off. NASA had braced itself for a budget as low as US$13.1 billion, and, therefore, found President William J. Clinton’s US$13.5 billion proposal a pleasant surprise. The request still entailed a US$200 million budget cut, and Congress might reduce the budget further. Nevertheless, Goldin responded to the proposed budget exuberantly, exclaiming, “Holy mackerel⎯this is a great program,” and remarking that for the first time during his five-year tenure, NASA could hope for budgetary stability. The proposal also projected that NASA’s budget in 2000 would be approximately US$13.2 billion, rather than the US$11.6 billion forecast in previous Clinton administration proposals. NASA planned to absorb the small reduction in funding by increasing efficiency, especially in the Shuttle program, having recently transferred management of the program to the privately held United Space Alliance. NASA officials believed that NASA could continue sending up seven or eight Shuttle missions annually, if budget trends continued to stabilize. On the day of the budget announcement, however, a NASA advisory panel warned once again that a drastic decrease in the Shuttle’s funding would compromise its safety. Nevertheless, Goldin maintained that the proposal would allow NASA to continue fostering “faster, better, cheaper” science.(Anne Eisele, “Budget Plan Brings Stability by 2000,” Space News, 10−16 February 1997; Larry Wheeler, “NASA Makes Do on Slimmer Budget, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 February 1997; Sean Holton, “NASA Cheers Budget that Cuts Agency Only a Bit,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1997.)
 Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. met with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin to discuss, among other topics, the United States’ concern that the Russian Space Agency’s lack of funding might derail plans for the ISS. U.S. officials declared that funding was the primary issue in the construction of the ISS. “We have no doubts about their science and engineering proficiency. Where we have concerns relates to adequate funding on the Russian side,” said one American space leader. Although the ISS had received contributions from the United States, Russia, Japan, Europe, and Canada, Russian construction stoppages on a crucial ISS component already had delayed the project. Before the Gore-Chernomyrdin meeting, NASA received assurances from the Russian Space Agency that, despite financial difficulties, Russia would maintain its commitment to the project. During the meeting, the leaders agreed upon a joint statement committing the Russians to a new deadline. Gore stated that he believed the summit’s reaffirmation of previous commitments would satisfy members of Congress who were critical of Russia’s trustworthiness.(Associated Press, “US-Russia,” 6 February 1997; Reuters, “Gore-Chernomyrdin Talks on NATO, Space, Summit,” 5 February 1997; Cragg Hines, “Russia Pledges To Pay Its Share of Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 9 February 1997.)
 NASA announced that it would join an international consortium of space agencies to support the launch of a Japanese satellite designed to create the largest astronomical instrument ever. The launch of the Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) Space Observatory would create a radio telescope more than twice the diameter of the Earth, giving astronomers their sharpest view yet of the universe. Astronomers praised the Japanese-led launch as a significant advance for space research. VLBI satellites would allow radio astronomers to link together widely separated radio telescopes, so that they would function as a single instrument with extraordinarily sharp resolving power. The farther apart the telescopes, the greater would be the image’s resolution. NASA equated the power of the new tool with the ability to see a grain of rice in Tokyo from Los Angeles. Scientists hoped that the new tool would allow for further exploration of active galaxies with massive black holes. Researchers also hoped that the instrument would foster understanding of the mysterious quasars, which pour out tremendous amounts of energy and host or create black holes. Creating the enormous VLBI network involved 40 radio telescopes from 15 nations. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science led the international consortium of science agencies, including NASA’s JPL, the U.S. National Science Foundation’s National Radio Astronomy Observatory, the Canadian Space Agency, the Australia Telescope National Facility, the European VLBI Network, and Europe’s Joint Institute for VLBI.(NASA, “Launch Will Create a Radio Telescope Larger than Earth,” news release 97-24, 7 February 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 25.)
 U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, NASA’s temporary resident aboard Russia’s Mir space station, became the second American to ride aboard the three-person Soyuz capsule that had delivered the cosmonauts to Mir. Cosmonauts Valery G. Korzun and Alexander Y. Kaleri, Linenger’s Russian partners aboard Mir, took Linenger for a short ride around Mir, to free a docking station for the new Soyuz vehicle that Russia would soon launch. In allowing an American astronaut aboard the Russian craft, Russia took another step with the United States to foster a cooperative postcommunist relationship between the two countries.(Association Press, “Astronaut Rides Soyuz,” 8 February 1997.)
 The Russian Space Agency launched Soyuz TM-25, carrying a crew of two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, and German astronaut Reinhold Ewald to the Mir space station, from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The cosmonauts would become Mir’s new, long-term crew, and the German astronaut would return with the retiring crew in two weeks. Germany had paid the Russian Space Agency millions of dollars to carry Reinhold Ewald aboard the Shuttle to Mir.(Reuters, “Russians Launch 3 into Space,” 11 February 1997.)
 NASA researchers, astronauts, and scholars gathered in Washington, DC, for a conference of the National Academy of Sciences, disclosing and discussing details of experiments conducted aboard the Shuttle during two 1996 missions. The event commemorated the one-year anniversaries of the second U.S. Microgravity Laboratory and the third U.S. Microgravity Payload. Scientists predicted that discoveries made aboard the Shuttle flights in 1996 would eventually lead to technological advances. Research on numerous topics, from the climate of the universe to human biology, could lead to production of cheaper metals and alloys or new synthetic drugs. Highlights from the research presentations included the announcement of the discovery that space-grown crystals are of much higher quality than those grown on Earth; the description of experiments intended to uncover the effect of space on the production of metal and alloys; and the presentation of evidence that the microgravity environment of space had enabled scientists to make more precise measurements of the physical properties of elemental gas.(NASA, “Significant Discoveries from Space Shuttle Experiments To Be Presented at Conference,” news release 97-23, 5 February 1997.)
 Shuttle Discovery, carrying a crew of seven astronauts, launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on a mission to service the HST. NASA planned the 10-day Shuttle Mission STS-82 to upgrade significantly the scientific capabilities of HST, as well as to perform standard maintenance on the US$2 billion instrument. The spaceflight was the second servicing mission for HST since its deployment in April 1990 aboard Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-31. The astronauts planned to conduct at least four spacewalks to install new components, such as the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph and the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer. A NASA scientist described the improvements as “replacing 1970’s technology with 1990’s technology.” In addition to the work conducted on the HST, Discovery’s crew planned to move the telescope a few miles farther into the atmosphere, improving its chances for a longer operating life. Astronomers hypothesized that the potential gains from refurbishing the HST outweighed the risks of tampering with its already spectacular abilities, justifying the US$800 million cost of the mission. The head of the HarvardSmithsonian Center for Astrophysics speculated that the refurbished HST could lead to “a whole different kind of science.”(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission STS-82—Press Kit,” news release 97-18, February 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Shuttle Starts Space Telescope Mission,” New York Times, 12 February 1997; Associated Press, “Improved Hubble Telescope To Give Astronomers New View of the Universe,” 8 February 1997.)
 The White House Commission on Aviation Safety and Security, chaired by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., released its recommendations for reforming the United States’ aviation industry. The Commission challenged NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the U.S. Department of Defense to combine their efforts, with the goal of reducing aircraft accident rates by 80 percent over the next five years. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin voiced immediate support for the challenge, explaining, “We’re looking for solutions that will save lives.” He pledged NASA’s commitment to interagency cooperation and committed US$500 million in NASA funds, to achieve a major reduction in aircraft-related fatalities. Both NASA and the FAA cited previous successful collaboration efforts between their agencies. The Gore Commission’s most controversial recommendation was the use of computerized databases to identify potential terrorists. Critics quickly called the plan an exercise in profiling, which would foster biased treatment, especially toward Arab Americans and passengers with Arab- sounding names. Other safety proposals included requiring children under the age of two to sit in their own seats, rather than on the lap of an adult, as the airlines had long permitted. The Commission further suggested that user fees, rather than ticket taxes, fund air-traffic control; that airports deploy a new satellite-based, air-traffic-control system, as soon as possible; and that airports make all airmail packages weighing more than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) subject to inspection. In total, the Commission recommended 53 changes to the current system.(NASA, “NASA, FAA, and DOD Challenged To Achieve White House Commission Goal To Reduce Aircraft Accidents,” news release 97-26, 12 February 1997; John Mintz, “Gore Panel Proposes Aviation Safety Steps,” Washington Post, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “FAA Ready To Depart on ‘Clear Path of Action’,” USA Today, 13 February 1997; Robert Davis, “53 Air Safety Changes Urged,” USA Today, 13 February 1997.)
 Discovery’s crew released the HST from the Shuttle’s cargo bay after nearly a week of maintenance and refurbishing work. The astronauts had conducted a fifth spacewalk, one more than NASA had originally planned, to place a makeshift patch on the HST’s peeling insulation. “It’s not the Hubble Space Telescope. It’s really Hubble Space Telescope II,” remarked NASA’s chief Hubble scientist upon releasing the telescope. NASA deemed the mission a complete success.(Associated Press, “Hubble Released To Search Universe,” 20 February 1997; Associated Press, “Looking for Answers,” 19 February 1997.)
 Astronaut and lawmaker U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), on the 35th anniversary of his journey as the first American to orbit Earth, announced that he would retire from the U.S. Senate at the conclusion of his fourth term. On 20 February 1962, Glenn had orbited Earth three times, symbolizing a hard-fought achievement in the United States’ effort to catch up with the Soviet Union in the space race. Glenn, first elected to the Senate from Ohio in 1974, made the announcement at Muskingum College in New Concord, Ohio, joking that since “there is still no cure for the common birthday,” he intended to retire at age 75.(Paul Souhrada, “Glenn, 75, Will Retire, Citing ‘No Cure for Common Birthday’,” Washington Times, 21 February 1997; NASA, “Glenn Orbits the Earth 35 Years Ago Today,” video advisory V97-12, 20 February 1997. 207 NASA, “Next Generation Internet a Million Times Faster than Home Computer Modems,” news release 97-29, 21 February 1997.)
 NASA announced that a plan for collaborative research and development between NASA and five other government agencies might result in the creation of an Internet connection a million times faster than home computer modems. The Next Generation Internet (NGI) initiative dedicated US$300 million and three years to developing the NGI, to fulfill the promise President William J. Clinton had made in his State of the Union address: “We must build the second generation of the Internet so that our leading universities and national laboratories can communicate at speeds one thousand times faster than today; to develop new medical treatments, new sources of energy, new ways of working together.” NASA sites designated for early trials of NGI connections included Ames Research Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, Lewis Research Center, and Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
 Shuttle Discovery ended Mission STS-82 with a safe landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The early morning landing occurred later than NASA had planned because of cloudy weather in Florida. NASA praised Discovery’s crew for its work refurbishing the HST.(William Harwood, “Discovery Lands: Shuttle Back from Hubble Repair Mission,” Chicago Sun-Times, 22 February 1997.)
 A small fire broke out aboard the Mir space station, raising new questions about the fitness of the aging station for occupation and research. The six crew members on board quickly extinguished the fire, the result of a faulty air purification unit. The astronauts and cosmonauts estimated that the fire had burned for about 90 seconds, forcing the crew to don respirator masks. Mir continued to function normally after the fire, although the heat had melted several cables.(NASA, “Small Fire Extinguished on Mir,” news release 97-30, 24 February 1997; Associated Press, “Fire on Russian Space Station Doused, but Raises Concern,” 25 February 1997.)
 Two Russian cosmonauts and a German astronaut returned safely to Russia after tenures aboard the Russian space station Mir. The cosmonauts had spent more than six months in space, and Reinhold Ewald of Germany had spent two weeks aboard Mir as a paying guest of the Russian Space Agency. Ewald conducted geophysical, astrophysical, and medical experiments during his stay. The German Space Agency paid about US$60 million for Ewald’s trip, providing a much- needed infusion of capital for Russia’s space program.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 2 March 1997.)
 NASA commemorated the 25th anniversary of the still-orbiting Pioneer 10 space probe. Launched 2 March 1972, Pioneer 10 was the functioning probe farthest from Earth, at approximately 6 billion miles (9.6 billion kilometers) away. NASA originally had intended the probe to orbit for 21 months, but the spacecraft had continued to perform remarkably well and efficiently long after its designated mission. The probe completed its planned objective of surveying Jupiter in 1972; after that, NASA launched Pioneer 10 into space at 86,000 miles (138,000 kilometers) per hour. Since then, scientists had tracked the probe, learning more about magnetic fields, solar wind, cosmic particles, and ultraviolet glow. In June 1983, Pioneer 10 became the first human-made object to leave the solar system. On the day marking Pioneer 10’s 25th year in space, the probe still broadcast “crystal-clear data” to the NASA control room on Earth. NASA did not plan a 26th anniversary for the probe, explaining that Pioneer 10’s pulse was finally growing so weak that it could no longer facilitate significant scientific experiments.(Associated Press, “Pioneer 10,” 3 March 1997; USA Today, “NASA To Retire Oldest Interplanetary Explorer,” 3 March 1997.)
 Design News honored as its Engineer of the Year, Bernard P. Dagarin, the key design engineer behind the Galileo space probe, which had successfully navigated Jupiter’s atmosphere in 1996. Dagarin had begun working on prototypes for the Jupiter probe in 1978, when NASA awarded Hughes Space and Communications Company the initial Galileo contract. According to Design News, “Never before had a spacecraft been asked to survive such a long and difficult mission.” Galileo had achieved the near impossible. Not only was Galileo’s Jupiter mission a complete success, achieving the desired data, but the mission had also become the capstone of Dagarin’s decorated career.(Lawrence D. Maloney, “Galileo Probe’s Guardian Angel,” Design News 52, no. 5 (3 March 1997): 74−83.)
 The unpiloted cargo spacecraft Progress M-33 failed in its planned docking with the Mir space station, forcing Russian space officials to decide whether to allow the cargo craft to burn up in the atmosphere or to try again to connect with Mir. The docking of Progress M-33, which only had some surplus fuel aboard, was not of critical importance to Mir, but Russian Space Agency scientists had planned to use the craft’s docked mass to adjust the trajectory of Mir. News of the failure of the Progress’s docking tempered Russia’s celebration of its first satellite launch from a new cosmodrome in Svobody, occurring on the same day. On 6 March, the saga ended, when Russian officials decided to let the Progress M-33 drift off to burn up in the atmosphere.(Reuters, “Russia May Try New Space Docking or Let Craft Burn,” 5 March 1997; Reuters, “Russian Space Launch Marred by Failed Docking,” 4 March 1996; Reuters, “Russia To Scrap Spacecraft after Docking Snag” 6 March 1997.)
 NASA researchers at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, announced a plan to collaborate with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in Berkeley, California, to explore the potential of the substance Aerogel, which has tremendous insulating capabilities. Scientists said that they were optimistic that they could manipulate the material, rendering it transparent and, therefore, especially useful in constructing energy-efficient windows for homes and automobiles. During the 1930s, a researcher at Stanford University had discovered Aerogel, often called frozen smoke because of its hazy appearance. NASA engineers had used Aerogel as an insulating agent aboard Mars Pathfinder in 1996. Although the substance is the lightest solid known⎯only three times the density of air, a block of Aerogel weighing less than 1 pound (0.5 kilograms) can support 0.5 tons (450 kilograms or 0.45 tonnes). Aerogel’s large internal surface area, which disperses heat throughout its structure, causes the material’s extreme insulating capability⎯a 1-inch-thick (2.5-centimeter-thick) Aerogel window would offer the same insulation value as 15 panes of glass. John M. Horack, Assistant Laboratory Director for Space and Science Communications at MSFC, called the development of Aerogel “a great example of how NASA space research generates scientific knowledge that can be used to improve the quality of life on Earth.”(NASA, “NASA Research in Space May Redesign Household Windows,” news release 97-34, 6 March 1997. 215 Warren E. Leary, “Microbe Peril from Mars Is Possibility, Panel Warns,” New York Times, 7 March 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Warn on Mars Bugs,” 7 March 1997; Mark Carreau, “Fear of Martians,” Houston Chronicle, 7 March 1997.)
 A panel of scientists at the National Research Council issued a report warning NASA of the slight possibility that a mission to Mars might actually bring microbes back to the United States. Although their report clearly stated that the so-called Microbe Peril was unlikely, the panel argued, nevertheless, that a probe returning from an exploratory mission to Mars could possibly serve as a conduit to bring Martian germs back to Earth. The panel issued its warning because of NASA’s plan to send a mission to Mars to obtain samples of substances on the planet, and because NASA scientists had recently identified signs of possible microscopic life on a meteorite. The panel’s report stated, “If life forms ever existed on Mars, either by having been formed in an independent origin or having been transferred there from Earth, it is possible that they could have continued to exist up to the present time.”
 NASA announced the selection of four industry partners to study and develop a new Earth- imaging radar system. The proposed LightSAR system would use advanced technologies to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of radar-based satellites, which gather scientific data and provide commercial remote sensing. Project Manager Steven Bard of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) pointed out the unique team approach planned for the project. NASA intended to work with industry partners from the start, to assess the potential commercial market for LightSAR products and services and to share the cost of developing the expensive new technology with private companies. The four primary contractors selected were DBA Systems Inc., Lockheed Martin Astronautics, Research and Development Laboratories, and Vexcel Corporation.(NASA, “Teams Selected for Studies of Potential Partnership with NASA To Develop New Earth Imaging Radar System,” news release 97-35, 6 March 1997.)
 Edward M. Purcell, 1952 Nobel Prize winner in physics and long-time researcher at Harvard University, died. Purcell discovered a means to detect the extremely weak magnetism of the atomic nucleus, making it possible to “listen to the whisperings of hydrogen through the universe.” Purcell had served as President of the American Physical Society. In 1967 Purcell had won the Oersted Medal of the American Association of Physics Teachers, and in 1979 he had won the National Medal of Science. At Harvard, Purcell held the position of Gerhard Gade University Professor, retiring from the university in 1977. Of his Nobel Prize–winning research Purcell commented, “We are dealing not merely with a new tool but with a new subject, a subject I have called simply nuclear magnetism.”
 Professional and amateur astronomers in northern China and in the eastern reaches of Russia witnessed the near-simultaneous occurrence of a total solar eclipse and an unimpeded view of Comet Hale-Bopp. According to news reports, tens of thousands of people crowded city streets and braved freezing temperatures to observe the spectacle, many using pieces of smoked glass to protect their eyes. Mohe County in China’s northern tip had banned the use of smoke-producing stoves and other heating devices, to keep the air as clear as possible for the view. Chinese television stations broadcast the event, only the third time in recorded history when a full eclipse and the passing of a nearby comet had occurred simultaneously.(Associated Press, “Comet, Eclipse Dazzle Chinese, Russians,” 10 March 1997.)
 NASA announced an agreement with the European Space Agency (ESA) for the European construction of two docking nodes for the International Space Station (ISS). In exchange, NASA agreed to launch the ESA’s Columbus laboratory module. The “launch-offset barter agreement” was typical of the arrangements in progress to bring the ISS closer to fruition. The ESA announced immediate plans for the Italian Space Agency to carry out the actual construction of the two nodes, slated for mid-2000 launches. In addition to the construction arrangement, the ESA agreed to provide a variety of minor hardware, including refrigeration units, for the astronauts’ living space and for research areas of the ISS.(NASA, “NASA-ESA Agreement Enhances Station with Additional Node,” news release 97-36, 10 March 1997. 220 NASA, “Lunar Prospector Spacecraft Construction Complete,” news release 97-38, 12 March 1997.)
 NASA announced the completed construction of the Lunar Prospector spacecraft, scheduled for launch in September 1997. Engineers had designed the craft to obtain the first compositional and gravity maps of the Moon. G. Scott Hubbard, NASA’s Lunar Prospector Mission Manager at Ames Research Center, praised contractor Lockheed Martin for its efficient construction and for keeping project costs at forecasted levels. NASA projected that the total cost to build Lunar Prospector and send it to the Moon would be about US$63 million. Scientists explained the need to return to the Moon, even though it was “conquered” decades ago, reminding the public that many important questions about the Moon’s history and its fundamental composition remained unexplored. Researchers hoped that Lunar Prospector’s planned one-year mission orbiting the Moon would create a detailed map of the Moon’s surface composition and gravitational and magnetic fields. Lunar Prospector itself was compact⎯only 4.5 feet (1.37 meters) high, 4 feet (1.22 meters) in diameter, and weighing 660 pounds (300 kilograms). Even before its launch, scientists hailed Lunar Prospector as a new type of pathfinder, which had “made history in terms of management style, technical approach, cost management, and focused science.” Prospector used a gamma-ray spectrometer to provide maps of the composition of the Moon, thereby allowing scientists to understand better the elements present in the surface layer of the Moon.
 217“Edward Purcell, 84, Physicist Who Shared a Nobel Prize,” New York Times, 10 March 1997.
 As the public anticipation of the appearance of Comet Hale-Bopp heightened, NASA announced that NASA-supported researchers would use its vast resources⎯including spacecraft and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST)⎯to study the comet. Scientists hoped that studying Hale-Bopp would lead to a greater general understanding of comets. Because comets are composed of loosely packed dirt and ice, experts consider them the best-preserved remnants of the early solar system. NASA disclosed that the Wallops Flight Facility would launch four rockets using ultraviolet wavelengths, to study Comet Hale-Bopp. In addition, the Ulysses spacecraft, the joint project of NASA and the ESA, which was already in orbit at the time, would chart the effects of solar-wind conditions on comets. However, scientists also disclosed that the close proximity of Hale-Bopp to the Sun posed a danger to HST’s sensitive detectors; therefore, they had determined to wait until a few months after the comet’s approach to Earth before tracking it with the telescope. JPL planned to host a public event, called Comet Chasers: On the Trail of a Comet, to bring scholars and the public together to discuss the significance of Comet Hale- Bopp.(NASA, “NASA Plans Comet Hale-Bopp Observing Campaign, Activities,” news release N97-17, 13 March 1996.)
 New support emerged for NASA scientists’ claim that a meteorite discovered in August 1996 held fossil evidence of primitive Martian life. In an article in Science, a group of researchers from California Institute of Technology and McGill University used magnetic studies to demonstrate that the findings on the meteorite were not, as some critics had contended, the result of a high-temperature environment that would have made life impossible. “What we are able to show from the magnetic studies is that these things [the fossil remnant that had excited the interest of Johnson Space Center geologists] couldn’t have been heated even to the boiling point of water.” Although the scientists did not explicitly support NASA’s earlier claim that the remnant provided evidence for bacterial life, the team’s discovery opened the intriguing possibility that remnants of primitive life could migrate from one planet to another.(Joseph L. Kirschvink et al., “Paleomagnetic Evidence of a Low-Temperature Origin of Carbonate in the Martian Meteorite ALH84001,” Science 275, no. 5306 (14 March 1997): 1629−1634; Mark Carreau, “California Scientists Back NASA’s Theory of Life on Mars,” Houston Chronicle, 14 March 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Study Backs Idea that Meteorite Hints of Life on Mars,” New York Times, 14 March 1997.)
 NASA announced that, through its Small Business Innovative Research program, researchers had successfully used recycled plastic milk bottles to create a more effective, lightweight insulation for clothing and blankets. The material had the same honeycomb structure as that of the metal heat barriers used in spacecraft. According to the principal investigator, Steven D. Miller of S. D. Miller and Associates, “The blankets are better than wool or fleece because they are non-allergenic, and they dry five times faster. The new material is also four times warmer than wool in cold and damp conditions.” The research team hypothesized that agencies such as the Red Cross, or other emergency medical personnel, eventually would be able to use the new material to warm patients more quickly. After developing the product for space and commercial uses, NASA planned to allow Miller’s company to pursue further commercialization opportunities without NASA funding.(NASA, “NASA Technology Creates Market for Recycled Milk Bottles,” news release 97-39, 13 March 1997.)
 NASA announced the establishment of a National Microgravity Center, formed in conjunction with Case Western Reserve University and the Universities Space Research Association. NASA selected Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, to lead its research efforts in the project. Plans for the nation’s first center dedicated exclusively to microgravity research focused on five areas: 1) research and technology development; 2) science program outreach and development; 3) scientific support; 4) technology transfer to industry; and 5) public education initiatives. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the endeavor, stating, “The National Center for Microgravity Research on Fluids and Combustion represents a commitment to our goal to strengthen the partnership between NASA and our nation’s research community in universities and industry so that together we can increase the scientific and economic payoffs from NASA’s Microgravity Science Program.” NASA selected Simon Ostrach, a distinguished professor of engineering at Case Western University, as Director of the National Microgravity Center. As Director, Ostrach would be responsible for managing the Center’s staff of more than 30 people and for shaping an agenda of research that would take advantage of opportunities aboard the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Establishes New National Microgravity Center,” news release 97-40, 13 March 1997. 225 Reuters, “Japan Unveils Experimental Docking Satellites,” 20 March 1997.)
 Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) unveiled its key contribution to the ISS, two satellites named after stars⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi, which Japan planned to launch aboard an H-2 rocket. The satellites would make it easier to perform unpiloted docking experiments on the ISS. Japan’s interest in robotic space research fueled the proposal, which complemented NASDA’s plan to build an unpiloted space shuttle to ferry Japan’s experiments to the ISS.
 NASA awarded its 1996 Government Invention of the Year to a patented, high-temperature seal developed for the National Aerospace Plane project. Bruce M. Steinetz and Paul J. Sirocky of NASA’s LERC directed the research. The seal used ceramic and superalloy fibers braided into a malleable structure to seal high-temperature joints on airplanes and Shuttles. The seal maintained its form in temperatures up to 2,000°F (1,090°C).(NASA, “NASA Selects 1996 Government Invention of the Year,” news release 97-47, 20 March 1997. 227 NASA, “Anniversary Marks Milestone of U.S. Presence in Space,” news release 97-45, 17 March 1997.)
 NASA marked the one-year anniversary of the United States’ continuous presence in space, a tenure that began with the mission of astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard the Mir space station. Astronauts John E. Blaha and Jerry M. Linenger had followed Lucid’s stay. NASA planned to maintain a continuous presence aboard Mir until 1998.
 The famed Comet Hale-Bopp made its closest approach to the Sun, accelerating the comet’s process of shedding the gargantuan ice shards that, scientists hypothesized, might contain the basic ingredients necessary for life to begin. Based on data gathered by researchers during the 20 months between the discovery of the comet and its approach to the Sun, scientists theorized that the outer layers of Comet Hale-Bopp probably contained methanol, formaldehyde, carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide, hydrogen sulfide, and other carbon compounds. Because of its proximity to the Sun, many telescopes, most significantly the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had to stop tracking the 25-mile-wide (40-kilometer-wide) comet to avoid damage to their sensitive instruments. The approach of the comet was a scientific opportunity occurring once “every 200 years or so,” according to Brian G. Marsden of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Comet sightings thrilled amateur and professional astronomers alike, as well as causing some paranoia. In one tragically irrational response to its approach, 39 members of the Heaven’s Gate religious community committed suicide, under the delusion that they were about to catch a ride on a spaceship hidden behind the comet’s tail.(William J. Broad, “The Comet’s Gift: Hints of How Earth Came to Life,” New York Times, 1 April 1997.)
 NASA announced that the newly refurbished and improved HST had allowed astronomers to observe the fading, visible-light counterpart of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), a process that researchers called “one of the most energetic and mysterious” in the universe. The scientists speculated that the observable counterpart signified the existence of an unobservable, catastrophic burst of gamma rays, unleashing as much energy in a few seconds as the Sun does in 10 billion years. The New Technology Telescope and the W. M. Keck Telescope, added to the HST in 1997, had enabled scientists to make the observation. According to Gerald J. Fishman of Marshall Space Flight Center, the lead investigator of NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, astronomers could not overestimate the significance of the find, even if the visible- light phenomenon was only an indicator of another unobservable phenomenon. “This [discovery] opens up a whole new era in GRB research,” Fishman explained. “We now know that it is possible to see the fading optical emission by rapid follow-up observations with powerful telescopes. With several more of these, we should be able to narrow the models of what could be causing these gigantic outbursts.”(NASA, “Hubble Tracks the Fading Optical Counterpart of a Gamma-Ray Burst,” news release 97-63, 1 April 1997.)
 Shuttle Columbia launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, embarking on a mission primarily to conduct research on microgravity. To understand the effect of the space environment on fire, and the potential danger of a fire to the astronauts, the mission crew planned to light more than 200 small, controlled fires during the mission. James D. Halsell Jr. commanded the Mission STS-83 crew, and Susan L. Still piloted Shuttle Columbia. Still was the second American woman to pilot a Space Shuttle. Mission Specialists Michael L. Gernhardt and Donald A. Thomas, Payload Commander Janice E. Voss, and Payload Specialists Roger K. Crouch and Gregory T. Linteris completed the crew. The Shuttle carried the Microgravity Science Laboratory in its payload, and the crew planned dozens of experiments, to “serve as a bridge to America’s future in space.” In the course of conducting these experiments, focused on processes necessary to carry out the long-duration research planned for the International Space Station (ISS), the astronauts hoped to create new research procedures and protocols. The STS-83 marked the 22nd mission of Columbia. The Shuttle’s launch took place after a one-day delay, so that engineers could install thermal insulation on two exposed Shuttle pipes.(NASA, “Microgravity Research Highlights Mission STS-83,” news release J97-8, April 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Leaves on a Mission To Study Fire,” 5 April 1997.)
 Astronauts aboard Columbia, consulting with NASA ground support, decided to cut short their planned 16-day mission because of the potential for an explosion in the Shuttle’s electronic generator. NASA decided to abort the mission after the crew had attempted for two days to fix the balky generator. Despite the fact that the Shuttle’s two other generators could provide enough power for the Shuttle, NASA’s procedure required the Shuttle’s return, to prevent subsequent problems. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway clarified that the astronauts faced no imminent danger and that terminating the mission was a precaution rather than an emergency. “The conservative thing to do is land on Tuesday,” Holloway said at a news conference. Columbia’s early return to Earth in Mission STS-83 was only the third time in the history of the Shuttle program that NASA had ended a mission early. The astronauts had time to complete only a few of the planned 33 experiments on the mission, which cost nearly US$500 million.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Flight Cut Short as Risk Persists,” Washington Post, 7 April 1997; Warren Leary, “Power Problem on Shuttle Forces a Tuesday Landing,” New York Times, 7 April 1997; Associated Press, “Deteriorating Generator Cuts Short Mission,” 6 April 1997.)
 Satellite-based monitoring instruments, owned by NASA and used by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), documented startlingly low levels of ozone over the Arctic North Pole. The measurements indicated ozone levels of nearly 40 percent below the levels found in 1979 and 1982. Scientists attributed the low ozone levels to a series of unusual meteorological conditions, although they did not yet know the principal causes of the change.(NASA, “Low Ozone Measured over North Pole,” news release 97-64, 8 April 1997.)
 Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, less than three days after its liftoff. The mission, planned for 16 days, ended early, and the Shuttle completed the return flight without incident. Columbia weighed more than 236,000 pounds (107,000 kilograms) at landing, the heaviest Shuttle ever to land, because of its load of unused supplies for experiments. Almost immediately after the safe landing, NASA officials began to consider repeating the flight as soon as possible, to allow the Shuttle crew to accomplish its original objectives and to avoid the substantial cost of launching an entirely new mission.(William Harwood, “Columbia Lands After Aborted Mission,” Washington Post, 9 April 1997. 66)
 Michael H. Carr of the U.S. Geological Survey announced that the Galileo spacecraft had captured images revealing iceberg-like structures, suggesting the presence of frozen water on Jupiter’s moon Europa. The discovery provided strong support for the theory that an ocean once existed on the moon’s surface. Astronomers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the discovery “mind-blowing” and “the clearest evidence to date that there is liquid water and melting close to the surface of Europa.” Ronald Greeley, the Arizona State University geologist who managed the Galileo imaging team, described the structures in the Europa images as “blocks of ice, similar to those seen on the Earth’s polar seas during springtime thaws.” Greeley concluded that a “thin icy layer covering water or slushy ice” might possibly exist on Europa’s surface. The images revealed one possible ice formation that spread across Europa’s surface in patches as wide as 4 miles (6.4 kilometers). Scientists disagreed on exactly how to interpret the images and on whether future exploration would be able to prove the presence of an ocean. Nevertheless, excitement over the findings spread throughout the research community. In its use of the Galileo probe to explore Europa, NASA continued its mission to search the universe for other environments suitable for life. The Galileo probe almost lost the images when an antenna on the craft jammed, slowing data transmission to Earth. Galileo came within 363 miles (584 kilometers) of Europa to capture the highly celebrated pictures.(Kathy Sawyer, “Signs of Ocean Found on a Jupiter Moon,” Washington Post, 10 April 1997; Associated Press, “Scientists Spot Water on Moon of Jupiter,” 10 April 1997; NASA, “New Images Hint at Wet and Wild History for Europa,” news release 97-66, 9 April 1997.)
 At a tense hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA announced the necessity of a significant delay in the on-orbit assembly of the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained the delay, “We knew from the outset that building the International Space Station was going to be tremendously challenging. Space exploration is not easy or predictable. We will work through this schedule issue.” NASA had scheduled the on-orbit construction to begin in November 1997, after Russia had launched Functional Cargo Block, known by its Russian abbreviation FGB. Inadequate funding for the Russian Space Agency, however, had delayed the construction of this ISS building block, pushing back the overall schedule. Russia had also delayed building the service module, another key component of the ISS.235 NASA’s announcement invoked further criticism from members of Congress opposed to the ISS initiative. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI), long a vocal opponent of the ISS, said simply, “I told you so.” Before the official announcement of the delay, Sensenbrenner had argued that NASA needed to consider alternative plans, in case the Russian Space Agency proved unable to meet its obligations. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Wilbur C. Trafton countered criticism, noting that the international contribution to the effort had surpassed US$6 billion and that NASA and its partners still expected to complete the overall project on time in 2002. Because the enormous undertaking involved “15 countries, dozens of companies, and thousands of workers,” keeping production to preestablished deadlines had proven difficult.(William J. Broad, “Panel Upset by New Delay in Russian Space Module,” New York Times, 10 April 1997. 237 Reuters, “Mir Crew Has Little To Celebrate on Space Day,” 11 April 1997.)
 The Russian Space Agency celebrated the 36th anniversary of sending the first Russian, Yuri Gagarin, into space. At the same time, two cosmonauts and U.S. astronaut Jerry M. Linenger, who were on board Mir, reported that they had almost had to abandon the Russian space station twice over the past few months. Russia’s successful history of space exploration contrasted with the current struggles of the Russian Space Agency to obtain adequate funding for Mir and other space initiatives. When Russia launched its first piloted mission in 1961, the Cold War was driving an intense space competition between the Soviet Union and United States. In the days leading up to the anniversary, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin expressed his support for increased funding to the Russian Space Agency in the future.
 NASA and the U.S. Air Force Space Command announced an agreement to collaborate on several projects of mutual interest. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin explained that the agreement was part of NASA’s ongoing mission to become a more efficient and cost-effective agency, and that sharing information would lead to “greater efficiencies in our respective missions.” Goldin and U.S. Air Force Space Commander General Howell M. Estes III signed the pact, establishing seven teams to explore areas of potential cooperation. The areas of research included the feasibility of launching defense satellites from the Shuttle; the use of the Shuttle for U.S. Air Force technology payloads; and development of a plan to meet the dual space needs of NASA and the U.S. Air Force. The two agencies also planned to examine ways they might share their common infrastructure and facilities.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Space Command Announce Cooperative Efforts,” news release 97-68, 16 April 1997.)
 In the first study to observe directly a change in the growth cycles of a large swath of the Northern Hemisphere, scientists reported that spring was arriving a full week earlier in the Earth’s coldest regions than only a decade earlier. The report contributed to growing concern over the prospect of global warming. Using images obtained from NOAA satellites, a team of five scientists from Boston University demonstrated that plants budding in early spring had used 10 percent more carbon than previously, indicating the spring’s earlier onset. The scientific community reacted to the report with interest, although most scientists cautioned that understanding climate change would be a long and difficult process.(Joby Warrick, “Spring Sprouting Earlier than a Decade Ago,” Washington Post, 17 April 1997.)
 NASA scientist Addison Bain released a study concluding that the cause of the highly publicized explosion of the airship Hindenburg in 1937 was a special paint used to protect the aircraft from sunlight⎯not the ignition of inflammable hydrogen as historians had previously thought. Bain and a team of researchers used reels of archived film, models, and computer simulations to reach the conclusion that the outside of the Hindenburg had caught fire first. Because the Nazi government viewed the Hindenburg accident as an embarrassment, Germany had restricted the investigation into the explosion, which caused the deaths of the 35 passengers. The cover-up had led researchers to propose the scientifically unconvincing theory of a hydrogen fire.(Reuters, “Paint Led to Hindenburg AirshipTragedy,” 23 April 1997.)
 NASA announced that it had rescheduled for July 1997 Space Shuttle Columbia’s Microgravity Science Laboratory (MSL) mission, cut short in early April because of a fuel cell problem. The quick repair and relaunch plan used the same crew and set the same objectives as the initial Mission STS-83. Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway stated, “we are now in the position to do everything possible to complete the MSL mission with minimal impact to downstream flights.” He also pointed out that the attempt to complete the MSL mission provided NASA with a “unique opportunity to demonstrate our ability to respond to challenges.” In its decision to insert Columbia’s Mission STS-83 into an already arranged Shuttle docket, NASA acknowledged that it would have to push back slightly other flights, already staffed and planned.(NASA, “Microgravity Science Laboratory Mission Set for July; Remaining 1997 Shuttle Manifest Adjusted Slightly,” news release 97-81, 25 April 1997; Seth Borenstein, “Space Shuttle Columbia Gets Chance To Finish What It Started,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 18 April 1997.)
 At the fourth Compton Symposium on Gamma Ray Astronomy and Astrophysics, scientists from Northwestern University and the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory announced the unexpected discovery of two clouds of antimatter in the Milky Way Galaxy. The researchers termed the material “antimatter annihilation radiation.” The team of researchers used NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to discover the clouds, which scientists could not fully explain. “The origin of this new and unexpected source of antimatter is a mystery,” William R. Purcell of Northwestern University explained. The scientists postulated that the clouds might have resulted from starbursts, jets of material from a nearby black hole, or from the merger of two neutron stars. Attempting to explain the startling nature of the discovery, Charles D. Dermer of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory said, “It is like finding a new room in the house we have lived in since childhood. And the room is not empty⎯it has some engine or boiler making hot gas filled with annihilating antimatter.”(NASA, “Antimatter Clouds and Fountain Discovered in the Milky Way,” news release 97-83, 28 April 1997; Malcolm W. Browne, “Enormous Plume of Antimatter Alters View of the Milky Way,” New York Times, 29 April 1997.)
 NASA astronaut, American Jerry M. Linenger, and Russian Space Agency cosmonaut, Ukrainian-born Vasili V. Tsibliyev, made the first joint U.S.-Russian spacewalk in the history of space exploration. Linenger, more than three months into his four-month stay aboard the Mir space station, joined Tsibliyev for nearly 5 hours outside the station. The two men gathered cosmic dust samples and installed a radiation meter. It was Linenger’s first spacewalk and Tsibliyev’s third. The men both wore Russian spacesuits and spoke in Russian as they cooperated to complete the exercise. Scientists planned to use the samples gathered from the spacewalk to continue tests to find the materials best suited for long-term space occupation, a question of preeminent importance with the ISS nearing fruition. Because of the orbiting position of the space station, Russian Mission Control was unable to communicate with Linenger and Tsibliyev while they were outside Mir, somewhat heightening tensions during the spacewalk.(NASA, “U.S. Astronaut Ready for Milestone Spacewalk,” news release 97-80, 25 April 1997; Associated Press, “American, Russian Take a Spacewalk,” 30 April 1997; Associated Press, “Astronauts Make First Joint U.S.- Russian Spacewalk,” 29 April 1997.)
 NASA announced that John C. Mather, a senior astrophysicist at Goddard Space Flight Center, had been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, often considered the highest recognition possible for scientists and engineers. Mather’s work at NASA had begun in 1974, specifically, on the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) spacecraft. He had served as a project scientist when NASA launched the spacecraft in 1989, and in 1992 he had participated in the COBE project, which effectively mapped primordial hot and cold spots in the cosmic microwave background radiation. The map demonstrated that radiation from the Big Bang conformed to theoretical predictions, providing new evidence for the long-standing Big Bang theory. Mather received his PhD in physics from the University of California at Berkeley in 1974.(NASA, “Goddard Scientist Selected for National Academy of Sciences,” news release 97-88, 2 May 1997. 245 NASA, “Heat-Resistant Material Licensed for High-Performance Pistons,” news release 97-91, 6 May 1997. 246 Associated Press, “Hubble-Look Back,” 9 May 1997.)
 NASA announced that it had granted Hitco Technologies exclusive rights to use a NASA- developed, heat-resistant material to produce high-performance pistons. NASA had developed the carbon-carbon composite in the 1960s, for use as a heat shield for missile applications. Researchers speculated that pistons composed of carbon-carbon, a material with virtually no thermal expansion, would allow engines to perform more efficiently, holding their shape and rigidity in temperatures well above 2,500°F (1,370°C). According to G. Burton Northam of Langley Research Center, the carbon-carbon composite was “the material of choice for the most demanding applications.” Allowing industry to use one of NASA’s patented technologies continued the trend of government-industry collaboration that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had fostered.
 At Baltimore’s Space Telescope Science Institute, NASA scientists described the long-duration- exposure pictures taken by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) as the “best picture we have yet of the early universe,” announcing that, approximately 12 billion years ago, the universe had been completely barren of galaxies. Richard S. Ellis of England’s Institute of Astronomy emphasized the significance of science’s new ability to use the HST to view “a time before galaxy formation.” The HST had opened its lens for many hours of exposure, focusing on a tiny wedge of the sky to capture its most probing picture ever, known as the Hubble Deep Field Survey. Focusing only on a small speck of the sky had enabled astronomers to look deeper into the universe than ever before. Mario Livio of the Space Telescope Science Institute estimated that the HST had captured a view of the universe at only about 10 percent of its present age.
 Hubble scientists released their first reviews of the newly upgraded HST, concluding enthusiastically that the refurbished space telescope offered exciting new possibilities. The upgrades to the HST significantly improved the range and precision of the instrument. Scientists reported peering approximately 50 million light-years away and zeroing in on previously undetectable black holes. According to Edward J. Weiler, the head of NASA’s Hubble team, the added Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, installed in February 1997, reduced the length of time it took to confirm the presence of black holes in the universe. Weiler called the HST a “census bureau” for black-hole hunting, allowing researchers to survey these objects as a population rather than as individual phenomena. Another new instrument installed in February, the Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS), enabled the HST to capture near-infrared wavelengths, beginning to penetrate the “dusty veil” that had prevented astronomers from studying the birth and death of stars. NASA engineers also disclosed that an early focusing problem with one of the three cameras used by the NICMOS system seemed to be correcting itself. Although the flaw could limit the life of the system, scientists were confident that NICMOS would still be able to gather and preserve all scientific data. During early testing of the NICMOS system, scientists had uncovered a region of the universe in which young stars eject material into a molecular cloud, a process that researchers had long hypothesized but had been unable to observe.(NASA, “Hubble’s Upgrades Show Birth and Death of Stars; Discover Massive Black Hole,” news release 97-93, 12 May 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Improved Hubble Telescope Gets Rave Reviews at NASA,” Washington Post, 13 May 1997; Reuters, “Hubble Captures Star Birth,” 13 May 1997; Associated Press, “Upgrade Hubble Telescope Dazzles Astronomers,” 12 May 1997.)
 The New York Times reported a soon-to-be released study by Research Policy, providing strong evidence that publicly funded scientific research often fueled industrial advancements in the United States. According to the study, prepared for the National Science Foundation, 73 percent of all American industrial patents filed during the two-year study cited scientific advancements made possible by government funding. The report had particular relevance because the Clinton administration and its congressional allies, both Democratic and Republican, had considered paring down the nation’s science outlays to balance the federal budget. The Council of Scientific Society Presidents called the report “a wake-up call for [f]ederal investment policies.” The study joined an ongoing debate over exactly what contribution general scientific research made to the national economy. The National Science Foundation and NASA were two of the agencies most cited in industrial patent requests.(William J. Broad, “Study Finds Public Science Is Pillar of Industry,” New York Times, 13 May 1997. 249 NASA, “NASA Earth Science Research Aircraft Soars to New Heights,” 13 May 1997.)
 For the first time, NASA deployed its ER-2 aircraft, a civilian version of the U-2 reconnaissance plane, over the North Pole. The vehicle’s flight supported the Photochemistry of Ozone Loss in the Arctic Region in Summer (POLARIS) project. The ER-2 flew at 70,000 feet (21,000 meters), an ideal height for atmospheric research. Michael J. Kurylo, Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program, emphasized the importance of aircraft such as the ER-2 to fill this specific research niche: “It is really critical that we have access to consistent measurements at this key altitude, which is an intermediate region between aerosol particle-driven processes measured by standard aircraft-based sensors and gas-phase processes monitored by orbiting satellites.” Scientists said they were optimistic that the ER-2 would aid significantly the POLARIS endeavor to understand why the ozone layer over the North Pole had experienced reductions during each Arctic summer.
 NASA and Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science announced an agreement to combine their efforts to collect and study samples from the surface of the asteroid Nereus. According to the plan, a Japanese launch vehicle would carry a NASA-engineered rover onto the surface of the asteroid. The planned rover, with a visible-imaging camera and a near-infrared point spectrometer, would weigh less than 3 pounds (1.3 kilograms), the smallest spacecraft ever sent into space. A recovery capsule would return to Earth the samples the rover gathered from Nereus. The project would have a lengthy timeframe, with the return of the samples to Earth scheduled for 2006. NASA and the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science were hopeful and excited at the prospect of joining forces. “This ambitious mission is an opportunity for two spacefaring nations to combine their expertise and achieve something truly fantastic,” said Jurgen H. Rahe, NASA’s Director of Solar System Exploration.(NASA, “NASA and Japan To Cooperate on Asteroid Sample Return Mission,” news release 97-95, 14 May 1997.)
 Space Shuttle Atlantis took off at dawn from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a crew of seven. Mission STS-84 was the fourth mission of 1997 and the sixth of nine planned missions to the Mir space station. Atlantis carried astronaut C. Michael Foale, who was to replace Jerry M. Linenger as the United States’ long-term resident aboard Mir. Charles J. Precourt served as Commander of Mission STS-84 and Eileen M. Collins as Pilot for the Shuttle. In addition, the crew included U.S. astronauts Carlos I. Noriega and Edward T. Lu and Mission Specialists Elena V. Kondakova of the Russian Space Agency and Jean-François Clervoy of the European Space Agency (ESA). Kondakova was the first Russian woman to fly aboard a NASA Space Shuttle. With the recent problems aboard Mir, many viewed the mission with special urgency. Concerned about the numerous breakdowns and the fire aboard the Russian space station, NASA even considered refusing to allow Foale to take his place aboard Mir. The Shuttle carried to Mir a new oxygen generator, which astronauts planned to unload almost immediately upon docking. Atlantis took into space more than 7,000 pounds (3,200 kilograms) of cargo for Mir and its crew.(NASA, “Atlantis Ready To Fly Sixth Shuttle–Mir Mission,” news release J97-15, May 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 15 May 1997.)
 European astronomers unveiled a new, more accurate map of the stars. Scientists immediately praised the 17-volume celestial guide as a milestone in astronomy. The ESA’s Hipparcos project had produced the map over 17 years, at a cost approaching US$1 billion. Astronomers called the release of the Hipparcos data the beginning of a new and fruitful debate. Hipparcos Project Scientist Michael Perryman said, “It’s a massive leap forward in our understanding. But the science of Hipparcos doesn’t stop here. For the scientific community it is just beginning.” In total, the map indicated the positions and motions of more than 118,000 stars.(Association Press, “Mapping the Heavens,” 15 May 1997.)
 NASA unveiled a new facility, called the Chemical Crib, at Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC). Officials hoped the new facility would reduce chemical waste by as much as 50 percent in three years. Waste disposal had become an increasingly expensive problem for NASA. “For every dollar spent to buy chemicals,” NASA’s Hazardous Materials Officer reported, “we spend three dollars to dispose of them.” The Chemical Crib would use a variety of techniques and technologies to compress waste, such as breaking down photographic-waste chemicals into a sludge, possessing as little as 5 percent of the mass of the original waste. NASA planned to construct similar facilities at its other sites. Staff of DFRC’s Safety, Health, and Environmental Office believed that the new facility would not only benefit the environment, but also the Center’s budget.(NASA, “New NASA Facility To Reduce Chemical Wastes; May Provide Better Storage for Hazardous Materials,” news release 97-102, 19 May 1997.)
 Astronaut Shannon W. Lucid, who had spent more than six months aboard Mir in 1996, received the Order of Friendship Medal from Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin in a ceremony at the Kremlin. The medal was the highest honor available to a non-Russian citizen.(NASA, “Astronaut Shannon Lucid Receives Russian Order of Friendship Medal,” news release 97-103, 19 May 1997.)
 NASA researchers announced the discovery of wildly oscillating weather patterns on Mars. In yet another use for the HST images, scientists tracked much colder, cloudier, harsher weather conditions than they had expected. R. Todd Clancy of the Space Science Institute attributed Mars’s chaotic weather to a combination of factors, including the planet’s thin atmosphere and elliptical orbit and the ice and dust clouds surrounding it. When the planet’s orbit places it closest to the Sun, large windstorms push dust into the atmosphere; the dust absorbs sunlight, causing the air to heat, and Mars’s temperature to rise as high as 30°F (-1°C). HST images seemed to demonstrate further that, when the planet is farthest from the Sun, the dust storms remain at low altitudes, and ice clouds surround the planet, causing temperatures to plunge precipitously. The findings were of particular importance to NASA’s ongoing Mars Pathfinder Project, with Pathfinder’s entrance into the Martian atmosphere planned for July 1997.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Space Telescope Finds Big Shifts in Weather on Mars,” New York Times, 21 May 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Kaleidoscopic Mars Shows Its True Colors,” USA Today, 21 May 1997; Associated Press, “Hubble Finds Climate on Mars Harsher than Scientists Thought,” 21 May 1997.)
 A Russian Zenit-2 rocket carrying a military satellite exploded moments after taking off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to Russian space officials, the failure occurred 38 seconds after liftoff, when an engine inexplicably shut off. The Russian Space Agency suspended all further launches until an investigation could determine what had caused the explosion. NASA believed that the destroyed satellite was a spy satellite intended to replace in orbit one of Russia’s many outdated satellites. Russia had not insured the satellite, valued at US$17 million.(Richard C. Paddock, “Russian Rocket Bearing Military Satellite Fails,” Los Angeles Times, 21 May; Associated Press, “Russian Booster Fails, Explodes During Satellite Launch,” 20 May 1997.)
 NASA announced that an American astronaut would be the first commander of the planned International Space Station, settling a long-standing disagreement between NASA and the Russian Space Agency. NASA selected veteran U.S. astronaut William M. Shepherd to lead the three-person crew, which also included Russian cosmonauts Sergei K. Krikalev and Yuri P. Gidzenko. Gidzenko said that he had no problem participating in a U.S.-led mission: “It doesn’t matter who will be commander, who will be the flight engineer or pilot. They all work together, and they will try to do their best.” NASA had selected Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev as a member of the crew, but Solovyev had refused to take part in an American-led expedition, opening the door to Gidzenko’s participation.(Todd Halverson, “American Astronaut Will Lead First Space Station Crew in ’99,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 May 1997.)
 The U.S. Capitol’s Statuary Hall installed a bronze statue of Apollo 13 astronaut John L. Swigert Jr., a native of Denver, to represent the state of Colorado. Each state chooses two statues for the hall to honor its most prominent citizens. Swigert was, perhaps, most famous for uttering the words, “Houston, we’ve had a problem.” Colorado had elected Swigert to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982, but he had died of cancer before his swearing-in. Swigert’s statue took its place alongside that of fellow Coloradoan Florence Rena Sabin, who led the crusade for women’s admission to medical schools. Astronaut Thomas Kenneth Mattingly II, whom Swigert replaced only three days before the Apollo 13 launch, attended the statue dedication, along with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and other dignitaries.(Paul Leavitt, “New Statue,” USA Today, 23 May 1997; Associated Press, “Newest Congressional Statue: Apollo 13 Astronaut John Swigert,” 22 May 1997.)
 Astronaut Jerry M. Linenger surprised onlookers at KSC when he bounded off Shuttle Atlantis only minutes after its landing. Physicians credited Linenger’s excellent condition after spending more than four months aboard the Mir space station to his regimen of orbital exercise. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin was on hand to greet Linenger and the other astronauts returning home on Atlantis. The Shuttle’s safe landing returned Linenger to Earth after 132 days in space⎯the second longest stint by an American.(Los Angeles Times, “Returning Astronaut Surprises Even Himself; Shuttle: Four Months on Mir Sap Less Strength than Traveler Jerry Linenger Expected. He Credits the Exercising He Did in Orbit,” 25 May 1997.)
 Educators, scientists, and politicians gathered to celebrate a new nationwide observance⎯Space Day⎯meant to carry on President John F. Kennedy’s call to the nation for space exploration. On 25 May 1961, Kennedy had urged the United States to “commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth,” sparking NASA’s successful development of human space travel. Advocates of Space Day argued that a day of celebrating previous achievements and calling for further advances would inspire future space explorers, particularly children. More than 1,900 schools across the nation participated in Space Day activities.(Martha Woodall for Knight-Ridder News Service, “Space Day Today To Renew Interest in Outer Space,” 22 May 1997.)
 Lockheed Martin Corporation announced a joint satellite venture with the Moscow-based Intersputnik consortium. Financial analysts estimated the pact could produce more than US$1.5 billion in annual revenue, capitalizing on the increasing demand for satellite transmission services for telecommunication signaling. The agreement, which cemented ties between the U.S. corporation and Russian space interests, combined Lockheed’s capital resources with Intersputnik’s rights to prime satellite positions. Lockheed assumed responsibility for constructing and launching the satellites, whereas Intersputnik took the lead in marketing and sales. The Intersputnik group represented Russia and 21 other nations. The newly formed Lockheed Martin Intersputnik Ltd. Company planned to focus on providing services to South Asia and Eastern Europe⎯burgeoning markets with great potential for technological and economic growth.(Jeff Cole, “Lockheed To Unveil Intersputnik Satellite Venture,” Wall Street Journal, 2 June 1997; Associated Press, “Lockheed Planning Russia Venture,” 2 June 1997; Greg Schneider, “Lockheed To Link Ex-Soviet Markets,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 3 June 1997.)
 NASA announced the start of a month-long research endeavor to explore the levels of radiation present at high altitudes, using a refitted ER-2 aircraft. The project focused on altitudes between 52,000 and 70,000 feet (15,900 and 21,300 meters), where radiation typically occurs because of cosmic and solar rays. The project had both scientific and public policy applications; researchers intended to use the data gathered to assess the safety of public, supersonic travel. The campaign, funded by NASA’s High-Speed Research Program, specifically investigated the plausibility of the High-Speed Civil Transport, still in the conceptual stage of planning, a commercial jetliner that would carry passengers at 2.4 times the speed of sound and at altitudes above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). According to NASA Project Manager Donald L. Maiden, the speed of supersonic flight could mitigate any ill effects of high altitudes on passengers, because “Even though the exposure levels are higher at the higher cruise altitude, the typical flying public will actually receive less radiation exposure than on today’s subsonic transports because of the higher speed of the High-Speed Civil Transport.” NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy’s Environmental Measurements Laboratory, the Boeing Company, and the space agencies of Canada, Germany, and the United Kingdom collaborated on the project.(NASA, “NASA Studies High Altitude Radiation with Upgrade ER-2,” news release 97-118, 3 June 1997.)
 The Los Angeles Times reported that the students of Glassell Park Elementary School had sold an astonishing 32,000 candy bars, to pay the way for all 115 of its fifth graders to attend the U.S. Space Camp at NASA’s Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California. Most of the school’s 951 students participated in selling candy to send their older classmates to the educational camp. Principal Beatrice LaPisto said proudly of her students, “This is a poor neighborhood. Most children here, for example, are on the free lunch program. But these are the brightest, best, most motivated students you’ll find anywhere.” This year was the first in which the nonprofit U.S. Space Camp Foundation had expanded its operations to the California site.(Bob Pool, “Space Race,” Los Angeles Times, 4 June 1997.)
 NASA researchers announced that data from the Galileo probe indicated that Jupiter has distinct wet and dry regions similar to the Earth. The finding refuted the previous supposition that Jupiter was mostly dry. When it descended to Jupiter in December 1995, Galileo landed in an extremely dry and hot portion of the planet⎯an area one member of the team called the Sahara Desert of Jupiter. Scientists assumed that the area was representative of the entire planet, until they were able to analyze more long-range images taken by the probe. The Galileo team concluded that Jupiter was remarkably similar to Earth, with wet, dry, hot, and cold regions, as well as rain, snow, and thunderstorms. Before the creation of Galileo, scientists had been unable to observe much of the planet because of surface clouds of frozen ammonia. According to Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA’s most fundamental conclusion was that “There is weather on Jupiter.” However, scientists pointed out that, in contrast to Earth, Jupiter faces weather developments that are far more extreme and long lasting. Storms on the planet can last for years or even centuries.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Wet Spots, Dry Spots and New View of Jupiter’s Light Show,” news release 97-123, 5 June 1997; K.C. Cole, “Scientists Detect Rain on Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 6 June 1997; Associated Press, “Jupiter Wet and Dry,” 6 June 1997.)
 An article in Nature confirmed the discovery of a small icy planet orbiting the Sun well beyond Pluto. The discovery confirmed the theory that the solar system extends far beyond previously verifiable limits. The planet, known as 1996TL66, with a surface area roughly the size of Texas, was the brightest solar-system object that astronomers had discovered beyond Neptune since 1978. Astronomers using a University of Hawaii telescope discovered the planet as its orbit passed closest to the Earth, an occurrence that happens every 800 years. In the past, some researchers had hypothesized, but had been unable to prove, that planets might exist in the area where astronomers discovered 1996TL66.(Jane Luu et al., “A New Dynamic Class of Object in the Outer Solar System,” Nature 387, no. 6633 (5 July 1997): 573−575; Associated Press, “Astronomers Find Icy Miniplanet Beyond Pluto,” 5 June 1997.)
 NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder, a remote-controlled, ultra-lightweight aircraft, set a new world record for highest altitude for a solar-powered aircraft. AeroVironment Pathfinder reached an altitude of 67,350 feet (20,500 meters), shattering the previous record of 50,500 feet (15,400 meters). The experiment took place at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility in Kauai, Hawaii. Engineers had designed Pathfinder to fly at extremely high altitudes, to supply researchers with atmospheric and environmental data that other planes could not gather. In traveling to such heights, Pathfinder experienced temperatures as low as -100°F (-73°C). After climbing for about 6 hours, the aircraft ascended into record-breaking territory, flying for more than 90 minutes at an altitude above 60,000 feet (18,300 meters). A partnership formed under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Alliance, involving NASA, aerospace companies, and members of the scientific community, was responsible for developing AeroVironment Pathfinder.(Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Surpasses Propeller Altitude Record,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 146, no. 25 (16 June 1997): 53; NASA, “Pathfinder Sets New World Record,” news release 97-132, 12 June 1997. 267 NASA, “Hubble Is First To Spot Colliding Supernovas,” news release 97-129, 10 June 1997.)
 Astrophysicists William P. Blair, Robert A. Fesen, and Eric M. Schlegel presented to the American Astronomical Society the first images ever recorded of two supernovas colliding. The team used the Hubble Space Telescope to capture the images of the supernovas, more than 17 million light-years from Earth. Astronomers had suspected that collisions occurred between exploding stars, but had been unable to capture an image of the process, because it was so short- lived. Although the scientific community would continue to debate the implications of the image, Blair offered this assessment of its significance: “It indicates that not only is there a lot of star formation going on, but a lot of those stars are massive. They are evolving quickly, and they are exploding as supernovas.”
 The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report detailing the cost overruns for the development of the International Space Station (ISS). U.S. Senator Dale Bumpers (D-AK), a longtime opponent of the expensive ISS, requested the report. Upon seeing it, Senator Bumpers commented, “we don’t need to search outer space for black holes. We have one right here on Earth. It’s called the International Space Station.” GAO’s report found that Boeing Company, hired by NASA to build the ISS, had already incurred nearly US$300 million in cost overruns. The report also found that the cost-effectiveness of the project had deteriorated severely from the time of last accounting. In 1995 Boeing had been US$27 million under budget as opposed to the severe overages of 1997. GAO Associate Director Thomas J. Schulz recommended in the report that Congress should rethink its commitment to the program if the overruns continued to grow. The estimate of the cost, just to get the program back on schedule, was US$129 million. However, an ongoing debate on a disaster relief bill for the Midwest prevented the scheduled congressional hearing on the report.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station Cost Control Problems Continue To Worsen” (report no. T- NSIAD-97-177, Washington, DC, 18 June 1997); Seth Borenstein and Tamara Lytle, “Space Lab Deep in Red, Report Says,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 June 1997; Associated Press, “Space Station,” 11 June 1997.)
 NASA announced that Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space Company had won the contract to develop and deliver solar-imaging instruments for U.S. weather satellites. The US$54 million contract provided funding for the creation of a model instrument and two flight instruments. Scientists believed that the solar x-ray images captured by the instrument would improve the ability of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Air Force to forecast special weather events. The proposed imager also had applications for civilian companies dependent upon predicting weather patterns.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Selected To Build Solar X-ray Imaging,” news release C97-g, 18 June 1997; Grant Jerding, “NASA Brings Its X-ray Vision to the Universe,” USA Today, 17 June 1997.)
 Jurgen H. Rahe, NASA’s Science Program Director for Exploration of the Solar System, died when a tree collapsed on the car he was driving during a severe storm in Maryland. Rahe, 57 years old, had enjoyed a distinguished career in the field of astronomy and at NASA. At the time of his death, he was responsible for overseeing visionary NASA programs, such as the Galileo Mission to Jupiter and the much-anticipated July 1997 landing of Mars Pathfinder. Rahe had guided NASA’s efforts to make more frequent and cost-effective exploratory missions of the solar system. According to one colleague, Rahe had presided over the planetary exploration program’s “unparalleled period of major discoveries.” Before his tenure at NASA, Rahe held tenured positions at California Institute of Technology and Germany’s University of Erlangen- Nuremberg.(Associated Press, “Obituary: Jurgen Rahe, 57, NASA Official,” 20 June 1997; NASA, “NASA Mourns Dr. Jurgen H. Rahe, Solar System Exploration Science Program Director,” news release 97-137, 19 June 1997.)
 As the 50th anniversary of the alleged alien sighting neared, the U. S. Air Force released a 231- page report entitled The Roswell Report: Case Closed. The report explained that the U.S. Air Force had recovered test dummies from the Roswell, New Mexico, crash site in 1947, rather than the bodies of aliens. The U.S. Air Force had issued a report on the Roswell matter in 1994, in which researchers argued that the presumed spacecraft that had crashed in 1947 was actually an Air Force balloon used in a top-secret program called Project Mogul. When officials discovered evidence that the tests had used parachute dummies, however, the U.S. Air Force compiled an additional report with the new information. Military officials hoped that the Air Force’s explanation for the supposed UFO reported in 1994, as well as for the supposed bodies of aliens discovered in the crash, would temper the controversy surrounding the issue. U.S. Air Force Colonel John Haynes, presiding over the Pentagon news conference at the release of the report, showed reporters footage of a NASA test craft that, indeed, resembled a flying saucer. Colonel Haynes explained that during testing in the 1950s, Air Force balloons had transported dummies to altitudes of 98,000 feet (29,900 meters), releasing them to fall to the ground. Since the testing was secret, the sight of falling dummies “easily could have been mistaken for something they were not.”(U. S. Air Force Headquarters, The Roswell Report: Case Closed (Washington, DC, 1997); Associated Press, “Air Force Says Dummies Used in Parachute Tests Were Mistaken for Aliens,” 24 June 1997; Richard Leiby, “Alien Autopsy,” Washington Post, 25 June 1997.)
 In the most serious of a string of problems for the Russian Mir space station, the 7-ton (6,400- kilogram or 6.4-tonne) robotic cargo spacecraft Progress accelerated out of control while docking and crashed into Mir, damaging the Spektr module, tearing a solar-power array, and crumpling an exposed radiator. When the craft crashed into Mir, U.S. astronaut, British-born C. Michael Foale was inside the Spektr module, which he had been using as his sleeping and research quarters. Foale immediately abandoned the damaged module and slammed shut a hatch, sealing off the leaking Spektr. Spektr depressurized completely, and later the entire space station suffered a slight depressurization. When the collision occurred, Mir cosmonaut Vasili V. Tsibliyev was controlling the Progress manually, attempting to re-dock the craft, to test the updated manual-control system. The Progress had already docked with Mir a few days earlier, when the crew had unloaded cargo and filled the craft’s hold with trash. In addition to damaging Mir, the collision temporarily jarred the station off its normal flying orbit. Although the crew quickly remedied this problem, the three-man team had to work inside a darkened, partially powered station. Russian and American space officials estimated that Mir had lost half of its operating power from the collision. The collision heightened tensions between Russian and American space officials, as questions mounted about the safety of the crew aboard the failing space station. U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) met with NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, urging NASA not to send American astronauts to Mir until the station’s safety standards had improved significantly. Yuri N. Koptev, Director General of the Russian Space Agency, responded angrily to Sensenbrenner’s suggestion.(Michael R. Gordon, “Russian Space Station Damaged in Collision with a Cargo Vessel,” New York Times, 26 June 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Docking Crash Cripples Mir Space Station,” Washington Post, 26 June 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Slow To Announce Mir Crash, but More Forthcoming than in Past,” 25; David Hoffman, “U.S. Questions on Mir’s Safety Anger Russia,” Washington Post, 27 June 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Future of U.S.-Russian Mission Shaky,” USA Today, 26 June 1997.)
 Vladimir Lobachyov, head of Russian Mission Control, explained to reporters that the collision of the robotic cargo craft Progress with the Mir space station had probably punctured one of the space station’s solar batteries, damaging Mir’s power supply. The crew of the damaged Mir turned the space station to face directly toward the Sun, so that Mir would get the jolt of energy necessary to boost its solar-power supply.(Reuters, “Mir Crew Turns to Sun To Help Damaged Space Station,” 26 June 1997.)
 NASA’s Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft engaged in a high-speed flyby of asteroid 253 Mathilde, capturing startlingly clear images of the huge space rock. Scientists had discovered Mathilde more than 100 years ago but, until the successful NEAR mission, they had been unable to take useful pictures of the 33-mile-around (53-kilometer-around) asteroid. NEAR Mission Director Robert W. Farquhar of the Applied Physics Laboratory praised the mission as “one of the most successful flybys of all time.” In the color images, the asteroid resembled a massive gray potato with deep gashes scarring its surface. Some of the craters on the asteroid were large enough to “swallow the District of Columbia,” according to one scientist who viewed the images as they were taken. The pictures also revealed that the rock was smaller than scientists had previously estimated and that it reflected only 3 percent of the Sun’s light, making it twice as dark as a piece of charcoal. Scientists hoped that the new data might reveal why the asteroid rotates at the extremely slow rate of one rotation every 17.4 days. NEAR’s multispectral imager took the pictures using very little of the spacecraft’s solar-based power, a significant accomplishment, since NEAR was approximately 186 million miles (300 million kilometers) from the Sun when it captured the images.(NASA, “Asteroid Mathilde Reveals Her Dark Past,” news release 97-147, 30 June 1997; Associated Press, “Spacecraft Sends Astonishing Images of Asteroid,” 27 June 1997; Associated Press, “In Close Flyby Spacecraft Sends Back Photos of Battered Asteroid,” 1 July 1997.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Commander James D. Halsell Jr. called Mission STS-94 a “once-in-a-career opportunity” for the seven-person crew, the same crew that had embarked upon Mission STS-83 in April 1997. NASA had cut short Mission STS-83 because of a fuel cell problem. The reflight gave NASA officials and the Shuttle crew a chance to undertake the experiments planned for the original mission, including testing hardware and procedures planned for the International Space Station. NASA was able to launch Columbia just 84 days after bringing the Shuttle home, at a cost of about 20 percent of the amount needed to set off a new Shuttle mission. The crew planned to carry out the original 33 experiments over the course of the 16-day science mission. Mission STS-94, NASA clarified, involved the same vehicle, crew, Microgravity Science Laboratory payload, and experiment schedule as the recalled mission. The mission was the first in the 36-year history of unpiloted spaceflight in which the same crew flew together in space more than once.(NASA, “Columbia and Crew Ready for Reflight of Microgravity Sciences Laboratory-1 Payload on Mission STS-94,” news release J97-21, June 1997; William Harwood, “Shuttle Begins Second Attempt at Mission,” Washington Post, 2 July 1997; Warren Leary, “Shuttle Roars Aloft To Complete Mission Interrupted in April,” New York Times, 2 July 1997; Associated Press, “Space Shuttle Blasts Off on Repeat Science Mission,” 1 July 1997.)
 NASA announced its plan to compensate for the failure of Japan’s Advanced Earth Observing Satellite (ADEOS) with NASA’s weather instruments aboard, admitting that the loss of the spacecraft was “a real blow to NASA’s science program.” Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) had declared the ADEOS lost on 30 June 1997. NASA scientists had been using the satellite to gather data about weather patterns and climate change. NASA resolutely pledged to continue working with NASDA despite the setback, highlighting plans to send up a second scatterometer aboard ADEOS II in 1999. Michael B. Mann, Deputy Associate Administrator of the Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise, qualified the failure saying, “The collaboration between NASDA and NASA on this mission has been outstanding . . . space operations is a risky business; those of us involved in the business strive to limit the risk but sometimes mishaps do occur.”(NASA, “NASA’s Earth Science Program Adjusts to Loss of Data from Japanese ADEOS Satellite,” news release 97-149, 2 July 1997.)
 NASA successfully landed the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft on Mars, exactly seven months after its launch from Earth. Project managers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) called the landing “near perfect,” celebrating the beginning of the “second era in the exploration of Mars.” The Mars Pathfinder Mission was the first to attempt a planetary landing on initial orbit, and Pathfinder’s safe landing followed a journey in which the spacecraft traveled at speeds of up to 16,600 miles (26,800 kilometers) per hour. Although NASA made its first successful flyby of Mars in 1965, in recent years it had taken a new approach to exploring the Red Planet. NASA achieved the development and deployment of Mars Pathfinder for US$266 million, a bargain compared to the US$1 billion cost of the failed Mars Observer. Because of its tightening budget, NASA had adopted a course of planning several simple, but targeted excursions, using low-cost spacecraft, rather than mounting a few complex and expensive missions. Pathfinder landed almost exactly at the point aimed for and immediately transmitted signals back to Earth announcing its safe landing. Officials at JPL noticed a slight complication, when early images revealed that some of the airbags used to cushion the craft’s landing had bunched up around the door that Sojourner⎯the rover set to explore the planet⎯would use to exit Pathfinder. NASA’s engineers clarified, however, that the temporary problem would not compromise the rover’s planned exploration.(John Noble Wilford, “Landing Called Near Perfect by NASA,” New York Times, 5 July 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Spacecraft Lands Today on the Planet of Dreams,” New York Times, 4 July 1997; Tony Knight, “Pathfinder Zeroes in on Red Planet,” Los Angeles Daily News, 4 July 1997; NASA, Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 1996 Activities (Washington, DC, 1997), p. 3.)
 Russia launched Progress M35, a supply spacecraft headed for Mir, filled with repair equipment needed to fix problems caused by the crash of another Progress cargo craft and to restore full power to the space station. According to Russian space officials, repairs would entail a lengthy spacewalk. The repair tasks appeared so daunting that the Russian Space Agency engineers pushed back the date of the work, to allow the Mir cosmonauts more time to train. C. Michael Foale, the American astronaut aboard Mir, was responsible for operating the Soyuz spacecraft docked at the station, so that in the event of a problem, the crew would be able to make a safe return to Earth.(Michael R. Gordan, “Russia Launches Supply Craft To Repair the Damaged Mir Space Station,” New York Times, 6 July 1997.)
 Sojourner, the roving vehicle carried to Mars aboard Pathfinder, began prospecting the surface of the Red Planet approximately two days after Pathfinder’s safe landing. NASA engineers and enthralled scientists described the scene of the six-wheeled, microwave-sized Sojourner, slowly descending the ramp of Pathfinder, as similar to Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap” in 1969. Richard A. Cook, managing the mission from JPL, set off a raucous celebration of NASA engineers when he announced, “The rover is on the surface of Mars. We’ve got some great images back, and all the scientists are in heaven.” Weather reports gathered by the Pathfinder reported that Sojourner was working in temperatures as high as 8° below 0°F (-22°C), as well as in wind and dust storms. Sojourner, named for black abolitionist Sojourner Truth, headed for a dark rock near Pathfinder, as its first object of close study. NASA scientists, who had named the rock Barnacle Bill because of its craggy appearance, used similarly whimsical terms to keep track of the various geological objects studied by Sojourner. Sojourner’s success, after some minor complication upon landing, encouraged mission scientists and drew wide acclaim from the media. Scientists began to speculate almost immediately, about whether the mission could possibly confirm or deny the existence of life on the planet.(John Noble Wilford, “On the Surface of Mars, Sojourner Rolls to Work,” New York Times, 7 July 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Data from Mars Indicate It Could Have Supported Life,” 7 July 1997; Peter N. Spotts, “Tiny Land Rover Begins Relaying Detailed Data About Surface of Red Planet,” Christian Science Monitor, 7 July 1997. 280 Michael A. Dornheim, “Pathfinder Aircraft Hits 71,500 Ft.,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 147, no. 3 (21 July 1997): 40; NASA, “Solar-Powered Pathfinder Sets New Record; Prepares To Monitor Deforestation of Hawaiian Island,” news release 97-153, 14 July 1997.)
 NASA’s AeroVironment Pathfinder⎯distinct from Mars Pathfinder⎯broke the record for highest-flying, propeller-powered aircraft in a flight from the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, Hawaii. After climbing for nearly 7 hours, AeroVironment Pathfinder reached its record altitude, maintaining its height for about 13 minutes. Even at its peak distance from Earth, a span of more than 67 nautical miles (124 kilometers), AeroVironment Pathfinder transmitted data without any problems. The successful test was part of the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology Program at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center.
 NASA reported receiving 265 million hits on its Web site during the four days following Mars Pathfinder’s landing. In response to what some observers called the “biggest event in computer network history,” NASA buttressed its own computers with donated equipment from corporate sponsors, so that the government site could handle the high volume of viewers. The Internet statistics validated the widespread popularity of the mission to Mars. The CNN network dedicated nearly half of its programming to the Pathfinder story on the day of the Mars landing, doubling its network ratings. Entrepreneurs sold a variety of Mars- and Pathfinder-themed products, and visitors jammed the National Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC. USA Today summed up the success of the Mars Pathfinder Mission: “NASA’s successful landing on the Red Planet has set off a Marsfest on the blue one.”(NASA, “Pathfinder Gets Hit Hard on the Internet,” news release I97-8, 9 July 1997; Martha T. Moore, “Mars Mania Invades Earth,” USA Today, 9 July 1997; Associated Press, “‘Mars Live’ Draws Millions to Web Site,” 9 July 1997; United Press International, “Mars Tops Internet Hit List,” 8 July 1997.)
 NASA announced the retirement of veteran astronaut Jeffrey A. Hoffman, who had flown on five Shuttle missions. Hoffman planned to continue his NASA service, becoming NASA’s European representative in Paris. Hoffman was one of the four astronauts to take part in the spacewalking mission to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) in 1993. In total, Hoffman had spent more than 1,200 hours in space and traveled more than 21.5 million miles (35 million kilometers).(NASA, “Jeff Hoffman Retires from Astronaut Corps,” new release 97-151, 9 July 1997.)
 The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia lit more than 200 small fires, testing the flammability of dozens of gases and materials. The experiments took place under the direction of Paul D. Ronney, a professor of mechanical engineering at the University of Southern California. Ronney explained that the experiments had as much application for Earth as for space. According to Ronney, the weaker the flame in space’s weightless environment, the cleaner its fuel would burn on Earth. The astronauts found that, without the effect of gravity, the flames often formed the shape of a ball and heat did not rise. The experiments created some attention for Mission STS- 94, largely overshadowed by the success of the Pathfinder mission to Mars.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests of Tiny Fires Spur Delight,” 9 July 1997; Wayne Tompkins, “Columbia Crew Ready for Hot Time in Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 July 1997.)
 Routine medical testing of the crew aboard Mir revealed that the Russian commander of the space station, Vasili V. Tsibliyev, had an irregular heartbeat and, according to Russian Mission Control, a problem with his “cardiovascular system.” The tests, indicating that Tsibliyev was overtired and suffering from stress, did not surprise space officials, considering his traumatic experience of late June, when a cargo craft had crashed into Mir. Tsibliyev reported that he had felt “irregularities” while he was exercising and when he was trying to sleep. The news of crew health problems complicated further the arduous repair plan. A day after learning of Tsibliyev’s test results, Russian officials proposed that U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale take Tsibliyev’s place in the repair spacewalk. NASA subsequently deliberated over the request before granting Foale permission to participate. Ultimately, however, Russian Mission Control decided not to allow Mir’s exhausted crew to perform the tasks. Instead, Mission Control planned for the replacement crew scheduled to arrive in August 1997 to make the repairs. The response to the latest of Mir’s challenges demonstrated an increasingly dependent and trusting partnership between the Russian and American space agencies. During the Soviet-led race for space, few could have imagined Russian officials asking for the aid of an American crew member in a time of crisis.(Paul Hoversten, “Latest Mir Trouble: Commander’s Heart,” USA Today, 15 July 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russians Suggest American Take On Mir Repair Task,” New York Times, 16 July 1997; Associated Press, “Commander of Russian Space Station Shows Heart Irregularities,” 14 July 1997; Reuters, “Tests on Mir Commander Show Cardiovascular Problem,” 14 July 1997; Associated Press, “Backs to the Wall, Russians Ask for Help from American Astronaut,” 15 July 1997; Reuters, “NASA Approves Mir Spacewalk Training for Foale,” 17 July 1997; New York Times, “A Rescue Assignment for NASA,” editorial, 17 July 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Gets Disappointing News; Next Crew To Do Key Repairs,” 19 July 1997.)
 Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., U.S. Department of Transportation Secretary Rodney E. Slater, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin joined in leading an aviation safety event at Dulles International Airport in Virginia. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had invited media representatives and interested spectators to the event, to observe demonstrations of the new technologies that the agencies had developed to improve the safety of flying aboard commercial, private, and government aircraft. NASA made available one of its Boeing B-757 research aircraft, providing hands-on demonstrations of the new techniques and technologies produced by NASA’s and the FAA’s Task Force on Aviation Safety.(NASA, “Vice President To Showcase Aviation Safety Technologies Developed by NASA and FAA,” news release N97-47, 14 July 1997.)
 As Mars Pathfinder and its surveyor Sojourner triumphantly explored the surface of Mars, NASA named as Software of the Year the Dynamics Algorithms for Real-Time Simulation (DARTS) software⎯a program used on the Pathfinder mission. Abhinandan Jain, Guillermo Rodriguez, and Guy K. Man of JPL had created the software to provide real-time simulations to test other software and hardware. DARTS allowed NASA mission managers to test procedures in a cost-effective manner.(NASA, “Software Used on Mars Pathfinder Wins NASA’s Software of the Year Award,” news release 97-154, 16 July 1997.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, just after sunrise, returning its seven-person crew to Earth. The landing marked the conclusion of a successful, 16- day mission, during which the astronauts completed 33 laboratory experiments. The low-cost mission was the first reflight in NASA’s history, concluding the research agenda planned for the April 1997 mission that NASA had terminated as a safety precaution. Although the press coverage of events on Mars and Mir had overshadowed the Columbia crew’s efforts, NASA Mission Manager Teresa B. Vanhooser stated confidently that scientific journals would give the mission due respect.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Returns Full of Research Information,” 17 July 1997.)
 Two Yemeni men filed a lawsuit against NASA, claiming that NASA had committed trespassing violations when it landed Pathfinder on Mars. The men claimed that their ancient ancestors had deeded the planet to them as an inheritance, requesting that Yemen’s prosecutor-general bring U.S. Ambassador David G. Newton to court to stop the violation. Although no legal restitution was expected, the lawsuit highlighted the excitement surrounding NASA’s Mars mission and the widespread interest in the Red Planet’s exploration.(Reuters, “Get Off Our Planet, Yemeni Men Tell U.S.,” 25 July 1997.)
 Astronomers using the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii announced the discovery of the most distant object ever observed from Earth. The discovery team comprised researchers from the University of Groningen in the Netherlands and the University of California at Santa Cruz. The scientists’ calculations indicated that the distant light they had discovered was an infant galaxy, approximately 13 billion light-years from Earth. Formally named Red Arc in CL1358-62, the discovery gave astronomers a glimpse into the universe as it had existed when only 7 percent of its present age. Lead researcher Garth D. Illingworth described the images as “a pathfinder for deciphering what is happening in young galaxies.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Discover Most Distant Object,” New York Times, 31 July 1997.)
 Frank L. Culbertson Jr., NASA’s Manager for the Space Shuttle–Mir research program, announced that in the future NASA would likely require astronauts to have training in spacewalking. The announcement coincided with reports in the New York Times and other U.S. newspapers that David A. Wolf had replaced astronaut Wendy B. Lawrence as the next NASA representative aboard Mir. NASA had replaced Lawrence because of her small stature. At 5 feet, 3 inches (1.6 meters) tall, she was too small to fit into the bulky Russian Orlan spacesuits worn on Mir. In addition, she had received no training in spacewalking. Previously, NASA had planned for Wolf to replace Lawrence aboard Mir following her research stint. NASA and the Russian Space Agency addressed the sensitive issue of replacing Lawrence because of her size, explaining the need for flexibility aboard Mir during significant repairs to the station. Lawrence reacted professionally, despite the disappointment of her replacement less than two months before her planned once-in-a-career mission.(Warren E. Leary, “Future Astronauts Must Walk Before They Fly,” New York Times, 1 August 1997; Todd Halverson, “Mir Prerequisite: Spacewalking,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 August 1997; United Press International, “U.S., Russia Cite Logic of Replacing Female Astronaut,” 1 August 1997; Associated Press, “NASA: Decision To Replace Astronaut Difficult but Necessary,” 31 July 1997.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin addressed the Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in convention, outlining NASA’s vision to “revitalize general aviation.” Goldin boldly predicted that the U.S. aviation industry would be able to deliver 10,000 aircraft annually within 10 years, and 20,000 annually within 20 years. The fly-in convention, featuring flyovers by NASA’s SR- 71, had the theme, “Boomers Turn 50,” celebrating both the 50th anniversary of the U.S. Air Force and that of the first breaking of the sound barrier. The Association announced the winner of the National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), a competition encouraging university engineering students to focus on the aviation industry. The conference also featured the unveiling of the new FAA flight- training curricula, as well as a national aviation safety initiative.(NASA, “NASA To Showcase New Activities at Upcoming Aircraft Fly-In Convention,” news release N97-51, 25 July 1997.)
 The Rasmussen Research Group reported that seven out of 10 Americans had seen at least one image of Mars obtained through the Mars Pathfinder Mission, denoting a remarkable level of public awareness of NASA’s mission to the Red Planet. The researchers also reported that nearly half of all Americans believed that an American would land on Mars within 10 years. Despite the widespread interest and optimism regarding the project, only 41 percent of those polled saw merit in the mission.(Mark Carreau, “Mars Trip a Monster Summer Hit,” Houston Chronicle, 2 August 1997.)
 The Russian Soyuz spacecraft lifted off from Kazakhstan carrying cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov on a mission to repair the disabled Mir space station. Russian space officials tasked the two men with restoring power to Mir after the 25 June collision with a cargo craft cut by half the orbiting research center’s energy. Regarding the importance of the mission, some observers of Russian space activity went so far as to say that the country’s piloted space program depended on Solovyev and Vinogradov’s success.(Associated Press, “2 Russians Blast Off on Mir Repair Mission,” 6 August 1997.)
 During the terminal countdown of a demonstration test of the Titan IV-B rocket designed for the Cassini mission to Saturn, engineers noticed liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen leaking from the Centaur stage of the rocket. NASA had scheduled Cassini’s launch for early October 1997. NASA officials delayed the launch until they could complete further tests, offering no immediate estimate of how long that might take. Interested scientists and engineers, however, predicted that the problem could postpone the mission by months or even years. Under the mission’s original timetable, NASA had expected Cassini to launch in October 1997, reaching Saturn in July 2004. Because of the length of the journey from Earth to Saturn, the scientific community expected that NASA would find it difficult to reschedule the flight. Moreover, experts warned that the alignment of planets providing an ideal launch date, such as that in October 1997, would not occur again for 12 to 14 years. At US$3.2 billion, Cassini was one of the last of NASA’s high- stake, multibillion-dollar missions, drawing considerable attention during the climate of steady cost reductions that characterized the 1990s.(NASA, “Countdown Test Reveals Fuel Leaks on Cassini Mission Centaur Upper Stage,” 7 August 1997; Associated Press, “Rocket Leak Could Postpone Landing on Saturn by Years,” 8 August 1997.)
 A relief crew of two Russian cosmonauts, Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov, arrived at Mir to begin repair work on the damaged space station. On 25 June 1997, Mir had suffered its worst accident, when a robotic supply craft attempting to dock pierced the exterior of one of its research modules. The arriving crew, carrying tools and equipment, also had difficulty docking. As Soyuz approached Mir, its autonomic docking system failed, forcing Solovyev to override the system and pull Soyuz back. Solovyev then successfully docked the relief vehicle using manual controls. The crew planned to repair Mir’s failing oxygen-generating system, before reconnecting the damaged research module to the rest of the station. Both NASA and the Russian Space Agency stressed that Mir had sufficient oxygen reserves in the event that the oxygen generator failed altogether. After repairing the oxygen system and the research module, the new crew planned to make as many as six spacewalks to repair the external damage caused by the June collision. Cosmonaut Solovyev brought significant experience to the mission; he had resided on Mir during four earlier missions, spending a total of 456 days in space. NASA planned for British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to remain on Mir, although the Russian Space Agency was replacing its crew aboard the space station.(Baltimore Sun (MD), “Relief Team Reaches Crippled Mir Space Station,” 8 August 1997; Reuters, “Two Cosmonauts Blast Off on Mission To Repair Mir,” 6 August 1997; Associated Press, “Russians Rocket To Repair Station,” 6 August 1997; Reuters, “New Crew Faces Hydra of Woes on Mir Space Station,” 5 August 1997.)
 Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-85 launched, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Kent V. Rominger, and astronauts N. Jan Davis, Robert L. Curbeam Jr., Stephen K. Robinson, and Canadian Bjarni V. Tryggvason, who planned to conduct studies on Earth’s ozone layer and to test a newly engineered robotic arm. The test on the small robotic arm, a prototype of the one planned for the International Space Station (ISS), continued NASA’s trend of using Shuttle missions to prepare for the much-anticipated space station. Discovery also carried a 7,000-pound (3,200-kilogram) German satellite, which would orbit freely for most of the10-day mission, gathering data on the declining ozone layer. Brown emphasized the international flavor of the crew and cargo saying, “one word for our mission would be diversity.” With this mission, its 23rd flight, Discovery tied with Columbia for the most missions by a single vehicle.(NASA, “August 7 Selected for STS-85 Space Shuttle Mission Launch,” news release 97-159, 24 July 1997; Marcia Dunn, “Shuttle Blasts Off on Ozone Study,” USA Today, 8 August 1997; Mark Carreau, “Discovery Mission Plans Tests with International Flair,” Houston Chronicle, 4 August 1997.)
 After exceeding even the most optimistic predictions made during its primary mission, the Mars Pathfinder spacecraft concluded its initial research maneuvers and began extended operations. The initial mission had returned to Earth 1.2 gigabits of data and more than 9,000 images of the Martian landscape. Project Manager of the Mars Pathfinder Mission Brian Muirhead said that the mission had not only had gathered an impressive amount of data, but also validated NASA’s new approach to exploring space. “This mission demonstrated a reliable and low-cost system for placing science payloads on the surface of Mars,” he stated. “We’ve validated NASA’s commitment to low-cost planetary exploration.” After completing the planned 30-day mission and traveling 171 feet (52 meters) across Mars’s landscape, the rover Sojourner remained in excellent condition. Operators gave Sojourner a two-day rest period to recharge its battery, before it began an extended exploration of the planet.(NASA, “Mars Pathfinder Results Generating New Picture of Mars as Mission Moves into Extended Operation,” news release 97-174, 8 August 1997; Los Angeles Times, “Mars Mission ‘100 Percent Success’, NASA Says,” Los Angeles Times, 9 August 1997.)
 As the two cosmonauts worked to repair the failing Mir space station, President Boris N. Yeltsin allowed the Russian government to borrow US$100 million from foreign banks, giving the Russian Space Agency an infusion of capital. Yeltsin announced the decision after touring the construction facilities where Russia planned to build its contributions to the ISS. The Russian Space Agency’s cash-flow problems had resulted in construction delays and failure to meet deadlines, postponing the completion of the entire ISS.(Associated Press, “Government Will Borrow $100 Million for Space Agency,” 9 August 1997.)
 After widespread speculation concerning the possibility of an indefinite delay of the Cassini Mission to Saturn, NASA announced that it would be able to repair a fuel leak in the spacecraft in time to meet an October 1997 launch date. NASA had enlisted U.S. Air Force engineers to make the repairs. The spacecraft’s need for repairs increased the tension surrounding the ambitious and expensive mission. Lieutenant Ken Hoffman of the U.S. Air Force, who supervised the repairs, attempted to reassure the public that the problem was “a correctable condition.” Nevertheless, opponents of the mission⎯particularly those opposed to the spacecraft’s use of radioactive plutonium⎯worried that the rocket’s launch might release hazardous materials. Michio Kaku, a City University of New York physics professor, said that, despite NASA’s announcement that it could quickly correct the problem, the leak was “just one more indication that NASA does not have things under control.”(Robyn Suriano, “Cassini Won’t Be Delayed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 August 1997.)
 Astronauts aboard Shuttle Discovery successfully tested a new robotic arm, considerably smaller than Discovery’s massive 50-foot (15-meter) crane, intended for tasks of higher precision. Discovery’s crew used the arm to unlock a cargo bay door and lift a small box. NASA had engineered the Japanese-made robotic arm for US$100 million, expecting that it would eventually serve astronauts aboard the ISS. Of the robotic arm’s test performance, astronaut Stephen K. Robinson stated simply, “it operated beautifully.”
 NASA and the Boeing Company unveiled a new stitching machine that experts believed would change the method of fabricating aircraft wing structures. The demonstration took place at Boeing Stitched Composites Development Center in Huntington Beach, California. The project team of engineers had replaced the large metal structures used in airplanes with strong, but light, composite materials. By reducing the weight of an airplane, engineers hoped to decrease fuel usage, with the eventual result of cost savings for consumers. Rather than using rivets to hold together an airplane’s wings, the NASA-developed stitching machine sewed together precut fabric layers in the shape of a wing. Next, the machine added braided stiffener materials to the wing, before setting the wing skeleton with resin. The process created a wing as strong as one built with metal structures, but at a fraction of the weight.(NASA, “New Manufacturing Method Could Lower Air Travel Costs,” news release 97-176, 13 August 1997.)
 Two Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin, returned to Earth after spending more than six months aboard the Mir space station. The New York Times echoed the feelings of many in the space community, calling the six months the Russians had spent in space, “six of the least glorious months in the history of manned space flight.” During their departure from Mir, Tsibliyev and Lazutkin continued to experience the same type of problem that had characterized their tenure on board the space station. The two cosmonauts, scheduled to disengage from Mir in the Soyuz spacecraft and then to circle the space station, cancelled the exercise because of concern that the two spacecraft would collide. After the cosmonauts landed in the desert of Kazakhstan, Tsibliyev recounted to an international press corps the difficult mission that he and Lazutkin had endured aboard Mir, remarking that the two cosmonauts should not become the scapegoats for Russia’s problems in space. The collision
 300Associated Press, “Astronauts Aboard Discovery Test New Japanese Robot Arm,” 9 August 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Tests a Robot Built To Spacewalk,” 11 August 1997. between the Progress cargo craft and Mir had occurred during the two men’s tenure, and shortly thereafter, doctors had diagnosed Tsibliyev’s irregular heartbeat. Space officials planned extensive debriefings for the two men. Meanwhile, President Boris N. Yeltsin congratulated the cosmonauts for their “persistence, courage, and heroism,” in spite of his having claimed only days earlier that the recent problems with Mir were solely the result of human error.(Daniel Williams, “Cosmonauts Return Safely from Space,” Washington Post, 15 August 1997; Michael Spencer, “Troubled Mir’s Crew Leaves, Landing Safely in Kazakhstan,” New York Times, 15 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mir Crew Returns to Earth Safely, but to Many Questions,” 14 August 1997.)
 Abe Silverstein received the Guggenheim Medal, honoring his significant contributions to the advancement of flight. Silverstein’s 40-year career at NASA had included a period as the Director of Lewis Research Center. The citation praised him for his leadership in the Mercury and Gemini programs and for “advancing technology of aircraft and propulsion performance,” as well as crediting him with proposing the name “Apollo” for the lunar landing mission. Previous winners of the Guggenheim Medal included Orville Wright, William E. Boeing, and Charles A. Lindbergh.(NASA, “Former NASA Official Receives Guggenheim Medal,” news release 97-177, 14 August 1997.)
 Mir’s main computer failed during a cargo craft docking, setting the Russian space station adrift. The malfunction postponed a planned spacewalk to begin repairs to Mir, forcing the crew to turn its attention to reorienting the space station toward the Sun. The crew shut down most of Mir’s operating systems to conserve power.(Shannon Tangonan, “Computer Shutdown Sends Mir Adrift,” USA Today, 19 August 1997; Michael Specter, “Computer Failure on the Mir Sends It Out of Control,” New York Times, 19 August 1997.)
 Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a 12-day mission devoted to environmental research. The crew hoped that the atmospheric data gathered during the mission would help scientists understand the ozone damage and climate change affecting Earth.(Mark Carreau, “We’re Very, Very Happy, Shuttle Crew Says of Flight,” Houston Chronicle, 20 August 1997.)
 NASA launched an unpiloted Delta rocket carrying the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), a US$100 million solar-observatory satellite bound on a 1 million-mile (1.6 million-kilometer) journey. The launch took place one day later than expected because, on the original launch date, a commercial fishing boat had come within range of the launch danger zone. Scientists launched ACE toward an imaginary point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth and 92 million miles (148 million kilometers) from the Sun, a point at which scientists believe that the gravity of the Earth and Sun balance each other. NASA planned for ACE to orbit for as long as five years, analyzing particles streaming from the Sun. In keeping with NASA’s focus on improved efficiency, NASA engineers collaborated with the Boeing Company to build ACE and launch the mission, at a cost of US$200 million⎯more than US$30 million under budget.(Associated Press, “After 1-Day Delay, NASA Launches Bargain-Priced Solar Observatory,” 25 August 1997; Associated Press, “Launch Delayed by Errant Shrimpers,” 25 August 1997.)
 Astronaut F. Story Musgrave retired from NASA after 30 years of service and six Shuttle flights. During his more than 1,200 hours in space, Musgrave had flown on the first voyage of Challenger and had been a member of the first crew to service the Hubble Space Telescope (HST). Flying aboard STS-80 in 1996, Musgrave became the oldest person to fly in space. NASA Director of Flight Crew Operations David C. Leestma said of Musgrave, “throughout the Shuttle program, from its earliest stages to the present, Story has been instrumental in developing the techniques crew members use to perform spacewalks.”(NASA, “Astronaut Story Musgrave Retires from NASA,” news release 97-188, 2 September 1997.)
 The embattled effort to launch the Cassini spacecraft suffered a setback when NASA engineers discovered ripped insulation in its Huygens probe, while the craft was sitting on the launchpad in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Investigators concluded that a ground-air-conditioner malfunction had caused the tears. The possibility of a launch delay, even for only a few days, concerned scientists, because Saturn was moving farther and farther from Earth. A longer journey to Saturn would require the spacecraft to use more fuel for transport, leaving less for scientific exploration. The Cassini Mission to Saturn had received significant public criticism because 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of plutonium⎯the largest amount of radioactive material ever rocketed into space⎯powered the probe. Although protesters had organized marches and petitioned government officials to stop the launch, NASA spokesperson Douglas Isbell had pointed out NASA’s perfect record of using nuclear fuel safely. Scientists from the European Space Agency and NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had planned and engineered the building of the 23rd nuclear-powered Cassini for the 11-year mission. Experts from both sides of the Atlantic were optimistic that engineers would repair the insulation damage quickly.(John Noble Wilford, “Delay Expected for Spacecraft Going to Saturn,” New York Times, 4 September 1997; John Kennedy and Seth Borenstein, “Nuclear Launch Draws Protest,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 30 August 1997; Sharon K. Spry, “Danger of Cassini Accident Too Great,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 August 1997; Associated Press, “Mishap May Delay Mission to Saturn,” 4 September 1997.)
 Using the HST, astronomers from a number of universities and other institutions reported in Science that they had discovered a massive crater on the asteroid Vesta. Scientists had long suspected that the asteroid might have a large crater, because Vesta is the “parent body” of many smaller asteroids, suggesting that a significant collision once occurred on Vesta. However, even with hints of such a history, the sheer size of Vesta’s crater surprised the observers. Measuring 285 miles (469 kilometers) across, the crater was nearly equal to Vesta’s 330-mile (531- kilometer) diameter. Scientists had waited for the asteroid to move closer to Earth, so that they could examine its surface closely. In May 1996, Vesta had moved within 110 million miles (177 million kilometers) of Earth, its closest approach in a decade. The science team stated further that unveiling Vesta’s complexion and history had yielded new insights into the effects of “a large impact on a small object.”(Peter C. Thomas et al., “Impact Excavation on Asteroid 4 Vesta: Hubble Space Telescope Results,” Science 277, no. 5331 (5 September 1997): 1492−1495; NASA, “Hubble Reveals Huge Crater on the Surface of the Asteroid Vesta,” news release 97-191, 4 September 1997.)
 British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Russian cosmonaut Anatoly Y. Solovyev conducted a 6-hour spacewalk outside the Mir space station, to investigate further the damage caused by the June 1997 collision with a robotic supply craft. However, they were unable to find the puncture that space officials believed Mir had sustained. The exercise was only the second joint spacewalk of a U.S. astronaut and a Russian cosmonaut. During the excursion, Foale used a crane to hoist Solovyev toward the damaged region of the craft. The two crew members endured temperatures ranging from 200°F (93°C), when Mir was in the sunlight, to -150°F (-101°C), when it passed into the darkness. Although Foale had spent many hours preparing for the spacewalk, learning how to maneuver in the heavy Russian spacesuit, he still exercised extreme caution to avoid snagging the suit on of Mir’s jagged edges. NASA had approved Foale’s participation in the spacewalk only shortly before it occurred.(Michael R. Gordon, “Astronauts Fail To Locate a Puncture in Crippled Mir,” New York Times, 7 September 1997; Michael Gordon, “Russian and American Astronauts Begin Space Walk,” New York Times, 6 September 1997; Associated Press, “U.S. Astronaut Gets NASA’s Approval for Space Walk Outside Mir,” 5 September 1997. 311 Paul Hoversten, “Mars Surveyor Passes Key Test,” USA Today, 10 September 1997; Associated Press, “Craft Bound for Mars Clears Crucial Hurdle,” 10 September 1997.)
 Mars Global Surveyor passed a critical test on its journey toward the Red Planet, when it successfully opened valves allowing high-pressure rocket propellant to enter its fuel lines. The same task had thwarted the 1993 Mars Observer at a similar juncture during its trip to Mars. Mars Global Surveyor had traveled for 10 months and for more than 435 million miles (700 million kilometers) to reach Mars. According to Glenn E. Cunningham of NASA’s JPL, the process of transforming Global Surveyor from a high-speed-travel spacecraft into a slow-moving craft subject to Mars’s gravitational pull was “a nail-biter.” Without the powerful propellant, the transition could not occur, which would have ended any hope of the mission’s gathering data. With the opening of the valves complete, NASA scientists were optimistic that the US$250 million probe would descend slowly into a tight orbit of Mars, yielding new information about the planet.
 Software magnate James W. Benson announced the formation of SpaceDev, a new company focused on launching a robotic craft to an asteroid. Benson argued that space “is a place, not a government project,” claiming that his company would gather new scientific data for a fraction of the money NASA spent annually on space exploration. Specifically, Benson stated that his Near Earth Asteroid Prospector would land on an asteroid, gathering images and scientific readings. He estimated that his company could complete such a feat for under US$50 million, about US$200 million less than NASA’s budget for a comparable mission. Benson and SpaceDev entered the realm of space exploration with overtly capitalist intentions. Benson planned to sell the data the company gathered to NASA and to universities for profit. Additionally, SpaceDev consultants estimated that asteroids might contain significant deposits of gold and other precious metals, worth US$1–4 trillion, which would become the property of whoever succeeded in accessing it. Of his overall theory on space and science, Benson clarified: “When we deliver science, we expect to get paid. We expect a profit. We offer more science for the dollar.”(Associated Press, “Company Promotes First Private Launch to Asteroid,” 10 September 1997.)
 NASA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and the Federal Aviation Administration signed a joint memorandum of agreement providing guidelines for commercial spaceports. The agreement was the culmination of a long debate over how the federal government could encourage private companies and state governments to use available federal launch sites. The White House Office of Science and Technology initiative had proposed the agreement, which sought to limit the regulatory steps a private company would have to take to become a launch-site operator. The measure continued the federal government’s trend of encouraging private industry to explore space.(NASA, “NASA, DOD, and FAA Sign Joint Agreement on Spaceports Launch Guidance,” news release 97-194, 11 September 1997.)
 Mars Global Surveyor fired its engine enabling Mars’s gravitational pull to capture it. Researchers from NASA’s JPL declared that the spacecraft had behaved exactly as planned during the crucial entry to Mars’s gravitational field. Experts predicted that the mission would produce 700 million bits of data, more than the amount acquired in all previous Mars missions combined. The mapping mission continued a new era of Mars exploration for NASA, involving dozens of probes surveying the planet’s surface and atmosphere.(Kathy Sawyer, “New Visitor from Earth Poised for Mars Orbit,” Washington Post, 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Everything ‘Perfect’ as Surveyor Craft in Countdown to Mars Orbit,” 11 September 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Global Surveyor,” 12 September 1997.)
 For the first time, NASA turned over control of a satellite project to a group of non-NASA scientists, placing the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF) under the control of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory at Harvard University. Harvard scientists had designed and built the satellite, but in previous NASA-university collaborations, NASA had always maintained control over implementation projects that it had funded. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said that NASA hoped the move would embolden non-NASA scientists: “What we wanted to do is get the scientists closer to their spacecraft and close to their sources of data.” NASA intended the AXAF, which had cost US$1.4 billion to develop, to study black holes and collisions between stars and galaxies.(Jules Crittenden, “X-ray Tour of the Universe To Begin in Cambridge Lab,” Boston Herald, 13 September 1997; Peter J. Howe, “Putting the Universe into Focus,” Boston Globe, 13 September 1997.)
 NASA announced that, in one week, engineers had completed repairs to the damaged insulation of the Huygens probe, a part of the Cassini Mission to Saturn. Some scientists had feared that the tears to the insulation would set back the ambitious mission indefinitely. NASA engineers, however, had worked rapidly to disassemble the probe, completely inspect the damage, and make the appropriate repairs. Additionally, during the repair period, the project had received a welcome voice of support from the National Space Society, an independent space advocacy organization. The Society had issued a statement expressing its full confidence in NASA and in the mission, offsetting the protests against the mission’s use of nuclear fuel. The National Space Society declared, “saying ‘no’ to Cassini would be saying ‘no’ to knowledge,” defending the use of nuclear power as the only safe and viable option for such a lengthy mission: “Cassini’s Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators (RTGs) . . . have proven their safety and capability in 23 prior missions, including human missions. RTGs are the only realistic option for sending probes great distances from the Sun and will certainly play a part in future human missions.”(NASA, “Repair Work on Cassini Huygens Probe Completed Successfully,” news release 97-198, 12 September 1997; Associated Press, “National Space Society Adds to Support for Saturn Mission,” 9 September 1997.)
 The Mir space station nearly collided with a U.S. military satellite, forcing Mir’s crew to prepare hastily for an emergency exit. When the satellite came within 500 to 1,000 yards (457 to 914 meters) of Mir, U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and the two resident Russian cosmonauts sealed themselves in the Soyuz spacecraft so that they would be able to leave if the satellite hit the station. According to NASA, problems with space debris and close encounters between satellites are common, but usually miles, rather than yards, separated the rapidly traveling spacecraft. Russian space officials had taken a different approach to the situation than their American counterparts would have chosen. Rather than ordering Mir to adjust its position, as NASA had instructed Shuttle crews to do when debris approach, Russian officials had ordered Mir’s crew back into Soyuz, prepared to take off immediately. The near miss of Mir and the satellite was not the first time that Mir had received a collision alert. NASA had begun monitoring Mir’s path when American astronauts joined the permanent crew and reported that space debris passed within a few kilometers of Mir about once every six weeks.(Edmund L. Andrews, “Satellite Gives Mir One More Close Call,” New York Times, 17 September 1997; Shannon Tangonan, “Too-Close Satellite Gives Mir a Scare,” USA Today, 17 September 1997.)
 Data gathered by the U.S.-French satellite TOPEX/Poseidon confirmed theories that a “full- blown El Niño condition” existed in the Pacific. Scientists believe that an El Niño forms when steady, westward-blowing trade winds weaken or reverse direction, altering typical, atmospheric jet-stream patterns around the world. TOPEX/Poseidon measured sea-surface heights and atmospheric water vapor to confirm the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s earlier prediction. Based on previous El Niño events, scientists predicted heavy rainfall for the western United States, mild winters in the east, and extreme droughts in Australia, Africa, and Indonesia.(NASA, “Independent NASA Satellite Measurements Confirm El Niño Is Back and Strong,” news release 97-200, 15 September 1997.)
 U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) issued a recommendation that NASA cancel its plan to replace C. Michael Foale aboard Mir with another astronaut. Sensenbrenner issued the bipartisan statement with U.S. Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA), calling on NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to alter the plan for the next Shuttle mission, retrieving Foale without delivering another American to the station. “I don’t think the increased risk is worth the benefit,” Sensenbrenner told reporters after a 4-hour hearing on Mir’s safety issues. Goldin testified that, despite some setbacks, NASA had no reason to suspect that sending an American astronaut to Mir was more dangerous than any other space exploration. NASA’s Shuttle–Mir Program Director Frank L. Culbertson Jr. responded to Sensenbrenner’s comments, “I take the safety of my friends [the astronauts] very seriously and would not send anyone on something that I would not do myself.” The hearing was the first time that NASA had formally defended the safety of Mir to Congress.(Larry Wheeler, “Panel to NASA: Stay Off Mir,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 September 1997; Knight- Ridder News Service, “Top Congressmen Say U.S. Astronaut Shouldn’t Board Mir,” 19 September 1997.)
 Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. began talks with officials in Russia, focused primarily on the International Space Station (ISS), economic cooperation, and controlling nuclear proliferation. The talks occurred in the context of a torrent of problems aboard Russia’s Mir space station and in Russia’s failures to meet its commitments to help build the ISS. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin traveled with the Vice President to participate in the space-related discussions.(Reuters, “Al Gore in Moscow for Talks on Space, Energy,” 21 September 1997; Associated Press, “Gore Calls for Reforms To Boost Investment in Russia,” 22 September 1997.)
 NASA’s Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, for Mission STS-86. The launch took place only hours after an independent task force chaired by astronaut Lieutenant General Thomas P. Stafford II reported that the Mir mission was sufficiently safe for the American astronauts. Specifically, the panel had determined that sending astronaut David A. Wolf to replace C. Michael Foale aboard the Russian space station would be reasonable, as well as important to continuing scientific research. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the last-minute decision for the mission to go forward after weighing the panel’s findings against NASA’s risk reports and the opinions of the House Committee on Science and Technology. Committee Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) had been particularly aggressive in calling for the end of the program to place astronauts aboard Mir for significant periods. James D. Wetherbee served as Commander of Space Shuttle Atlantis, embarking on his fourth flight to space. The Shuttle also carried Jean-Loup Chrétien of the French Space Agency, Vladimir G. Titov of the Russian Space Agency, Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Wendy B. Lawrence, and David A. Wolf. The Shuttle carried the SPACEHAB module in its payload, with supplies for Mir research and logistical equipment aboard.(NASA, “Panels Give Astronaut a ‘Go’ for Launch to Mir,” news release 97-214, 25 September 1997; NASA, “Astronaut Wolf Continuing American Presence on Mir, Joint US-Russian Spacewalk Highlights STS-86 Mission,” news release J97-27, September 1997; Traci Watson, “Amid Controversy, Atlantis Lifts Off,” USA Today, 26 September 1997; Associated Press, “Astronaut Leaves for Tour on Mir,” 26 September 1997.)
 Cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov and Mission Specialist Scott E. Parazynski made a 5-hour spacewalk outside Mir to test jetpack systems and to retrieve experiments for return to Earth. The two men, who left Atlantis while the Shuttle remained docked with Mir, became the first Russian-American team ever to conduct a spacewalk from a NASA Shuttle. The joint spacewalk was also the first in which Mir crew members used NASA spacesuits rather than those provided by the Russian Space Agency. On this busy day of operations, two of the Russian crew also successfully installed a new guidance computer, which Atlantis had transported to the station.(Robyn Suriano, “Spacewalk,” USA Today, 1 October 1997; Mark Carreau, “Atlantis, Mir Crews Prepare for Spacewalk, Computer Task,” Houston Chronicle, 1 October 1997.)
 NASA announced that the construction schedule for the International Space Station (ISS) remained on target to begin delivery launches in December 1998. All 15 nations participating in the building of the ISS had traveled to Johnson Space Center (JSC) to finalize the station’s construction sequence and compare progress updates. The international consortium agreed on a 45-flight sequence for delivering the already-assembled portions of the station from Earth to their orbiting home. To assemble the colossal station completely, NASA and its partners planned five years of steady launch-and-construct missions, expecting to send the U.S.-constructed Node 1 into space sometime during June 1998.(NASA, “Control Board Reports International Space Station Launch on Target, Finalizes Assembly Sequence,” news release 97-222, 1 October 1997.)
 The White House Office of Science and Technology Policy formally approved the mid-October launch plan of the controversial plutonium-powered Cassini Mission. Critics had subjected to intense scrutiny the exploratory mission to Saturn and its moon Titan, because it used nuclear power. The Florida Coalition for Peace and Justice, among other organizations, had protested the mission and attempted to derail it, but had failed to spark widespread public outrage. Activists worried that the rocket might release plutonium if the launch failed, despite NASA’s more than a dozen safe launches using the hazardous fuel. The mission required nuclear power because Saturn has extremely dim sunlight⎯not enough to provide adequate solar power to prevent the Cassini spacecraft’s instruments from freezing. NASA’s policy required that the White House give final approval of the launch, because the mission used nuclear fuel. NASA had begun work on the Cassini Mission in 1989, with cooperation from the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency. Many regarded the mission⎯the first time a space probe had attempted to land on the moon of another planet⎯as NASA’s boldest and most ambitious endeavor. This aspect of the mission especially interested scientists, who theorized that Titan has an Earth-like atmosphere. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin said of the mission: “I fully expect that it will return spectacular images and scientific data about Saturn.”(NASA, “Cassini To Survey Worlds of Saturn and Titan; Sends First Probe to Moon of Another Planet,” news release 97-190, 3 September 1997; NASA, “NASA Receives Approval To Launch Cassini Mission,” news release 97-225, 3 October 1997; Maurice Tamman, “Protestors Set Stage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 29 September 1997.)
 The international scientific community observed the 40th anniversary of Sputnik’s successful launch. On 4 October 1957, the Soviet Union had sent into orbit Sputnik I, a small sphere-shaped satellite, setting off a space race that continued throughout the Cold War. Although the United States had initially responded to the Soviet Union’s achievement with fear and apprehension, NASA commemorated the event 40 years later with a celebratory symposium. The United States had launched NASA itself less than one year after the USSR’s Sputnik success, partly because of the American public’s distress over the Soviets beating the United States into space. The son of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, Sergei N. Khrushchev, a prominent professor of International Studies at Brown University in Rhode Island, spoke at NASA’s Sputnik symposium. With the fall of the Soviet Union, Russia had unveiled to the world’s scientists many of the developmental plans of the Sputnik program. However, the end of communism had also precipitated enormous budget shortfalls for the Russian Space Agency. Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev took the opportunity of Sputnik’s widely celebrated anniversary to complain publicly that Russia owed more than US$400 million in rent for Baikonur Cosmodrome⎯the site of Sputnik’s launch and of ongoing Russian space activity. When the Soviet confederation broke up, Russia had agreed to pay US$100 million annually for the right to continue using the launch facilities in Kazakhstan.(NASA, “Reconsidering Sputnik: Forty Years Since the Soviet Satellite,” news release N97-64, 5 September 1997; Associated Press, “Plea for Rent Marks Sputnik Anniversary,” 5 October 1997.)
 Shuttle Atlantis touched down at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, safely returning British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Earth after his 145-day stay aboard Mir. Foale’s tenure in space was among the longest in NASA’s history, surpassed only by Shannon W. Lucid’s 188-day mission. Although Foale was determined to return to Earth’s gravity in good physical condition, NASA doctors planned to keep the astronaut under medical supervision for several days.(Mark Carreau, “Astronaut Ends Marathon Ride; Foale Lands on Shuttle After 145 Days Aboard Russian Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 October 1997.)
 NASA announced that astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had identified the most luminous star ever charted. The “celestial mammoth,” large enough to fill the diameter of the Earth’s orbit, reportedly releases up to 10 million times the power of the Sun. The team from the University of California at Los Angeles estimated that the star, possibly as old as 3 million years, weighs up to 200 times the mass of the Sun. The team nicknamed it the Pistol Star because it has a pistol-shaped nebula. Despite the star’s mass and brightness, it was not visible to the naked eye because of the interstellar dust clouds between Earth and the center of the Milky Way. Therefore, astronomers had used infrared technology to observe the star. Team researcher Mark R. Morris argued that the discovery of the massive star near the center of the galaxy would force scientists to rethink their conceptions of how stars formed in the first place.(Associated Press, “Space Monster,” 8 October 1997; NASA, “Hubble Identifies What May Be the Most Luminous Star Known,” news release 97-227, 7 October 1997.)
 After more than nine days without sending a signal, Mars Pathfinder’s main transmitter resiliently delivered a message to Earth. To anxious project managers, the message was a welcome relief. The breakdown in the spacecraft’s communication to NASA controllers had necessitated NASA’s activating a contingency plan for Sojourner. The rover had stopped gathering data and reverted to slowly circling its parent spacecraft, waiting to receive directions, a pattern that some scientists feared would be the long-term fate of the rover. The spacecraft’s aging batteries had caused the breakdown in communication of data. However, in spite of the malfunction, NASA officials reiterated that the mission had fulfilled its objectives, emphasizing that solving the problem of communicating with the craft while it was resting on the Red Planet would benefit future explorations of Mars.(Associated Press, “Lacking Signal, Mars Vehicle Is Left To Be Roving in Circles,” 7 October 1997; Associated Press, “Pathfinder Checks in After Weeks of Silence,” 8 October 1997.)
 Mars Pathfinder scientists announced that Mars appeared to have a crust, a mantle, and an iron core⎯attributes similar to those of Earth. The researchers suggested that Mars may once have been warm and wet, although they remained unable to determine whether Mars had a molten core, such as that of Earth or Mercury, or a “dead” core, such as that of the Earth’s Moon. The findings contributed to growing evidence that Mars might be more than a solid ball of rock and that the planet might once have had water and life. Signs of possible erosion and weathering encouraged such hypotheses, as well, although scientists clarified that proof of such theories was still probably years away.(K. C. Cole, “Internal Structure of Mars, Earth Similar, Scientists Say,” Houston Chronicle, 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Mars Once Warm and Wet, Data Suggests,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Three Mars Layers Suggests Life on Planet Was Possible,” 9 October 1997.)
 A Russian cargo spacecraft docked without incident at the Mir space station, using the craft’s automatic pilot to complete the maneuver. It was the first successful docking after two previous failed attempts, one of which had resulted in the crash that seriously damaged Mir. To address the earlier problem, the Russian Space Agency had reconfigured the mathematical formula guiding the procedure. The Progress M-36 cargo craft carried a backup computer for the space station. Mir’s crew planned to unload the more than 6,000 pounds (2,700 kilograms) of cargo in the days following the delightfully uneventful docking.(Washington Post, “Cargo Ship Docks with Space Station,” 9 October 1997; Associated Press, “Successful Docking Gives Mir a Life in Morale,” 8 October 1997; Reuters, “Mir Crew To Unload Cargo After Text-Book Docking,” 8 October 1997.)
 NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) selected Scientific and Commercial Systems Corporation of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide support services for its Huntsville, Alabama, facilities. The US$66 million contract included transportation and equipment services, as well as publishing, mail, and food support. MSFC arranged the contract as a cost-plus-incentive-fee, performance-based contract, to provide NASA with cost savings, as well as with flexibility to reorganize services as necessary.(NASA, “Virginia Firm Chosen To Provide NASA Institutional Services,” news release C97−r, 10 October 1997.)
 NASA announced that new smart software, with more realistic landing simulations for Shuttle pilots, would become an integral part of astronaut flight training. Hamid Berenji, Ping-Wei Chang, and Steven R. Swanson of JSC engineered the software, which used “adaptive fuzzy logic,” allowing the program to learn from experience and to function in a manner closer to human thinking than that of previous software. The software team predicted that the program would help not only Shuttle pilots, but also commercial pilots and even people learning to use machinery unrelated to aviation. Berenji predicted that, because the new training system would be easier to use than previous programs, new pilots would feel much more confident than before.(H. R. Berenji et al., “Refining the Shuttle Training Aircraft Controller,” Fuzzy Systems, 1997: Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Conference 2 (1−5 July 1997): pp. 677−682; NASA, “Shuttle Landing Simulations To Improve with Smart Software,” news release 97-229, 14 October 1997.)
 In celebration of the 50th anniversary of his most historic achievement, Charles E. “Chuck” Yeager broke the speed of sound once again, flying an F-15 fighter jet in California’s Mojave Desert. NASA aired the recreation on NASA TV as part of its celebration at Edwards Air Force Base. Some historians call Yeager’s 1947 feat “the greatest achievement since the first successful flight of the Wright Brothers.” The U.S. Postal Service observed the anniversary by unveiling a commemorative stamp, the “50th Anniversary of Supersonic Flight.” The ceremonial jaunt was the 74-year old Yeager’s last official U.S. Air Force flight.(Jay Levine, “Yeager Bids Farewell to 800,000-Plus,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997; NASA, “Breaking the Sound Barrier Reenactment on NASA TV,” news release N97-72, 9 October 1997.)
 The Cassini spacecraft lifted off from Cape Canaveral, Florida, beginning a seven-year, 2.2 billion-mile (3.5 billion-kilometer) journey to and around Saturn. After several delays, including a two-day delay immediately before the launch because of high winds, the takeoff was flawless. Before the launch, activists had protested Cassini’s fuel source, 72 pounds (33 kilograms) of radioactive plutonium; to calm public anxiety, NASA planned to sample air quality at 25 stations surrounding the launchpad, including several samples taken as far as 10 miles (16 kilometers) away. Additionally, a U.S. Department of Energy aircraft flew through the trailing gases of the rocket booster to make sure that no radioactive material had leaked. The US$3.4 billion mission set out to survey the planet Saturn, its rings, and its moon Titan. Engineers had programmed the Cassini spacecraft to conduct a number of “gravity-assist swingbys,” flying twice past Venus and once past Earth and Jupiter, to build up the speed necessary to make the long journey to Saturn. About seven years into the mission, NASA planned for Cassini to release a disc-shaped Huygens probe toward Titan. Throughout the mission, Cassini was to make more than 40 close flybys of Titan, gathering far more vivid images of the moon than ever before. NASA intended Cassini’s camera to take more than 300,000 colored pictures of Saturn and its moons. Scientists hoped that the mission would expand considerably the knowledge of the planet gained through the earlier Voyager missions.(NASA, “Cassini Launch,” news release, October 1997; Earl Lane, “Plutonium-Bearing Craft Set for Saturn Trip,” Birmingham News (AL), 5 October 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Nuclear Powered Craft Fuels Fury Before Launch,” USA Today, 13 October 1997; Karl Grossman, “The Risk of Cassini Probe Plutonium,” Christian Science Monitor, 10 October 1997; Associated Press, “Cassini Spacecraft Lifts Off for Saturn,” 16 October 1997.)
 President William J. Clinton used his newly bestowed line-item veto power to cut funding for a “reusable space plane.” The US$10 million appropriation was a priority of the U.S. Air Force Space Command and space officials. In total, Clinton’s line-item vetoes trimmed about US$144 million from the 1998 U.S. Department of Defense appropriations bill, less than one-tenth of 0.1 percent of the total bill.(John M. Broder, “Clinton Gently Vetoes $144 Million in Military Budget Items,” New York Times, 15 October 1997; David L. Chandler, “Clinton Veto Delays Space Plane Plans,” Antelope Valley Press (Palmdale, CA), 21 October 1997.)
 Russian cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov conducted an “internal” spacewalk, entering the damaged Spektr module of Mir. Once inside the darkened module damaged by the June 1997 cargo craft collision, the men found floating space debris. Seven bags and a refrigerator door were among the items banging around inside the Spektr module. After securing the debris, the cosmonauts went to work installing new solar-panel cables to restore full power to Mir. The cosmonauts, who were wearing bulky spacesuits, performed the 6-hour spacewalk inside a cramped module. Although the men became exhausted before they could finish the repair work, the arduous exercise had boosted the station’s power supply by 30 percent. Russian Space Agency officials planned for the cosmonauts to conduct another repair operation during the following days.(David Hoffman, “A Partial Repair Gives Mir a Power Boost,” Washington Post, 21 October 1997; Associated Press, “A Spacewalk of Surprises Aboard Mir,” 21 October 1997.)
 The Pentagon announced that it had successfully tested its Mid-Infrared Advanced Chemical Laser (MIRACL), at White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico. The laser, constructed under President Ronald Reagan’s Strategic Defense Initiative, generated a beam that traveled more than 260 miles (418 kilometers) from Earth, hitting an orbiting satellite. According to Pentagon representative U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Robert Potter, if turned to its highest setting, MIRACL would have destroyed the satellite target. The test, which took place two years after the expiration of a 1985 congressional ban on tests of this type, was the first time the United States had tested a laser aimed at an orbiting satellite. Representatives of defense-related industries and scientists around the world debated the acceptability of such a test and the ethics of deploying the instrument. However, whether or not the test was justifiable, the successful hit had demonstrated the vulnerability of satellites to Earth-based weapons.(Associated Press, “Laser Test-Fired into Space Strikes Orbiting U.S. Satellite,” 21 October 1997.)
 Representatives of NASA and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services signed an agreement to enlist NASA technologies in the fight against breast cancer and other women’s illnesses, creating a cooperative framework for the exchange of research information between the two agencies. According to Carolyn A. Krebs of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, the technology allowing HST to map distant galaxies also had the potential to scan human tissue for malignant masses.(NASA, “NASA/Heath and Human Services To Join Forces To Fight Women’s Illnesses,” news release N97-74, 20 October 1997.)
 NASA announced the retirement of J. Wayne Littles, Director of MSFC. Littles had served as Director from 1996 to 1997, the capstone to his 30-year career at the facility. Wayne Littles had twice received the Presidential Rank of Distinguished Executive.(NASA, “Marshall Center Director Dr. Wayne Littles To Retire,” news release 97-247, 28 October 1997. 98)
 Mir cosmonauts Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov engaged in a 6-hour spacewalk, successfully dismantling a damaged solar panel so that Mir’s crew could install a replacement panel. The Russian Space Agency nearly called off the spacewalk when Solovyev discovered a problem with the radio-monitoring system on his spacesuit, just as the men prepared to leave the station. Although the crew’s attempts to repair the monitoring system were unsuccessful, Russian Mission Control eventually decided to proceed with the spacewalk. The cosmonauts worked effectively, communicating with Russian space officials only periodically. This was Solovyev’s fourth spacewalk during his tenure on Mir, confirming his status as the world’s most experienced spacewalker, with more than a dozen spacewalks to his credit. While the cosmonauts worked outside Mir, U.S. astronaut David A. Wolf monitored their progress from inside.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 November 1997.)
 After a four-month mission, NASA officials announced that Mission Control had halted communications with Mars Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner. Sojourner’s batteries were nearly drained, and many of the rover’s instruments had frozen in Mars’s harsh climate. Mission controllers expected the rover simply to come to a halt on Mars’s vast plains, ceasing signal transmissions altogether. Nevertheless, NASA considered the US$266 million mission largely successful. The mission had lasted much longer than planned, transmitting, from the surface of the Red Planet to Earth, nearly 10,000 pictures of the Martian landscape, including images showing evidence of erosion, as well as more than 1.2 billion bits of data. Sojourner’s remarkable service, even in the midst of harsh dust storms and temperatures reaching
 -50°F (-6°C), had excited scientists and public alike. Mars Pathfinder Web sites had received more than 565 million hits during the mission’s tenure. Using the treasure trove of information Pathfinder had gathered, scientists had concluded that Mars’s surface had many similarities to that of Earth. Perhaps the most compelling was the evidence compiled during the mission in support of the theory that, at one time, Mars had water on its surface. In addition, the mission’s research team concluded that water and wind had played crucial roles in shaping the planet’s surface. Mission controllers spoke of their gratitude for the data gathered, which would keep scientists busy for years, as well as about their excitement at the possibility of building upon Mars Pathfinder’s success in future missions.(Paul Hoversten, “Mars Pathfinder Comes to Quiet End Today,” USA Today, 4 November 1997; Reuters, “NASA Announces End of Mars Pathfinder Mission,” 5 November 1997.)
 A team of scientists from the University of California at Riverside announced that NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had enabled them to discover a “vast halo” of gamma rays surrounding the Milky Way Galaxy. The astronomers clarified that the discovery of the halo did not make clear how or why the gamma rays encircled the galaxy. NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory uses gamma rays to expose highly energetic particles that would otherwise be invisible because of their absorption in the atmosphere. The scientific community greeted the discovery with interest and questions.(K. C. Cole, “Halo Around Milky Way Reported,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1997; Reuters, “Gamma Rays Found Surrounding Milky Way,” 5 November 1997.)
 Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced the agency’s support for a film company to shoot a Hollywood-style movie aboard Mir. Russian director Yuri Kara had submitted a proposal to bring actors and film crews to Mir to shoot the film, entitled “Space Flight Has a Price.” Although the Russian Space Agency had not officially approved the project, the cash-strapped agency welcomed the unique opportunity to earn money. The biggest obstacle to the project seemed to be finding financial backers willing to pay to send Kara’s crew into space. The prospect of filming a movie aboard Mir raised some concerns in the space community, but Kara noted that Russian cosmonauts already had acting experience, having filmed commercials aboard the space station for products, including Pepsi-Cola, Omega watches, and Israeli milk.(Associated Press, “Mir⎯the Movie,” 5 November 1997.)
 A group of astronomers announced that they had used NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer to observe a black hole “literally dragging space and time around itself as it rotates.” The discovery confirmed the existence of frame dragging, an extrapolation of Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity. According to the findings, the black hole had such a massive gravitational field that nothing nearby, not even light, could escape its pull. To make the discovery, the team of researchers brought together academic scientists from Italy and the United States, as well as NASA personnel. By studying x-ray emissions, the astronomers were able to find a pattern of forces that clearly revealed the strength of the black hole’s gravitational pull. Alan N. Bunner, Director of the Structure and Evolution of the Universe Program at NASA Headquarters, called the discovery “exciting work,” encouraging scientists to test the findings. Before the discovery, frame dragging persisted as one of the last unverifiable theories of relativity, which scientists had suspected but had been unable to observe. Popular press reports touted the breakthrough as another victory for Einstein.(NASA, “First Observation of Space-Time Distortion by Black Holes,” news release 97-258, 6 November 1997; K.C. Cole, “Finding Backs Einstein’s Theory of Gravity,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997; Kathy Sawyer, “Score Another One for Einstein,” Washington Post, 7 November 1997.)
 NASA announced that lighting technology developed to grow plants in space might help treat cancerous brain tumors in children. According to a series of trials, some tumor-fighting drugs performed more proficiently when illuminated with the light-emitting diodes (LEDs) created for NASA’s Shuttle plant experiments. To gauge further the effectiveness of LEDs in assisting cancer-fighting drugs, Dr. Harry Whelan of the Medical College of Milwaukee obtained permission from the Food and Drug Administration to use the LEDs on a limited number of children with cancer. Whelan’s method involved injecting his patient with cancer-fighting drugs and then placing an LED probe near the affected area. Whelan believed that the light focused the drugs on the dangerous tumors only, leaving the rest of the patient’s brain unaffected. NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research program, allowing small businesses to adapt NASA’s technologies for extended public uses, initiated the trial of LEDs to fight cancer.(NASA, “Space Research Shines a Light on Tumors To Save Lives,” news release 97-259, 6 November 1997.)
 Following on the heels of Mars Pathfinder’s successful mission to map the surface of Mars, two researchers used sonar information and satellite images to create a highly detailed map of the global ocean floor, another largely unexplored area. David T. Sandwell of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography and Walter H. F. Smith of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration improved by 30 times the precision of the world’s most exact ocean maps. Their new map, revealing ridges and canyons never before delineated, helped explain ocean currents and tides across the world. The new mapping technology interested oil companies, looking for clues to the location of fossil fuel deposits, and fishermen seeking likely habitats of fish.(Robert Lee Hotz, “Map Dramatically Deepens Learning About Sea Floor,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 1997.)
 Geochemists from the University of Michigan and the University of Tennessee announced that they had arrived at the most accurate and precise estimation of the age and origin of the Moon yet calculated. They suggested that a collision between the Earth and another planet, 4.5 to 4.52 billion years ago, resulted in the creation of the Moon. To reach their conclusion, the researchers used a special spectrometry technique to examine 21 lunar samples. The scientists also concluded that the collision had set Moon’s orbit.(United Press International, “Researchers Narrow Moon’s Origins, Age,” 10 November 1997.)
 After altering the spacecraft’s path to move it farther away from Mars’s violent winds, NASA launched Mars Global Surveyor from its safe elliptical orbit of the Red Planet, sending the spacecraft into the planet’s harsh atmosphere. NASA officials indicated that, because of the change in flight plans, Mars Global Surveyor would begin its mapping mission of Mars in 1999, one year later than originally planned. The change of plan highlighted both the difficulty of exploring Mars and NASA’s ability to adapt to difficult conditions. When Mars’s atmosphere had proven more hostile than previously anticipated, mission controllers had proven able to readjust Surveyor’s orbit. In effect, the move had placed Surveyor in a holding pattern, keeping it from harm. Once conditions had improved, however, NASA would not be able simply to proceed as planned. Because Surveyor ran on solar power, the mission planners must wait for Mars and the Sun to realign, to provide energy for the craft. However, although NASA would have to postpone the mission for one year, the delay would provide an added benefit, allowing NASA’s researchers to set Surveyor on a circular orbit that would actually bring Surveyor closer to the planet than originally projected.(John Noble Wilford, “Mars Map Will Come a Year Late,” New York Times, 11 November 1997; Mark Carreau, “Mars Map Still on Tap,” Houston Chronicle, 11 November 1997; A. J. Hostetler, “Surveyor Has New Course,” Times-Dispatch (Richmond, VA), 13 November 1997.)
 NASA announced the retirement of Wilbur C. Trafton, who had guided NASA’s International Space Station (ISS) planning for nearly four years. Trafton resigned from his position as Director of the Space Station Program one week after a contentious hearing, in which NASA officials informed Congress that cost overruns on the ISS had reached nearly US$1 billion. However, at Trafton’s departure, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised him, stating, “Will Trafton has met or exceeded all of the challenges I have placed before him.” During Trafton’s tenure, Russia had officially joined the ISS effort as a full partner, and the ISS had moved from planning stage to construction.(NASA Trafton Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 97-264, 13 November 1997; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA’s Space Station Chief Resigns,” Washington Post, 14 November 1997.)
 Reaffirming their commitment to the international consortium’s expensive and increasingly complicated task of constructing Mir’s replacement, NASA and the Russian Space Agency announced appointments to the first four crews that would live and work aboard the ISS. NASA chose astronaut William M. Shepherd as the first expedition commander. Russia selected cosmonauts Yuri P. Gidzenko and Sergei K. Krikalev to accompany Shepherd on the first increment crew. The second crew would have a Russian commander, Yury V. Usachev, accompanied by a crew of American astronauts, James S. Voss and Susan J. Helms. Each member of the first two crews possessed significant space experience. Moreover, the selection of the crews represented careful diplomatic choices meant to support the strong, but still strained, space partnership of the United States and Russia.(NASA, “U.S., Russia Name International Space Station Crews,” news release 97-269, 17 November 1997. 351 George Lardner Jr. and Walter Pincus, “Military Had Plan To Blame Cuba if Glenn’s Space Mission Failed,” Washington Post, 19 November 1997.)
 The Assignation Records Review Board made public more than 1,500 pages of classified records, including a memorandum detailing a plan to blame Prime Minister Fidel Castro and the government of the Republic of Cuba if astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s attempt to orbit Earth in the Mercury capsule was unsuccessful. The 2 February 1962 document stated, “by manufacturing various pieces of evidence which would prove electronic interference on the part of the Cubans,” the United States could shift the blame to Castro. Glenn’s safe return to Earth rendered any such plans unnecessary.
 Space Shuttle Columbia lifted off from Earth on Mission STS-87 with great fanfare, executing an unusual 180° roll 6 minutes into the 81⁄2-minute flight, a maneuver planned to put the Shuttle in radio contact with communication satellites. The launch itself took place at the “exact moment on the exact day as planned” for the sixth consecutive mission. The six-person crew included Takao Doi, a Japanese astronaut who planned to make his country’s first spacewalk; Kalpana Chawla, the first Indian-born woman to travel into space; Leonid K. Kadenyuk, the first Ukrainian to fly on a U.S. Shuttle; and U.S. astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Steven W. Lindsey, and Winston E. Scott. The crew planned to conduct a spacewalk to test instruments and procedures for the ISS. The Shuttle also carried the U.S. Microgravity Payload-4, which the astronauts planned to use to test the responses to conditions in space of a variety of materials and liquids.(NASA, “Solar and Microgravity Research Highlight Final Shuttle Mission of 1997,” news release J97037, November 1997; William Harwood, “Columbia Corkscrews into Orbit,” Washington Post, 20 November 1997; Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Blasts Off with Multinational Crew,” 19 November 1997; Associated Press, “Shuttle Executes Flip on Its Way into Orbit,” 16 November 1997.)
 Two members of Columbia’s crew, U.S. astronaut Winston E. Scott and Japanese astronaut Takao Doi, conducted a spacewalk, successfully recapturing the unresponsive Spartan satellite released on 21 November. After the 3,000-pound (1,400-kilogram) satellite had failed to turn toward the Sun, Columbia’s robotic arm had bumped it away from the Shuttle. NASA officials had cancelled the mission’s originally planned spacewalk to rescue the US$10 million spacecraft. Astronauts Scott and Doi later received a telephone call from President William J. Clinton congratulating them on grabbing the satellite.(William Harwood, “Satellite Designed To Study Sun Fails,” Washington Post, 22 November 1997; Associated Press, “Columbia Crew Prepares Plan To Recover Spinning Satellite,” 24 November 1997; William Harwood, “Space Walkers Grab Satellite, Wrestle It Back onto Shuttle,” 25 November 1997; Reuters, “Spacewalking Astronauts Grab Errant Satellite,” 25 November 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Calls Shuttle Crew with Thanks,” 28 November 1997.)
 The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report on the threat of space debris to the planned International Space Station (ISS). According to the report, Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan, NASA’s surveillance capabilities, relying on the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) network of radar and optical sensors for information about possible collisions, had not provided enough information to prevent collisions in space. GAO surmised that DOD had focused most of its attention on military objects, missing many of the smaller pieces of debris that could have caused significant damage to NASA’s Shuttles or the ISS. GAO recommended that NASA, DOD, and the CIA collaborate to upgrade the space surveillance system. According to estimates, more than 110,000 pieces of debris, most measuring about 0.5 inches (1.3 centimeters) in diameter, were floating in space. With a closing velocity of 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour, even such a small object would do significant damage to the ISS, when the station was in a prograde orbit. GAO’s report noted that the fully completed ISS would be 10 times larger than any Shuttle flying in space, and that it would be in orbit for at least 10 years, increasing the chance of a collision occurring. Although they acknowledged the possibility of a collision, NASA scientists argued that the odds favored the ISS’s avoiding such an occurrence. As NASA’s expert, Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris, Nicholas L. Johnson, explained, “The odds are certainly in your favor that nothing will happen at all in those 10 years [of planned space station operation].”(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Surveillance: DOD and NASA Need Consolidated Requirements and a Coordinated Plan” (report no. NSIAD 98-42, Washington, DC, 1 December 1997); Sean Holton, “Worries Rise over Junk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 December 1997.)
 In a once-in-a-century occurrence, eight planets lined up in the sky “like pearls on a string” from west to east. Astronomers could view, in one line of sight, Pluto, followed by Mercury, Mars, Venus, Neptune, Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn⎯with a crescent Moon visible as well. Jack Horkheimer, host of public television’s Star Hustler described the event as “naked-eye astronomy at its best,” a boon for amateurs. According to computer calculations, the orbits of the planets would not line up in such a pleasing manner for observers on the Earth for at least another century.(Associated Press, “Planets in Once-in-Century Lineup,” 2 December 1997.)
 Crew aboard Shuttle Columbia successfully released and operated the Autonomous Extra- vehicular Robotic Camera Sprint (AERCam Sprint). The 35-pound (16-kilogram), spherical camera propelled itself around the Shuttle after astronaut Winston E. Scott had released it during a spacewalk. The camera used periodic jet thrusts to maneuver, responding to control commands made from inside Columbia. The US$3 million camera transmitted images of Columbia and its crew back to Earth, providing unique vantage points for observation. The astronauts, who retrieved the small robotic device without any complications, concluded that it would be a helpful technology for future Shuttle missions and the ISS.(Seth Borenstein, “Robot Set for 1st Space Walk in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 December 1997; Associated Press, “Free-Flying Camera Flits High Above Columbia, Sends Down Video,” 3 December 1997.)
 The Astronauts Memorial Foundation recognized Major Robert H. Lawrence Jr. as the first black astronaut in NASA history, exactly 30 years after his death during a U.S. Air Force training mission. A ceremony adding Lawrence’s name to the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s Space Mirror at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) ended a long bureaucratic debate over whether Lawrence qualified as an astronaut. Lawrence had never met the Air Force requisite that an astronaut must have flown at an altitude of least 50 miles (80 kilometers) above Earth, because, although he had received his appointment to the U.S. Air Force’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program, he had died before flying in space. Therefore, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation had repeatedly refused to include his name on the Space Mirror at KSC. However, in 1996 U.S. Representative Bobby L. Rush (D-IL) had persuaded the Air Force to verify Lawrence’s status as an astronaut. Thereafter, the Astronauts Memorial Foundation’s board of directors voted, immediately and unanimously, to include Lawrence’s name on the Space Mirror.(Associated Press, “Crash Victim Recognized as 1st Black Astronaut,” 8 December 1997.)
 At a meeting of the American Geophysical Union, scientists unveiled evidence of another cause, besides the Sun, of “killer electrons,” which travel at high velocity. When electrons travel from Jupiter’s massive magnetic field, their speed approaches the speed of light. Showers of high- velocity electrons cause many problems, including blackouts on Earth and damage to orbiting satellites and global positioning systems. Scientists had previously been unable to determine the source of the electrons causing the damage. Presenting the new information on the phenomenon of high-velocity electrons, the researchers declared that the ability to forecast “space weather,” including the patterns of high-velocity electrons, would become increasingly important during the coming age of the ISS.(Tim Friend, “Mystery Solved: Jupiter Is Source of Killer Electrons,” USA Today, 9 December 1997.)
 U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN) sent a harshly worded letter to NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, decrying NASA’s chronic cost overruns and promising investigative hearings before the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation. Although McCain and Frist both expressed support for NASA, and for space exploration in general, they wrote that “continual, unabated overruns undermine the public faith” in the space program.(Sean Holton, “Senators Blast NASA for Program Overruns,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1997.)
 NASA dedicated a plaque in memory of Ellison S. Onizuka, celebrating his record of achieving the highest altitude for propeller-driven aircraft. Onizuka had been Hawaii’s first astronaut and a member of the Shuttle crew aboard Challenger when it exploded in 1986. NASA’s recognition of Onizuka’s achievement, more than a decade later, occurred during the same year that the remotely controlled AeroVironment Pathfinder broke a distance record for unpiloted space travel, topping 71,000 miles (114,000 kilometers) during its 7 July 1997 flight. NASA honored Onizuka for his part in “reaching for the heavens and striving for excellence,” noting that his achievement had contributed to that of Pathfinder. NASA dedicated the plaque honoring Onizuka at the U.S. Navy’s Pacific Missile Range Facility on Kauai, where the record-setting Pathfinder plane had set flight on its historic mission.(NASA, “NASA Solar-Powered Altitude Record To Be Dedicated to Challenger Astronaut,” news release N97- 087, 3 December 1997.)
 U.S. Senator D. Robert “Bob” Graham (D-FL) announced a plan to lease room aboard NASA Space Shuttles and the ISS to private entities, to offset the costs of space exploration. Graham announced his plan during a news conference at a new Cape Canaveral, Florida, air station dedicated to commercial launches. Congress had banned the use of the Shuttle for commercial purposes after the Challenger accident. Some space experts believed that Graham’s plan would take advantage of a strong commercial market for the retrieval of satellites from space. Graham’s plan joined a list of other initiatives of the mid-1990s, designed to merge government and private space interests to ease costs for the federal government.(Seth Borenstein, “Graham: Let’s Make Money in Space,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 December 1997.)
 The Galileo spacecraft made the closest ever flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa and earned a place in space history by becoming the first spacecraft to orbit an outer planet. Galileo came within 124 miles (200 kilometers) of Europa, gathering images of what looked liked an icy ocean beneath the moon’s frozen crust. The prospect of water on the moon’s surface excited scientists, who had identified Europa’s climate as unique among the moons and planets of the galaxy. The images of the possible ocean seemed to show signs of “slushy material” pushing up against the surface ice, a sign of a heated core. The flyby was the first encounter to occur during Galileo’s two-year extension to its original mission. According to press accounts, Galileo, launched in 1989, had already gathered enough data to force scientists to “rewrite textbooks.”(NASA, “Closest Europa Flyby Marks Start of Galileo Mission ‘Part II’,” news release 97-286, 16 December 1997; K. C. Cole, “Galileo Takes Close-Ups of Icy Europa,” Los Angeles Times, 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Galileo Flies By Europe, Sees Indication of Ocean Under Ice,” 17 December 1997.)
 NASA released images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) revealing more clearly than ever the “final blaze of glory” of aging Sun-like stars. Scientists had long hypothesized that stars gradually dimmed and died out as they cast off a shell of glowing gas. However, the HST revealed instead that dying stars create in space an intricate series of glowing patterns⎯“pinwheels, lawn sprinkler style jets, elegant goblet shapes, and even some that look like a rocket engine’s exhaust.” Astronomers speculated that the new images would lead them to reanalyze “stellar evolution.” According to Howard E. Bond of the Space Telescope Science Institute of Baltimore, Maryland, the images made old ideas about the death of stars seem simplistic. Hubble scientist David S. Leckrone of NASA Headquarters, referring to the eventual burning out of the Sun, went so far as to say, “In a very real way, these images show us our own destiny.” Scientists believed that the images portrayed a complicated but very organized sequence of events, which experts might understand after further study.(NASA, “Hubble Witnesses the Final Blaze of Glory of Sun-Like Stars,” news release 97-287, 17 December 1997; Paul Hoversten, “Hubble Observes Stars’ Swan Songs,” USA Today, 18 December 1997; John Noble Wilford, “Hubble Takes Gaudy Photos of Dying Stars,” New York Times, 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Hubble Previews Death of Earth in 6 Billion Years,” 18 December 1997.)
 Mir’s crew had to abandon a German-built robotic camera called the Inspector, which Russian space officials had hoped would capture precise images of the holes in the Spektr module, made when the a cargo craft crashed into Mir in June 1997. The camera had failed immediately after its launch, diverting from its planned course. After attempting for several hours to redirect the Inspector, the crew made plans to change Mir’s orbit, to avoid a collision with the unruly robot. The malfunctioning Inspector was the latest in the long string of accidents and malfunctions that had forced the three Russian-American crew members aboard Mir to spend nearly as much time on maintenance as on scientific research.(Reuters, “Mir To Abandon Robot Space Camera After Failure,” 17 December 1997; Associated Press, “Robot Fails, Floats Free Near Mir,” 18 December 1997.)
 President William J. Clinton awarded Congressional Space Medals of Honor to Edward H. White II and Roger B. Chafee, who died in the Apollo 1 fire. Clinton presented the medals to members of the men’s families in a ceremony in the Oval Office. White and Chafee were part of the three-man crew involved in the tragedy, which had occurred more than 30 years earlier. On 27 January 1967, the Apollo 1 space capsule had caught fire on the launchpad, killing the three men on board the spacecraft. The third member of the crew, Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1978. The accident had caused NASA to institute aggressive safety procedures, placing a premium on the well-being of its astronauts. Clinton noted the contributions of the fallen astronauts, “though they never got there, astronauts Chaffee, White, and Grissom’s footprints are on the moon.” Besides Apollo 1’s crew, only nine other astronauts had received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor.(Associated Press, “Apollo 1 Astronauts Honored: 3 Killed in 1967 Fire on Launch Pad,” 18 December 1997; Associated Press, “Clinton Gives Congressional Space Medal,” 17 December 1997.)
 NASA announced that, because of a US$100 million budget shortfall, it would lay off 600 workers from its 6,000-person workforce, including 500 workers from KSC. United Space Alliance, the joint venture of Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company, which NASA had contracted to take over Shuttle operations, planned to solicit volunteers for early retirement before resorting to “pink slips.” To ensure the maintenance of safety standards, NASA was to maintain the right of final approval of all personnel decisions.(Dan Klepal, “NASA Confirms 600 Jobs Will Be Cut,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 December 1997; Associated Press, “Space Center Layoffs,” 23 December 1997.)
 EarthWatch Inc. of Longmont, Colorado, launched into orbit Early Bird 1, the first private spy satellite. The launch, which took place in Russia, ended government domination of space spying. According to EarthWatch, Early Bird 1 had the capability to track objects on Earth as small as 10-feet (3-meters) long. The company also reported that “customers were lining up to buy images.” Customers for Early Bird 1 services included public interest groups, planning to track military movement and arms control measures, and foreign governments, without the resources to launch their own satellites. Because Early Bird 1 was an American-produced satellite, the U.S. federal government retained the right to switch it off during wartime, as well as the right to filter images sold to foreign customers. Experts predicted that the security and privacy questions surrounding the first private spy satellite would take years to sort out. However, they also surmised that Early Bird 1 was only the first in the wave of satellites that private industry would launch during the coming decade.(William J. Broad, “First Civilian Spy Satellite Soars into Space, Launched in Russia by a U.S. Company,” New York Times, 25 December 1997; Reuters, “1st Civilian Spy Satellite Launched in Russia,” 26 December 1997.)
 The Russian Space Agency paid cosmonauts Vasili V. Tsibliyev and Alexander I. Lazutkin belated bonuses for their six-month Mir mission, payments that Russia had withheld until investigators had determined the two men’s roles during the troubled mission, which included the crash of a robotic cargo craft into Mir. S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), the company that built Mir, had blamed Tsibliyev and Lazutkin, suggesting that Russia deny the two cosmonauts their salaries. However, once the Russian government had determined that human error had been only one among many causes of the crash, RSC Energia’s President Yuri P. Semyonov had retracted the company’s demand that Russia punish the cosmonauts and had supported their right to receive payment. Tsibliyev received about US$100,000 and Lazutkin about US$80,000. Both men had expressed dismay at the negative reception they had received upon returning to Earth after the difficult mission.(Associated Press, “Mir’s Pay Day,” 25 December 1997.)
