 NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
 The crew of the Mir space station replaced the malfunctioning computer block, which had failed on 2 January, and restarted the station’s orientation system. This common type of malfunction, which had occurred seven times in 1997, did not create life-threatening conditions, but it did reduce the power supply to the space station, thereby crippling the gyroscope that oriented the station’s solar panels. Using the Soyuz escape module engines to control its orientation, Mir turned off all nonessential systems, to conserve energy until the crew had completed the repair.(Washington Post, “Mir Crew Replaces Computer Block,” 4 January 1998; Chicago Tribune, “New Year, Old Woe—Mir Computer Glitch,” 3 January 1998.)
 Steve Fossett’s Solo Spirit balloon, carrying NASA’s prototype Aerobot Science Payload, landed prematurely when it experienced equipment problems. NASA had been testing the Aerobot Science Payload prototype for use on balloons in outer space, to collect information from other planets’ atmospheres. On this trip, Aerobot returned accurate data on position, balloon velocity, vertical wind velocity, temperature, and humidity, but experienced problems with a pressure sensor and a satellite communications link.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Balloon Trip Helps Martian Studies,” 11 January 1998.)
 An Athena II rocket carrying Lunar Prospector launched from the renovated U.S. Navy test- launch site, Launch Complex 46, marking the first time that the government-based space transportation agency, Spaceport Florida Authority, had managed a launch from the complex. The rocket carried aboard some of the ashes of geologist Eugene M. Shoemaker, who had died in a car crash in July 1997. Among his many professional accomplishments, the sixty-nine-year-old Shoemaker had selected lunar landing sites and trained Apollo astronauts. On 5 January, NASA had cancelled Athena II’s first scheduled launch for safety reasons, after U.S. Air Force radar necessary to track the rocket failed. The unpiloted rocket launched at 9:28 p.m. (EST) and, after 1 hour, propelled the 4-foot (1.2-meter), 650-pound (291-kilogram) Lunar Prospector out of low- Earth orbit toward the Moon.(Lynne Bumpus-Hooper, “Prospector Off on Historic Trip to Moon,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 1998; Jim Erickson, “Late Flagstaff Astronomer’s Ashes Are Headed for Moon in Fitting Tribute,” Arizona Daily Star (Tucson, AZ), 7 January 1998; Washington Times, “NASA Launches Mission to Moon Seeking Water for Future Settlers,” 7 January 1998.)
 Astronomers announced that pictures from a new camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) supported the theory that a new planet was forming around Beta Pictoris. Images focusing on the disc (the halo of dust and gas rotating around the star) revealed that, instead of a smooth flow, one quadrant has a large bulge, indicating the orbital path of a planet that could be many times larger than Jupiter. No actual planet was visible in the images, only the effects of its gravitational pull. Nevertheless, this was the strongest evidence to date in visible light, of the presence of a possible planet. Beta Pictoris is younger (20 million to 100 million years old compared to the Sun’s 4.5 to 5 billion years) and about eight times brighter than the Sun. The formation of planets around a young star suggested that planets form very early in the life of a solar system.(Washington Post, “Images Support Theory of New Planet: Hubble Photos Show Bulge in Star’s Halo Dust—63 Light-Years from Sun,” 9 January 1998.)
 NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
 The two Russian crew members of the Mir space station completed a record-breaking spacewalk. Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov dismantled and retrieved in record time the Kristall module’s optical-monitoring equipment made by the United States. The scheduled 6-hour spacewalk took only 3 hours and 8 minutes. However, it was unclear whether the cosmonauts had been able to repair a leaky hatch. The problem was not with the rubber sealing, as Russian ground control had suspected, but rather with a malfunctioning lock that was preventing the hatch from sealing hermetically. The cosmonauts activated 10 reserve locks and pumped air into the airlock, planning to monitor the hatch for leaks over the next 24 hours. The spacewalk was Commander Solovyev’s 16th in five flights over 10 years. He had spent more than 70 hours in free space, more than any other person had accrued.(Washington Post, “Mir Commander Walks into Spaceflight History,” 10 January 1998; Washington Times, “Cosmonauts Possibly Fix Leaky Hatch, Do Spacewalk in Record-Short Time,” 10 January 1998.)
 Russian Mission Control monitored Mir’s airlock pressure following the repair work of 9 January. On Friday, 8 January, when the crew entered the airlock without spacesuits to retrieve some equipment, the repair was holding, but the pressure had fallen slightly. Russian ground control near Moscow, which was analyzing the data, planned to decide on Monday whether Mir’s Kvant-2 module was safe.(Reuters, “Mir’s Airlock Pressure Down a Bit—Russian Control,” 11 January 1998.)
 At 7:15 a.m. (EST), Lunar Prospector executed the first of three engine bursts needed to settle into orbit. In a flawlessly executed maneuver, Prospector fired its engines for 30 minutes to slow down, permitting the Moon’s gravity to capture it. The small robotic spacecraft was NASA’s first visitor to the Moon since the astronauts from Apollo 17 had walked on its surface in 1972. The Lunar Prospector project had cost about US$63 million.(Washington Times, “After 25 Years, NASA Shoots for the Moon,” 12 January 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Prospector Slides into Lunar Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 12 January 1998.)
 Pressure in Mir’s Kvant-2 module had been dropping steadily, to about three-quarters of the normal atmospheric pressure of Earth, indicating that the hatch was still not closing properly. Despite these problems, the team delayed further repairs, scheduling them to take place after other planned events, including a spacewalk scheduled for later in the week, the docking with Space Shuttle Endeavour planned for 25 January, and the arrival of a Russian-French team on 30 January.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 12 January 1998; Reuters, “Mir Airlock Continues To Leak After Repair,” 12 January 1998.)
 Lunar Prospector settled into its orbit after three flawless engine burns. The five scientific instruments (magnetometer, electron reflectometer, gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron spectrometer, alpha particle spectrometer, and Doppler gravity experiment using an S-band antenna) began transmitting streams of data. The neutron spectrometer scanned the lunar surface for evidence of hydrogen; the gamma-ray spectrometer determined concentrations of elements such as uranium and iron; and the alpha-particle spectrometer searched for indications of volcanic and tectonic activity.(Reuters, “Corrected—U.S. Space Probe Begins Hunt for Water on the Moon,” 14 January 1998; NASA, “Solar System Exploration: Lunar Prospector,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=LunarPr&Dis play=ReadMore (accessed 30 July 2007).)
 The contractor operating the Space Shuttle program, United Space Alliance (USA), announced that it would cut 500 jobs at KSC by 30 January, to reduce total workforce by 10 percent. The announcement raised concerns in Congress about Shuttle safety.(Robyn Suriano, “500 KSC Layoffs Jan. 30 Expected: Budget Shortfall Will Reduce Work Force 10 Percent,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998; Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Latest Round of KSC Layoffs Needs Congressional Scrutiny,” 15 January 1998.)
 Florida state leaders began forming a task force to attract Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Reusable Launch Vehicle to the coast’s spaceports. U.S. Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL) confirmed verbal commitments from the Spaceport Florida Authority and from Enterprise Florida to help fund the task force. The Florida VentureStarTM Capture Team, the proposed name for the task force, estimated that they needed between US$200,000 and US$1 million to carry out a successful bid for the VentureStarTM business.(Todd Halvorson, “Task Force To Focus on Attracting Lockheed Martin’s VentureStar to State,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 January 1998.)
 American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
 Mir Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev celebrated his 50th birthday⎯in space, enjoying a “semi- officially” sanctioned one-gulp-per-person dose of cognac and a birthday dinner chosen from the space station’s supplies. Solovyev had logged an impressive 80 hours of spacewalking during 17 walks. As of this Mir mission, Solovyev’s fifth, the Russian cosmonaut had spent a cumulative total of approximately 20 months on the space station.(Associated Press, “Mir-50-Year-Old Cosmonaut,” 16 January 1998.)
 NASA officially named U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH), veteran astronaut of the Mercury program, as a crew member aboard Space Shuttle Discovery’s Mission STS-95 planned for October 1998. At age 77, Glenn would become the oldest person to fly in orbit. In 1962 he had been the first American to orbit Earth. NASA described the research planned during Glenn’s spaceflight, a joint effort between NASA and the National Institute of Aging of the National Institutes of Health. Scientists intended to supplement peer-reviewed research on sleep disorders, muscle atrophy, balance, and clinical evaluations of blood and heart function with data collected during Discovery’s planned October mission. Senator Glenn had undergone medical tests with NASA physicians, as well as with independent consultants, all of whom had determined that Glenn was medically qualified for spaceflight, with an excellent fitness level. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Glenn “brings a unique blend of experience to NASA. He has flight, operational, and policy experience.”(NASA, “Sen. Glenn Gets a ‘Go’ for Space Shuttle Mission,” news release 98-8, 16 January 1998. 386 Associated Press, “Russia-Space Station,” 18 January 1998.)
 The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
 Following a meeting of the Defence Council, President Boris N. Yeltsin issued a decree giving overall control of Russia’s space industry to the civilian Russian Space Agency. Yeltsin’s intention was “to extract maximum economic benefit from one of the few manufacturing industries in which Russia is a world leader.” With this decree, Yeltsin required the government to create a plan for a restructured space industry, giving priority to national security, to economic and scientific missions, and to strengthening Russia’s position in the world marketplace.(Reuters, “Russia Puts Civilian Agency in Charge of Space,” 20 January 1998.)
 A NASA Space Shuttle program manager announced that a special safety study would not prevent USA, the prime Space Shuttle contractor, from cutting up to 10 percent of its workforce at KSC. The safety report, not yet released, called for some changes in the layoff plan, but would still permit the private company to cut up to 600 jobs.(Seth Borenstein for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Kennedy Space Center in Florida To Cut 600 Private-Company Shuttle Jobs,” 22 January 1998.)
 NASA modified its contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation in order to produce a second flight vehicle for the X-34 program. The modified contract expanded test objectives, allowing US$7.7 million in additional funds for the purchase of hardware and another US$2 million for additional testing and analysis, wind tunnel testing, and a second leading-edge thermal protection system.(NASA, “NASA Commits to Second Vehicle for X-34 Program,” news release 98-11, 21 January 1998.)
 NASA announced the change in name of one of its four strategic enterprises. NASA’s Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise was renamed Earth Science Enterprise. Mission to Planet Earth Strategic Enterprise had originated 10 years ago, based on the concept that NASA should observe the Earth in the same way that it studies other planets. NASA said that the new name reflected the enterprise’s reformulated goals. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise would seek to answer key questions about land-surface cover, near-term and long-term climate change, natural hazards, and atmospheric ozone.(NASA, “Mission to Planet Earth Enterprise Name Changed to Earth Science,” news release 98-12, 21 January 1998.)
 The Russian Space Agency nominated veteran cosmonaut Valery V. Ryumin to fly as a mission specialist aboard Discovery during Mission STS-91 in May. In his last spaceflight in 1980, Ryumin was a member of the Soyuz 35 Mission. During that mission, he had spent 185 days in space from April through October. Ryumin had spent a total of 362 days in space in the course of his three missions.(NASA, “Veteran Cosmonaut Nominated To Fly on Final Shuttle/Mir Mission,” news release, 21 January 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Endeavour Mission STS-89 successfully launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite forecasted thunderstorms. The crew of STS-89 included Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Joe F. Edwards Jr., Payload Commander Bonnie J. Dunbar, and Mission Specialists Michael P. Anderson, James F. Reilly, Salizhan S. Sharipov, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, who would replace David A. Wolf on Mir. This was the eighth Shuttle–Mir docking, but the first for an orbiter other than Atlantis and the first overseen by Launch Director David A. King. NASA had appointed two new rotational launch directors, David A. King and Ralph R. Roe Jr., following the retirement of veteran Launch Director James F. Harrington III.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts,” 23 January 1998; Seth Borenstein, “Weather May Keep Endeavour on Ground,” Huntsville Times (AL), 21 January 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-89,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-89.html (accessed 11 June 2007); NASA Kennedy Space Center, “KSC Launch Director Harrington To Retire; Successors Named,” news release 223-97, 17 December 1997, http://www- pao.ksc.nasa.gov/kscpao/release/1997/223-97.htm (accessed 5 August 2008).)
 NASA Launch Integration Manager Donald R. McMonagle announced that Space Shuttle Columbia’s tune-up would take place at the Boeing Company’s facility in Palmdale, California, rather than at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida. NASA Launch Integration and Shuttle operator USA advised Boeing officials “to get ready to map out a plan for Columbia’s work in California.” The announcement, following the recent notification about significant job cuts, was more bad news for KSC officials. NASA officials had proposed in 1996 that KSC handle much of the Shuttle’s maintenance and modification but had decided that the facility was “too busy with launches to handle [S]huttle renovation.” Alan Buis, a Boeing representative, suggested that, because Columbia would be getting “a complicated internal glass cockpit, Palmdale is ‘a logical choice’.”(Seth Borenstein, “California Plant Gets Shuttle Work Again,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 January 1998.)
 Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
 Astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas was unable to fit into his Russian-made emergency spacesuit before boarding Mir, but after initial orders that Thomas spend the first night in the Space Shuttle, Mission Control granted him permission to board. The suit was necessary only in case of emergency evacuation aboard Soyuz. Once aboard Mir, Thomas altered his spacesuit, adjusting and removing some straps in the armpit and torso areas. After the alterations, the suit fit exactly as it should, ensuring that Thomas would not have to return to Earth with Endeavour on Thursday.(Steve Marshall, “Mir Spacesuit, Astronaut Prove To Be a Poor Fit,” USA Today, 26 January 1998; Washington Post, “Astronaut Moves into Mir Despite Spacesuit Problem,” 26 January 1998; Washington Times, “Thomas Finally Fits in on Mir: Crucial Alterations Made to Space Suit,” 27 January 1998.)
 During the Shuttle’s docking at Mir, a sensor aboard Endeavour failed, requiring Mir to take control of Endeavour. Mir was to keep the Shuttle pointed in the right direction until Mission Control could transmit software to fix the sensor.396 Crews transferred about half of the 7,400 pounds (3,356 kilograms) of supplies and equipment aboard the Shuttle to the space station.(Brad Liston for Reuters, “Balky Suit and Other Problems Fixed on Mir,” 26 January 1998.)
 A Russian Space Agency official insisted that there had been no problem with Andrew S. W. Thomas’s spacesuit, describing the U.S. astronaut as bad tempered and expressing concern about the implications of Thomas’s attitude for the remainder of the mission. Deputy Flight Commander Viktor Blagov indicated that, since major work would take place on Mir, “any fuss about the space suit is out of place.” Blagov explained that Thomas would keep both David Wolf’s spacesuit and his own.(Reuters, “Balky Suit.”)
 Endeavour lost power to its small forward-maneuvering jets for 30 minutes. Because the jets, which deliver 25 pounds (11 kilograms) of thrust, keep the complex stabilized as it orbits Earth, the loss of power left the Endeavour–Mir complex adrift. During this malfunction, the crew continued its main task, to transfer supplies and equipment from the Shuttle to the space station. NASA officials explained that the crew had never been in danger. However, if the Shuttle’s small maneuvering jets had not regained power, Endeavour would have had to rely on its primary jets, which deliver 875 pounds (397 kilograms) of thrust. Using the primary jets would have risked damage to Mir upon separation of the two spacecraft.(Brad Liston for Reuters, “Faulty Jets Are Fixed, and Space Complex Is Stabilized,” New York Times, 27 January 1998.)
 NASA announced the discovery of a fast-spinning pulsar, providing evidence of an evolutionary link between strong-field, slower-spinning, energetic pulsars and weak-field, millisecond pulsars. Frank Marshall, William W. Zhang, and Eric V. Gotthelf of GSFC found the pulsar by examining x-ray emissions that NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer spacecraft had recorded in 1996. Observations of the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics spacecraft, a satellite jointly owned by Japan and the United States, confirmed the discovery. The scientists reported that the pulsar was spinning at a rate of 60 times per second, and that it could have been spinning as fast as 150 times per second when it formed 4,000 years ago. An astrophysicist at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Los Alamos National Laboratory remarked, “this is the fastest high-energy pulsar of its type we know about.” The research team reported that the pulsar is “likely associated with the remnant of a supernova (N157B) that exploded in the Large Magellanic Cloud about 4,000 years ago.” Comparing the pulsar found in N157B to the high- energy pulsar in the Crab Nebula, the scientists reported that the central source of x-ray light from N157B is this fast-spinning pulsar associated with a supernova remnant, proving the hypothesis that the weaker the magnetic field, the faster the pulsar spins at birth.(NASA, “Fast-Spinning Pulsar Discovery Provides Evolutionary Link,” news release 98-14, 26 January 1998.)
 Engineers at KSC made corrections to Endeavour’s software, completely repairing the Shuttle’s jets overnight. After the transmittal of the corrected software to the computers on board the Shuttle, the problem was resolved. NASA believed that a malfunctioning relay latch, an electrical connection on the spacecraft, had caused the problem.(Reuters, “Faulty Jets Are Fixed.”)
 The crew closed the hatches used to transfer equipment between Endeavour and Mir at 5:34 p.m. (EST) in preparation for Endeavour’s return flight to Earth. The closure of the hatches concluded five days of Endeavour’s continuous link-up with Mir, during which time the astronauts and cosmonauts had transferred 9,600 pounds (4,350 kilograms) of materials. In addition to equipment exchanges, the crew exchanged American astronaut David A. Wolf for Andrew S. W. Thomas, a U.S. astronaut born in Australia, who was to remain aboard Mir for a planned four- and-one-half-month mission.
 NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration awarded a US$423 million contract to Hughes Space and Communications of El Segundo, California, to manufacture and launch up to four weather-monitoring Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites (GOES). The basic contract covered the manufacture and launch of two spacecraft. Separate fixed-price options for two additional spacecraft would cost US$190 million and US$185 million. The spacecraft would carry instruments to provide regular measurements of the Earth’s atmosphere, cloud cover, and land surfaces. Two spacecraft would also carry the Solar X-ray Imager and Space Environment Monitor instruments. These four spacecraft, known as GOES-N, -O, -P, and -Q were to continue, enhancing the services of the current GOES-I through -M series, a “mainstay of modern weather forecasting.” The GOES series provided meteorologists and hydrologists with “visible and infrared images of weather systems, and precise atmospheric soundings.” The positions of the spacecraft in orbit would allow scientists to monitor storms when they were first forming in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.(NASA, “Hughes Selected To Build Weather Satellites,” contract announcement release C98-B, 28 January 1998. 404 Robyn Suriano, “Atlas Launches on Fourth Try: Classified Craft Likely To Serve as Orbital Switchboard,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 January 1998.)
 An Atlas rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida at 1:37 p.m. (EST), after NASA had scrubbed the flight three days in a row. The Lockheed Martin rocket, which carried a classified spacecraft for the Pentagon’s National Reconnaissance Office, separated from its passenger 11⁄2 hours after launching, with the satellite successfully placed in orbit. The satellite, viewing two-thirds of the globe, was to circle the Earth in an egg-shaped orbit, taking it from 24,000 miles (39,000 kilometers) above the northern latitudes to just 200 miles (322 kilometers) above Antarctica.
 Endeavour separated from Mir to head home at 11:57 a.m. (EST), returning David A. Wolf to Earth and leaving Andrew S. W. Thomas at the Mir station for a four-and-one-half-month stay. Wolf was returning to Earth aboard Endeavour after completing a 119-day stay on Mir. The new crew of Mir, two cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and a French astronaut Léopold Eyharts, lifted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on Soyuz TM-27, 23 minutes before Endeavour undocked from Mir.(New York Times, “Shuttle Departs, Leaving Last American on Mir,” 30 January 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Endeavour Separates from Mir,” USA Today, 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.”)
 402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
 Raytheon Systems Company’s training unit, formerly known as Hughes Training, appointed former astronaut Henry W. Hartsfield Jr. as Managing Director for the company’s NASA support business. In this position, Hartsfield was to manage the development of simulators for the ISS program.(David Welch for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Raytheon Systems Names Chief of NASA Deals,” 30 January 1998.)
 Just hours before Endeavour touched down in Florida, a new crew from Russia docked at Mir to begin a three-week transition from Mir 24 to Mir 25. Mir 25 Commander Talgat A. Musabayev replaced Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Flight Engineer Nikolai M. Budarin replaced Pavel V. Vinogradov, and Researcher Léopold Eyharts, a 40-year old French air force pilot on his first spaceflight, joined the crew.(NASA, “STS-89”; Washington Post, “2 Russians, Frenchman Blast Off for Mir,” 30 January 1998.)
 The U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Museum in Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated the 40th anniversary of the successful launch of the modified Redstone rocket, which had carried into orbit Explorer I, the United States’ first satellite. The launch occurred four months after the Soviet Union had placed Sputnik I in orbit. In addition to achieving orbit, the 31-pound (14- kilogram) Explorer I had discovered the Van Allen Radiation Belt. The museum at the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station held an open house and a space fair and launched a model rocket to celebrate the anniversary of this milestone and to educate the public about the United States’ 40 years in space.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Explorer 1 Anniversary Event Will Bring History to Life,” 31 January 1998.)
 One thousand Puerto Ricans protested against NASA’s plans to launch, from a nature preserve in Puerto Rico, suborbital rockets filled with chemicals. The Coqui Dos program planned the launch to measure high-level winds and turbulence in the upper atmosphere. Coqui Dos continued the El Coqui program of 1992, part of NASA’s Suborbital Sounding Rocket program, which launched 25 sounding rockets annually from locations worldwide. Because the rockets would disperse aluminum trimethol before crashing into the sea, the protesters demanded that NASA produce studies proving that the launch would not damage the environment. The mayor of Vega Baja led the protest outside the entrance to the Tortuguero Recreation Area, the section of the nature preserve where the rocket launches would take place, threatening to sue NASA to force it to release environmental impact studies from the 1992 launch.(NASA, “NASA Studying Space Weather from Puerto Rico,” news release 98-23, 6 February 1998; Mario Maldonado for Associated Press, “Puerto Rico-NASA,” 1 February 1998; Lance Oliver, “11 Launches Will Attract Protesters: Many in Puerto Rico Fear Damage by Research Rockets,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 2 February 1998.)
 Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA planned to reserve an additional US$750 million of federal funds over the next two years, enabling Lockheed Martin to continue work on a replacement vehicle for the Space Shuttle. Lockheed Martin and NASA had signed an agreement in 1996 to develop the X-33 suborbital test craft. At that time, the federal government had pledged to dedicate US$900 million to develop the craft and fund 15 suborbital test flights, beginning in the spring of 1999. Goldin explained that if the test program exceeded the original ceiling of US$900 million, the US$750 million funding pool would be available, beginning in the year 2000, to develop the X-33 replacement vehicle.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, "More NASA Money for Shuttle Replacement,” 3 February 1998.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the selection of Ghassem R. Asrar as the new Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise. Before this appointment, Asrar had served as Chief Scientist for the Earth Observing System in the Office of Earth Science Enterprise at NASA Headquarters. He led an international team in developing scientific priorities and measurements “to be obtained from a series of advanced Earth-orbiting satellites that promise fundamental new insights into the connections between Earth’s land, oceans, atmosphere, ice, and life.”(NASA, “Asrar Named Associate Administrator for Earth Science,” news release 98-19, 2 February 1998.)
 A West European Ariane 4LP rocket blasted off from French Guiana, carrying two communications satellites, Brasilsat-3 and Inmarsat-3. Twenty-one minutes after takeoff, the first satellite, belonging to Brazil, separated from the rocket. Five minutes later, the second satellite, a 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne) worldwide mobile communications satellite, separated from the rocket. The launch successfully placed both satellites in orbit.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “European Ariane Rocket Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 5 February 1998.)
 Shuttle operator United Space Alliance (USA) cut 363 jobs at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), one of the largest cutbacks in decades. Combining the layoffs with 194 voluntary resignations, USA eliminated 557 jobs at KSC. In implementing the cutbacks, the company hoped to “trim $100 million from the current [S]huttle budget,” thereby reducing costs, improving efficiency, and attracting new payload customers without compromising safety.(Richard Burnett and Seth Borenstein, “363 Lose Jobs at Space Center,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 February 1998.)
 At a news conference at NASA in Washington, DC, Robert P. Kirshner, astronomer at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, and other astronomers discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images, showing a “shock wave lighting a knot of gas some 100 billion miles [161 billion kilometers] wide.” In 1987, when a telescope in Chile detected the first light of an exploding star, the supernova designated SN1987A, astronomers had observed a glowing ring of gas around the remnant of the star. Although the gas ring had cooled and faded, the new HST images showed the shock wave of energy colliding with and lighting up the edges of the ring. The astronomers had been studying the images closely to learn more about how stars evolve and become supernovas. Anne L. Kinney of the Space Telescope Science Institute explained that studying stellar evolution and the inner workings of supernovas is important, because the explosions that create supernovas “fertilize the galaxies” with the enriched material of heavy elements.(NASA, “Shock Wave Sheds New Light on Fading Supernova,” news release, 10 February 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Ring of Fire Could Hold Clues to Events Leading to Supernova,” New York Times, 11 February 1998; Associated Press, “Bright, Exploding Star of 1987 Readies a Reprise of Fireworks,” Washington Post, 11 February 1998.)
 The National Research Council released a report entitled “Space Technology for the New Century,” finalizing two years of independent study by an expert panel, conducted at the request of NASA. The report’s key finding stated that, because of its “faster, better, cheaper” short-term goals, NASA “may be neglecting key technologies needed for longer-term advances in space.” The panel identified six technologies that NASA ought to “spur with annual investments of $3 million to $5 million each.” The technologies, all with broad-based applications, include: 1) high-volume, planet-to-planet video and data communications based on laser technologies instead of radio frequencies; 2) precisely controlled space structures (space telescopes with more sophisticated and sensitive steering and pointing); 3) micro-machines; 4) safer and more efficient nuclear power systems; 5) radiation-resistant computers and electronics; and 6) advanced space mining and manufacturing technologies.(Sean Holton, “Report: NASA Should Work More on New Technology,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 February 1998.)
 The Commercial Aviation Safety Strategy Team (CASST) announced a campaign to focus attention on “the most pressing aviation safety problems.” CASST was composed of the Air Transport Association, Boeing Company, Airbus Industrie, the Air Line Pilots Association, and the Aerospace Industries Association, as well as major jet engine manufacturers, General Electric Company, Pratt & Whitney of United Technologies Corporation, and Rolls-Royce. CASST identified the top safety issues needing improvement worldwide, including controlled-flight-into- terrain accidents, engine failures, runway incursions, and maintenance errors. CASST recommended working to reduce these safety hazards, as well as implementing technologies to detect in-flight turbulence.(Tim Dobbyn for Reuters, “Aviation Industry Unveils Safety Priorities,” 11 February 1998.)
 Elizabeth H. Moore, Head of the Art and Archaeology Department of the School of Oriental and African Studies, the University of London, and Anthony Freeman, a radar scientist at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), discussed new radar imagery of Angkor, Cambodia, during a press briefing at JPL. The researchers announced that the Airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar (AIRSAR), developed by JPL to produce radar maps, had helped them to detect and locate a distribution of prehistoric mounds and undocumented temples to the northwest of Angkor. The three-dimensional maps, created using radar interferometry, revealed evidence of temples and earlier civilization that were absent or incorrectly marked on modern topographic maps and early twentieth-century archaeological reports. These discoveries brought into question long-standing ideas about the urban evolution of Angkor. The 1996 AIRSAR Pacific Rim Deployment on board a NASA DC-8 jet was a follow-up to a 1994 study of Angkor that used Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SIR-C/X-SAR) on board Space Shuttle Endeavour during Mission STS-59, producing the radar images used to create the three- dimensional maps. Unlike SIR-C/X-SAR, AIRSAR had P-band with a longer wavelength, able to penetrate the forest canopy. AIRSAR also flew in a mode that allowed it to measure topography and create three-dimensional images of the surface.(NASA, “New Insights into Ancient Angkor by NASA Radar To Be Subject of Press Briefing,” news release N98-11, 5 February 1998; NASA, “NASA Radar Reveals Hidden Remains at Ancient Angkor,” news release 98-28, 12 February 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Unseen Angkor,” 12 February 1998.)
 As part of the Small Business Innovation Research Program, NASA officials chose more than 300 research proposals to share US$23 million in funding. Out of 28 award categories, 21 focused on space-based applications, such as achieving routine space travel, exploring and settling the solar system, and developing new technologies in astrobiology. The range of topics indicated that research associated with high-profile space transportation and exploration efforts, curtailed because of cuts in NASA’s 1999 budget, would continue on a smaller scale.(Anne Eisele, “Small Business Grants Span Range of NASA Goals,” Space News, 23 February–1 March 1998.)
 The Voyager 1 spacecraft became the most distant human-made object in space, at 6.5 billion miles (11 billion kilometers) from Earth. At 2:10 p.m. (PST), the Voyager 1 spacecraft surpassed the distance of the Pioneer 10 spacecraft, which was traveling in the opposite direction. Voyager’s signal took 9.5 hours to reach Earth. The spacecraft had to rely on radioisotope thermal electric generators, because at the far edge of the solar system, very little solar power was able to reach it—at that distance, the Sun is only 1/5,000th as bright as it is on Earth. Edward C. Stone, a Voyager scientist and Director of NASA’s JPL, remarked, “the fact that the spacecraft is still returning data is a remarkable technical achievement.” NASA had launched Voyager 1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, on 5 September 1977.(NASA, “Voyager 1 Now Most Distant Human-Made Object in Space,” news release 98-30, 13 February 1998; Los Angeles Times, “Voyager 1 Becomes Mankind’s Farthest Object from Earth,” 18 February 1998.)
 Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced that he would resign from NASA in the near future. As NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, Huntress had been responsible for programs in astrophysics, planetary exploration, and space physics. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin credited him with the revitalization of NASA’s Space Science Enterprise, in particular, with overseeing critical components of the program such as the HST and Mars Pathfinder. Huntress had joined NASA’s JPL in the 1960s, a research scientist specializing in ion chemistry and planetary atmospheres, and NASA had appointed Huntress to head the Office of Space Science in March 1993. In his retirement announcement, Huntress stated, “I have served in this position for more than five years now and it is simply time to move on.”(NASA, “Huntress Announces His Departure from NASA,” news release 98-31, 18 February 1998.)
 The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
 This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
 After two delays, one because of mechanical problems, the other because of strong winds, a Japanese H-2 rocket blasted off from Tanegashima Space Center, carrying a US$370 million communications satellite intended to conduct a three-year series of communications and broadcast tests. However, an engine breakdown prevented the satellite from entering a geostationary orbit; instead, the launch left the satellite floating in space, useless for its intended mission. Engineers were looking for ways to rescue the mission.(Mari Yamaguchi for Associated Press, “Japan-Satellite,” 21 February 1998.)
 The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
 A US$35,000 study commissioned by the Florida Space Business Roundtable revealed that commercial satellite companies did not favor Cape Canaveral as a launch site. The Florida Space Business Roundtable presented its findings at the Florida Space Launch Symposium in Melbourne, Florida. In the survey, executives from satellite manufacturing companies rated spaceports, evaluating them in 11 categories, such as their launch base facilities, flight scheduling, governmental red tape, and on-site technical services. The executives’ favorite launch site was Vandenberg Air Force Base in central California, and they selected Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China as the worst place to launch. Florida’s spaceports did well in two categories, but business executives considered red tape at those facilities a problem.(Todd Halvorson, “Survey: Brevard Launch Sites Fail To Measure Up—Space Coast Falls Short for Commercial Liftoffs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 25 February 1998.)
 NASA partially cancelled the Clark satellite program, keeping only the US$13 million launch vehicle service portion of the contract with Lockheed Martin. As reasons for the cancellation, NASA cited cost overruns, an uncertain launch schedule, and questions concerning the effectiveness of Clark’s instruments in orbit, because its primary instrument had been “sitting on the ground two years longer than planned.” The intended mission of the program was to take black-and-white stereo images, showing detail as small as 10 feet (3 meters) across, for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise (formerly the Office of Mission to Planet Earth), as well as for commercial customers. NASA had paired the Clark satellite with the Lewis satellite. However, after its August 1997 launch, the Lewis satellite had gone into a spin, which controllers were unable to repair. Consequently, the Lewis satellite plunged into the atmosphere where it burned up.(NASA, “NASA Terminates Clark Earth Science Mission,” news release, 25 February 1998; Justin Ray, “NASA Cans Clark, an Imaging Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 February 1998.)
 A valve in an air purifier on Mir overheated, spreading smoke aboard the station. Although the incident caused elevated carbon monoxide, the levels continued to drop steadily. The crew was not in danger, but the incident was a reminder of the terrifying fire that had occurred last year, when an oxygen generator burned for 14 minutes, filling Mir with smoke and nearly causing the crew to abandon the station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Smoke on Mir,” 27 February 1998.)
 Russian space officials cancelled a spacewalk after cosmonauts broke three wrenches on the last of 10 locks, while trying to open a hatch. The cosmonauts had intended to repair a damaged solar panel. NASA rescheduled the spacewalk for April. The incident further increased concerns about the safety of Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 March 1998.)
 At a news conference at Ames Research Center (ARC), NASA scientists announced that the Lunar Prospector spacecraft had found “evidence of ice crystals sprinkled throughout the Moon’s shadowy north and south poles.” Alan B. Binder, a Lunar Prospector scientist, stated that the team believed they had detected anywhere from 10 million to several 100 million tons of water over areas of 3,600 to 18,000 square miles (9,300 to 47,000 square kilometers) at the northern pole and 1,800 to 7,200 square miles (4,700 to 19,000 square kilometers) at the southern pole. However, the ice, detected using a neutron spectrometer that scans the lunar surface for signs of hydrogen, was not in the form of ice sheets, but “present in small crystals mixed in with the moon’s rocky soil, scattered across thousands of square miles in lunar polar regions.” Although evidence of ice was quite strong, the water signal was relatively weak. Because the Moon is very dry, scientists theorized that comets or asteroids colliding with the Moon’s surface had carried the ice to the Moon.(NASA, “Lunar Prospector Finds Evidence of Ice at Moon’s Poles,” news release 98-38, 5 March 1998; Ruth Larson, “Probe Finds Signs of Water on Moon: Prospect of Ice in Soil at Poles Tantalizes NASA,” Washington Times, 6 March 1998; Kathy Sawyer, “Spacecraft Finds Solid Evidence of Water at Moon’s Poles,” Washington Post, 6 March 1998.)
 NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
 Russian cosmonauts aboard Mir located a lost wrench among 12 years’ worth of accumulated spare parts. They used the wrench to loosen the bolt that had broken three wrenches earlier in the week, preventing the two cosmonauts from undertaking a planned spacewalk.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Solve Mystery of Missing Wrench,” 5 March 1998.)
 NASA officially declared Mars Pathfinder “dead” six months after its mission ended, after getting no response to one last set of commands. Pathfinder’s mission had ended on 27 September 1997, when NASA lost communication with the craft. Pathfinder and its rover Sojourner had landed on Mars on 4 July 1997, and NASA had expected the two craft to “live” on Mars for only 30 days. However, Pathfinder had exceeded its mission by eight weeks, and Sojourner had roamed the Martian terrain 10 weeks longer than the originally planned one-week operation.(Dan Whitcomb for Reuters, “Scientists Declare Pathfinder Officially ‘Dead’,” 10 March 1998.)
 The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin publicly acknowledged for the first time that the ISS would cost more than originally proposed, with a revised cost of US$21.3 billion, and would take longer to assemble than was initially planned, with a revised completion date of December 2003. Since 1993, NASA had consistently reported that the cost of the ISS would be US$17.4 billion, and had targeted a 2002 completion date. The revised cost was 200 percent more than the original US$8 billion estimate in President Ronald Reagan’s 1984 proposal.(Larry Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun Now Pegged at $6 Billion,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 March 1998. 436 NASA, “New Global Surveyor Data Reveals Deeply Layered Terrain, Magnetic Features and Genesis of a Martian Dust Storm,” news release 98-45, 13 March 1998.)
 New data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor Mission provided insights into the planet’s deeply layered terrain, its strong, localized magnetic fields, and the genesis and evolution of a Martian dust storm. Scientists analyzed data collected in October and November 1997, publishing the first set of formal results in the 13 March 1998 issue of Science. Mars Global Surveyor had used a variety of instruments to collect data. The thermal emission spectrometer had mapped the temperature and opacity of the Martian atmosphere during the sandstorm, and a camera had returned visual images of the storm’s effects. The spectrometer had also obtained some infrared emission spectra of Mars’s surface, indicating “the presence of pyroxene and plagioclase, minerals which are common in volcanic rocks, with a variable amount of dust component.” Surveyor’s magnetometer and electron reflectometer had measured strong localized magnetic fields on Mars. A laser altimeter had collected data from Mars’s northern hemisphere, revealing a flat surface, becoming increasingly rough toward the equator. Scientists had interpreted a variety of landforms in the Mars images, including the northern polar cap and gigantic canyons, ridges, craters, and shield volcanoes.
 Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
 Minnie, the last living astro-chimp, died of old age at forty-one-years-old. Minnie had lived out her retirement at Holloman Air Force Base under the care of the Coulston Foundation. Minnie, an understudy for chimps Ham and Enos, was the only female chimpanzee to train for the Mercury Project in the early 1960s, but she had never flown in space. Ham had become the first chimpanzee in space when he had made a 15-minute suborbital flight in 1961, before Alan B. Shepard Jr.’s flight that May. Enos’s orbital flight had been a precursor to John H. Glenn Jr.’s flight in February 1962.(Los Angeles Times, “Minnie, Last of the Early U.S. Space Program ‘Astro-Chimps’, Dies at 41,” 28 March 1998. 439 Mike Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’ Hits Pentagon,” 20 March 1998; Michael J. Sniffen for Associated Press, “US-Israel-Analyzer,” 20 March 1998; Washington Post, “Five Teens Suspected of Hacking into Pentagon Computers,” 20 March 1998.)
 At the request of the United States, Israeli officials arrested Ehud Tenenbaum, the eighteen-year- old computer hacker who called himself The Analyzer, along with two other Israeli teenagers. Tenenbaum was ringleader of a group called Israeli Internet Underground. Prosecutors accused the teenage hackers of breaking into U.S. government and military computer systems, including NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), as well as into Israeli government computers and commercial and educational computer systems in the United States. The FBI said that all three had admitted their involvement, stating that they had worked in tandem with two juveniles in Cloverdale, California.
 A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
 Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
 NASA announced the arrest of “the suspected leader of a group of computer hackers who broke into the network of a NASA laboratory.” Law enforcement agents accused twenty-year-old Calldan Levi Coffman of Carson, Washington, suspected leader of a group called ViRii, of infiltrating the networks of various corporations, universities, and other government agencies, in addition to breaching the security of computer systems at NASA’s JPL last June. NASA’s Computer Crimes Division had worked with other government agencies, including the U.S. Naval Intelligence Service, the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the FBI, to uncover a link between Coffman’s group and Israeli hacker Ehud Tenenbaum, known as The Analyzer. Law enforcement officials suspected Tenenbaum of organizing a confederation of hacker groups, including his own group and Coffman’s group.(Associated Press, “NASA Hacker,” 18 March 1998; Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’,” 20 March 1998.)
 NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, and the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics to conduct “parallel six-month definition studies of a new small satellite to monitor variations in the amount of radiant solar energy that reaches Earth,” as part of the preparations for the Total Solar Irradiance Mission.(NASA, “Two Studies Will Refine and Expand Solar Monitoring Task,” news release 98-47, 19 March 1998. 444 Brett Davis, “Space Station Costs Irk Congress,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 March 1998; Tamara Lytle, “U.S. Legislators Criticize Increasing Cost of NASA’s Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 20 March 1998.)
 NASA officials appeared before a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to explain the increasing price tag of the ISS. The anticipated cost of the ISS had increased to US$4 billion more than originally projected, drawing ire from supporters and opponents alike. NASA’s new Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg led the lawmakers through the reasons for the increasing budget, explaining the series of revised out-year estimates. He attributed part of the problem to cost overruns related to “recurring schedule and budget problems with the Russian [S]pace [A]gency,” and part to the fact that NASA’s primary contractor, the Boeing Company, was already US$600 million to US$817 million over budget. However, Rothenberg stated, “only a fraction of these revised out-year estimates are tied to actual overruns.”
 At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
 Boeing Company announced plans to cut an additional 8,200 jobs by the end of the year 2000, to streamline facilities, to focus on manufacturing and assembly operations, and to eliminate redundant laboratories. The job cuts, affecting work sites in Arkansas, California, and Texas, included planned product phaseouts of the MD-80 and MD-90, and brought into question the future of the MD-11. As it shut down selected facilities, including an electronic manufacturing facility and the Site 9 modification center, Boeing planned to transfer thousands of employees involved with aircraft and missile systems, reusable-space-systems support, and satellites.(United Press International, “Boeing Cuts 8,200 Jobs,” 20 March 1998.)
 NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
 The Boeing Company appointed Michael T. Kennedy to a newly created position, Vice President for the Boeing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle and Delta IV Programs. Since 1996, Kennedy had been Vice President of Delta III and had shown “his ability to manage launch vehicle development effectively by bringing Delta III on line for its first launch this summer.” As Kennedy moved into his new position, Boeing promoted Daniel J. Collins to Program Director for Delta III, and Jay L. Witzling became Vice President of Delta II and Titan Programs. Kennedy had joined Boeing in 1970, working on the Skylab, Saturn SIVB, Titan, Delta, SPACEHAB, and ISS programs.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Selects Vice President for EELV/Delta IV Program,” 26 March 1998.)
 An international team of researchers announced that observations of U.S. satellites orbiting Earth had proven one of physicist Albert Einstein’s theories correct. In his general theory of relativity, Einstein had predicted that a spinning body could curve space, because the “spin of a body must change the geometry of the universe by generating space-time curvature.” Einstein had called the phenomenon frame dragging, but scientists came to refer to it as the Lense-Thirring effect, naming it for two Austrian physicists who wrote that rotating celestial bodies, such as the Sun, “create a force that pulls space toward them.” Ignazio Ciufolini, a physicist at Sapienza University of Rome, and his colleagues used lasers to measure changes in the orbits of the Laser Geodynamics Satellite I, or LAGEOS, a NASA spacecraft, and LAGEOS II, a satellite belonging to NASA and the Italian Space Agency. The research team observed changes that they could not account for by the laws of gravity or tidal forces, concluding that the Lense-Thirring effect exists. The satellites, launched in 1976 and 1992, were passive satellites dedicated exclusively to laser ranging. In this process, scientists had send laser pulses to the satellite from ranging stations on Earth, measuring the round-trip travel time of the pulses. The research team had analyzed data collected over a four-year period beginning in 1993.(NASA, “Earth Dragging Space and Time as It Rotates,” news release 98-51, 27 March 1998; Reuters, “Einstein Proved Right Yet Again,” 26 March 1998.)
 NASA awarded a contract worth US$148 million to Raytheon STX Corporation. The five-year award included a one-year base period followed by four one-year options. Contract services for providing federal information processing services at NASA’s ARC included software development and maintenance, engineering operations and maintenance, network services, analysis, quality assurance, and reviews.(NASA, “NASA Awards $148 Million Contract to Raytheon STX Corp,” contract announcement, 27 March 1998. 451 Tim Smart and Anne Swardson, “European Space Firms Agree To Merge,” Washington Post, 28 March 1998.)
 France’s Aérospatiale, British Aerospace, Germany’s Daimler-Benz Aerospace, and Spain’s CASA, partners in the Airbus Industrie airplane-manufacturing consortium, announced their intention to merge into a “unified civilian and military aerospace conglomerate that would compete in the world market with U.S. aerospace giants Lockheed Martin Corp[oration] and Boeing Co[mpany]” The partners provided no details regarding how the merger would take place, but the public statement represented “another move toward a unified European aerospace industry,” an idea that had been elusive “because of the competing national interests of the various countries.”
 Astronomers at the University of Manchester in England and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) announced that six radio telescopes, in concert with the HST, had “captured the first image ever recorded of an unbroken ‘Einstein ring’,” a “circle of light created by the gravitational warping of space between a very distant galaxy and the earth.” Physicist Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity had predicted that “light from a distant object would travel a curving path if it passed close to a massive object along the line of sight from Earth.” The radio image showed a fragmented group of bright arcs, but the HST showed that the galaxy’s infrared emission region was perfectly in line with the gravitational lens and Earth, confirming the existence of the Einstein ring.(Malcolm W. Browne, “‘Einstein Ring’ Caused by Space Warping Is Found,” New York Times, 31 March 1998. 127)
 In a spacewalk lasting nearly 7 hours, Mir cosmonauts failed to stabilize the solar panel damaged in a collision in 1997. Russian space officials had postponed this spacewalk from 3 March, when the crew had been unable to unlock the hatch, breaking three wrenches in their attempts. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, spent most of the spacewalk setting up a handrail, left outside the space station by the previous crew. After struggling to unfold and assemble the handrail, the pair only had enough time to install one of two footrests. The cosmonauts returned to Mir after the elapse of 6 hours and 40 minutes; their oxygen tanks only held approximately 7 hours of air. Russian Mission Control had intentionally turned off the audio system during most of the spacewalk. Officials said that Mission Control would no longer allow journalists to listen to radio traffic between Mission Control and spacewalkers, because reporters had become overly critical. Russian officials accused reporters of exaggerating problems on the space station, despite the fact that Mir had been operating relatively trouble free for several months before this spacewalk.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Undertakes Six-Hour Spacewalk To Repair Solar Panel,” 1 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 2 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Runs Out of Time, Fails To Stabilize Solar Panel,”1 April 1998.)
 An Orbital Sciences Corporation Pegasus XL rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, carrying a NASA satellite to study solar events that could endanger astronauts and spacecraft. The Small Explorer (SMEX) satellite program, under the management of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, had developed the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) satellite.(Associated Press, “BRF—Satellite Launch,” 2 April 1998; PR Newswire, “Orbital’s Pegasus Rocket Successfully Launches TRACE Spacecraft for NASA; Advanced SMEX Satellite Will Study the Sun; Spacecraft’s First Signals Indicate Early Success,” 2 April 1998.)
 Eberhard R. M. Rees, deputy and later successor to Wernher von Braun as “chief of American rocketry efforts,” died at age 89, after suffering from Alzheimer’s disease. Rees, born in Germany, had graduated from the Dresden Institute of Technology in 1934 with an advanced degree in mechanical engineering. He had worked as a technical plant manager with the German Guided Missile Center beginning in 1940, but after Germany’s defeat in World War II, Rees became one of 118 scientists who surrendered to the West under the so-called Project Paperclip, becoming a U.S. citizen in 1954. In the United States, he had first worked at White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico, “where he shared his expertise on the V-2, a German rocket- propelled bomb, and on guided missile projects.” In 1950 Rees had moved to Huntsville, Alabama, to serve as Deputy Chief of the Guided Missile Development Division at Redstone Arsenal. Among the projects Rees had managed were the Hermes II Project, the Redstone and Jupiter missile programs, the Explorer satellite project, and the Saturn program. Between 1956 and 1960, Rees had been Deputy Director of the U.S. Army Ballistic Missile Agency’s Development Operations Division. He had received a Distinguished Service Medal from NASA for his role in the Apollo 11 Mission. Rees had succeeded Wernher von Braun as Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1970, retiring in 1973.(Ford Burkhart, “Eberhard Rees, Rocketry Pioneer, Dies at 89,” New York Times, 4 April 1998. 128)
 The Organization of American Historians presented the 1998 Richard W. Leopold Prize to Andrew J. Butrica for his book, To See the Unseen: A History of Planetary Radar Astronomy. The organization awarded the biennial Richard W. Leopold Prize “for the best book written by an historian connected with federal, state, or municipal government in the areas of foreign policy, military affairs, the historical activities of the federal government, or biography in one of these areas.” Butrica’s book, a comprehensive history of planetary radar astronomy, was a publication of the NASA History Series produced by the NASA Headquarters History Division’s Office of Policy and Plans.(NASA, “NASA History Wins Prestigious Prize,” news release 98-53, 3 April 1998.)
 NASA released images recorded by the Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft, showing the Cydonia region of Mars in 10 times more detail than that provided in the images recorded more than 20 years ago by one of the U.S. Viking space probes. In the new images, the Sun was shining from the opposite direction than in the images recorded by the Viking probe. Viking’s images had revealed a surface formation in the hilly desert area, Cydonia, which some members of the public believed to be a monumental sculpture of a humanoid face, in spite of NASA scientists’ insistence that the “face” was only a common geological formation called a mesa. Some of those people who believed the structure to be a sculpture had accused NASA of manipulating data in a conspiracy to keep the origins of the face a secret. Surveyor’s new images confirmed NASA’s previous analysis of the formation. However, in an effort to counteract the conspiracy rumors, NASA posted on the Internet the raw data sent by Mars Global Surveyor and took no official position regarding what the images did or did not reveal. Several planetary scientists remarked that “the new image contained no surprises and no evidence of artificial origin.”(Robert Lee Hotz, “California and the West Alien ‘Face’ Recedes into Martian Myth Space: NASA Photo Appears To Show a Naturally Weathered Mesa,” Los Angeles Times, 7 April 1998; Kathy Sawyer, “With Mars Images, NASA Says: Face It, It’s a Mesa,” Washington Post, 7 April 1998.)
 Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin, trying for a third time, successfully stabilized a bent solar panel during a spacewalk of 4 hours and 15 minutes. The solar panel was only one of 10 nonfunctioning panels. The crew had not intended to repair the damaged panel fully, but only to stabilize it, so that it would not break loose and hit the space station. The cosmonauts cut short the spacewalk, scheduled to take 51⁄2 hours, when the thruster engine aligning Mir with the Sun ran out of fuel. Forced to return to the space station early, the cosmonauts were unable to remove some scientific equipment attached to the outside of the station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Mir Crew Shortens Spacewalk After Thruster Fuel Runs Out,” 7 April 1998. 459 Edith M. Lederer for Associated Press, “Europe-Space Water,” 7 April 1998; Washington Times, “Europe’s Space Surveyor Finds Water Vapor Near Stars, Planets,” 8 April 1998.)
 The European Space Agency (ESA) announced that Europe’s Infrared Space Observatory, which had been orbiting Earth for two and one-half years, had located water in unexpected places. The most intriguing of these was the water vapor detected in the atmosphere of Saturn’s largest moon, Titan. ESA Director of Science Roger M. Bonnet remarked, “the moon may duplicate the conditions that led to the creation of life on Earth . . . and the only thing you need is a little heat to heat up Titan, maybe [the] birth of life may be seen.” Chairperson of ESA’s Astronomy Working Group Reinhard Genzel said that the Observatory had “enabled scientists to see water throughout the universe,” and that the water was likely brought “to the icy outer planets by comets.” He explained further that comets might have deposited the water on Earth during the early formation of the solar system, when many comets constantly collided with the Earth.
 NASA announced the selection of nine researchers to form the Science Team for the Mars Microprobes, “a technology validation mission that will hitchhike to the [R]ed [P]lanet aboard NASA’s 1998 Mars Polar Lander mission.” NASA intended the probes to collect data measuring thermal and physical properties of the soil while searching for the presence of water ice. The nine selected scientists were David C. Catling, Julio A. Magalhaes, Jeffrey E. Moersch, James R. Murphy, and Aaron Zent of NASA’s Ames Research Center; Ralph D. Lorenz of the University of Arizona; Paul Morgan of Northern Arizona University; Bruce C. Murray of California Institute of Technology; and Marsha Presley of Arizona State University.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Technology Validation Mission To Explore the Subsurface of Mars,” news release 98-59, 8 April 1998.)
 U.S. astronomers studying star formation reported that a body resembling a pinkish star, at the center of the sword in the constellation Orion, was “a hotbed of star formation called the Orion Nebula,” the site of a gas cloud generating enough water “to fill the Earth’s oceans 60 times a day.” The team of astronomers, led by Martin O. Harwit of Cornell University, used the Infrared Space Observatory to observe the Orion Nebula, detecting “large amounts of water vapor within clouds of gas on their way to becoming stars in the nebula.” The discovery, which demonstrated for the first time “the vital role that water plays in star formation,” may “provide an important clue about the source of water in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Michael Werner of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) emphasized the significance of the discovery, saying that the data confirmed, “that water is prevalent in space” and “plays a vital role in the chemistry and physics of interstellar clouds.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Massive Water Find Linked to Star Birth,” 9 April 1998. 462 Craig Covault, “Shuttle/Spartan Verdict Sparks Station Concerns,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 148, no. 16 (20 April 1998): 26; Seth Borenstein, “Astronaut Gets Blame Lack of a Signal Causes Satellite To Fail,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 April 1998.)
 At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
 James K. Yungel, a NASA scientist studying Earth remote sensing, discussed a joint project underway at Monterey Peninsula Airport, involving NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The researchers had parked at the airport a Twin Otter airplane, with a scanning laser system and a global-positioning-satellite receiver, to make precise measurements of the West Coast, mapping the changes El Niño had caused along the coastline. The goal of the survey was to create “the most highly detailed map yet of the West Coast,” increasing scientists’ ability to predict erosion over the next decade.(Michael McCabe, “NASA Mapping West Coast in Wake of El Niño: Most Rigorous Survey Ever Should Help Predict Erosion,” San Francisco Chronicle, 17 April 1998.)
 Jeremy Lin of Taiwan’s Academia Sinica Institute and colleagues at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico, reported in the journal Nature that measurements taken with the world’s largest radio telescopes—the Very Large Array (VLA)— had detected “peculiar bulges in the atmosphere of a giant star.” Huge plumes of gas thrust from beneath the surface of the red supergiant star, Betelgeuse, had likely caused the bulges. Betelgeuse is located in the shoulder of the constellation Orion, about 430 light-years from Earth. The research team used the Y-shaped, 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer-wide) cluster of 27 huge antennas of the VLA telescopes to capture the most detailed radio image ever taken of a star other than the Sun. The team discovered that some of the gas in the star’s atmosphere was much cooler than previously believed—about 5,750°F (3,200°C). The discovery of the lower temperatures enabled astronomers to understand “how huge amounts of dust are constantly blown away from the star.” Before the lower temperatures were identified, scientists had not been able to explain how the stellar dust formed, because at “higher temperatures the dust could not condense from the hot gas expelled from the star’s interior.” Astronomers believe that dust created and expelled by stars like Betelgeuse “is distributed throughout the universe and provide[s] the raw materials that gave rise to life on Earth.”(Malcolm W. Browne, “Atmosphere Bulges on None-Too-Distant Star,” New York Times, 21 April 1998.)
 After problems with one of two network-signal processors caused a 24-hour delay, Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-90) blasted off on the Shuttle program’s final Neurolab mission, carrying 26 experiments for basic research in neurosciences to “expand understanding of how the nervous system develops and functions in space.” Test subjects aboard the Shuttle included crew members, rats, mice, crickets, snails, and two kinds of fish. The Neurolab mission was the joint effort of NASA, several U.S. partners, the space agencies of Canada, France, and Germany, the ESA, and the National Space Development Agency of Japan. Crew members included Commander Richard A. Searfoss; Pilot Scott D. Altman; Mission Specialists Richard M. Linnehan, Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams, and Kathryn P. Hire; and Payload Specialists Jay C. Buckey Jr. and James A. Pawelczyk. Mission Specialist Hire was the first KSC employee that NASA had selected as an astronaut candidate. Mission STS-90 was Columbia’s 25th flight.(NASA, “Neurolab Shuttle Mission To Launch April 16,” news release N98-25, 3 April 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-90,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-90.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
 Two scientific teams, independently studying HR 4796, a star in the southern constellation Centaurus, announced they had captured “the strongest evidence yet” of a new group of planets forming around the star. The teams used the 10-meter (33-foot) W. M. Keck II Telescope on top of the extinct Mauna Kea volcano in Hawaii, and the National Science Foundation’s 4-meter (13-foot) Blanco Telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory in Chile. Using both of these sensitive new instruments, the research teams believed they could see clearly, through the glare of the star, a planet-forming disc of gas and dust. A third international team of British and American astronomers released the first images of the huge discs, which appeared to be forming around two other stars, Fomalhaut and Vega, the star made famous in the novel and movie Contact. The third team used the 15-meter (49-foot) James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, also atop Mauna Kea. Scientists considered the discoveries of the discs around the stars a missing link in the study of planetary system formation, offering them clues about the formation of rocky planets like Earth.(Kathy Sawyer, “Oh, Baby! Telescopes Show the Birth of a Solar System; New Imaging Sharpens Delivery Room View,” Washington Post, 22 April 1998.)
 An international group of computer hackers, calling itself Masters of Downloading or MOD, announced that it had stolen key software programs from NASA. The same group had previously broken into the Pentagon’s Defense Information Systems Network, claiming to have stolen enough information to “‘take control’ of military satellites and other systems.” Although U.S. Department of Defense officials said that MOD had downloaded an application for management and record keeping, not for “anything that could perform a control function,” the group claimed that its cyber attack on NASA had “stripped the U.S. space agency of its chief defense against computer intrusion.” MOD had sent the stolen samples of NASA software to a computer expert who maintained a Web site devoted to information-security issues. The group, which included at least two Russian members, asserted that it had broken into NASA’s system through JPL to obtain the software samples and threatened to sell the information to international terrorist groups or foreign governments.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “NASA Becomes Latest Victim of Masters of Downloading,” 23 April 1998.)
 The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
 Astronauts and physicians Jay C. Buckey Jr. and Dafydd Rhys “Dave” Williams performed the first surgeries ever conducted on living specimens while in orbit. The two doctors injected chemical markers into the hind legs of six of the surviving baby rats to determine the role of gravity in the development of muscles. The crew anesthetized the baby rats before injecting them with the pink florescent chemical, the first time scientists had performed such a procedure in zero-gravity conditions. In addition to studying how muscles and nerves develop in space, the crew studied whether anesthesia really works without the help of gravity, whether patients have more difficulty recovering from anesthesia in space, and how wounds heal in space. Two other astronauts successfully completed “the most difficult medical procedure ever attempted on someone in space.” The astronauts guided tiny needles into the nerves behind their knees, in an experiment aimed at understanding and easing the blood pressure problems and dizziness that astronauts suffer after returning to Earth. An estimated 500,000 Americans experience the same symptoms every day when they stand up. The needle enabled the astronauts to “listen” to electrical impulses, as the brain sent messages to the nerve.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Surgeons Hope Rats Will Survive,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 29 April 1998; Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Shuttle Crew Performs First Space Surgery,” 29 April 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 April 1998; Robyn Suriano, “Astronauts Listen to Brain-Nerve Chatter,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 30 April 1998.)
 At the 13th annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented five aerospace companies with the 1998 George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest “quality and excellence” award for contractors and subcontractors. The companies, representing both large and small businesses, were ILC Dover Inc. of Frederica, Delaware; Allied Signal Technical Services Corporation of Lanham, Maryland; DynCorp, Johnson Support Division of Houston, Texas; BST Systems Inc. of Plainfield, Connecticut; and Advanced Technology Company of Pasadena, California. Administrator Goldin said, “these companies exemplify excellence and outstanding achievements that prove beneficial to NASA and the [n]ation’s industry.” Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory added, “each of these companies has definitely made a positive impact on NASA’s performance goals.”(NASA, “NASA Awards Five Firms the George M. Low Award,” news release 98-74, 1 May 1998.)
 The Chinese Long March 2C rocket launched two U.S. satellites into orbit, from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in Shanxi province in northern China. The satellites were part of a mobile telecommunications system that Motorola Corporation had developed for the Iridium World Communications network scheduled to begin commercial service on 23 September 1998. The Iridium contract had “boosted China’s launching industry,” which had been “struggling to recover from a string of launch disasters in 1995 and 1996.”(Associated Press, “China Puts 2 Satellites into Orbit,” 3 May 1998.)
 Returning from the Neurolab mission, Space Shuttle Columbia landed smoothly, despite a malfunctioning hydraulic unit. Most of Columbia’s 1-hour-long descent relied on two hydraulic units, because the cooling system for the third unit had failed. To prevent the third unit from overheating, the crew turned it on just minutes before landing. After the landing, Mission Control congratulated the Neurolab astronauts on “a historic mission that elevated neuroscience research to record heights.” During the 16-day Neurolab flight, the team had accomplished a number of experiments never before performed in space, including the first direct nerve recordings, the first joint recording of sleep and breathing, the first embalming of animals, and the first surgery on animals. Because only the rodents aboard Columbia were accessible during the flight, astronauts and scientists did not immediately know how the other animals, including fish, snails, and crickets, had fared. A quick inspection after landing, however, “revealed that only 25 of 225 baby swordtail fish survived the mission, a much higher mortality rate than expected.” The baby rats also had a higher mortality rate than expected; 52 of the 96 baby rats had died in orbit after their mothers refused to nurse them. NASA veterinarians had expected a dozen deaths from natural causes. Animal rights groups criticized the experiments.(USA Today, “Scientists To Study Effects on Critters,” 4 May 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Mission’s Data Has Scientists Feeling Antsy: Neurolab Analysis Begins Today,” USA Today, 4 May 1998.)
 At a NASA news conference, astronomers discussed the discovery of the largest explosion ever sighted in space. The journal Nature published three papers about the event, detected on 14 December 1997. The explosion, a gamma-ray burst (GRB) designated GRB971214, had occurred 12 billion years ago and had “apparently outshone all the rest of the universe” for about 40 seconds. The Italian-Dutch orbiting gamma-ray observatory BeppoSAX had measured the sharp pulse of gamma rays and “pinpointed the position of the rays’ source.” The United States’ Compton Gamma Ray Observatory satellite had also detected the gamma-ray pulse, and scientific institutions around the world had monitored the after-effects of the explosion. Twelve hours afterward, John R. Thorstensen of Dartmouth College had used a 94-inch-diameter (49- centimeter-diameter) telescope at Kitt Peak Observatory in Arizona to detect a visible afterglow, which lasted for about two weeks. After the glow had faded, the scientists had discovered a faint galaxy in the same location. A team of American, Italian, and Indian astronomers, led by two California Institute of Technology scientists, used the Keck II Telescope in Hawaii to measure the distance from Earth to the source of the burst. No theorists were able to explain the explosion, and no existing models explaining GRBs could explain the amount of energy emitted from GRB971214. The scientists suggested the possibility that a superdense neutron star had ripped apart as it disappeared into a neighboring black hole, or that a violent merger of two black holes had caused the burst.(Malcolm W. Browne, “Astronomers Detect Immense Explosion 2d Only to Big Bang,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; NASA, “Most Powerful Explosion since the Big Bang Challenges Gamma Ray Burst Theories,” news release 98-75, 6 May 1998.)
 The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
 A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a spy satellite. Civilian observers speculated that the spacecraft's name was Orion, and that it would “play an important role in listening in on foes of the United States.” With a wire mesh antenna the size of a football field, the satellite was so sensitive that it could “detect transmissions from a radio the size of a wristwatch or a very small cell phone.” The satellite could also monitor electronic transmissions between military bases. At the time of the launch, the Titan was the most powerful American booster in use.(Robyn Suriano, “Titan Rocket Sends Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 May 1998. 476 Associated Press, “U.S. Satellite Launched from Russian Rocket,” 9 May 1998.)
 Launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, a Proton-K Russian booster carried into orbit an American EchoStar IV communications satellite, to relay broadcast signals to the central and western United States. Lockheed Martin Corporation had built the satellite and, under a partnership agreement between Lockheed and the Russian Khrunichev company, International Launch Services launched the spacecraft.
 NASA dedicated as a U.S. Air Force conference center the newly renovated, historic control center, Complex 14 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, the site of the Mercury program launches. The domed blockhouse with 10-foot-thick (3-meter-thick), reinforced concrete walls had protected launch controllers from possible explosions of Atlas rockets launched only 1,000 feet (305 meters) away. The renovation preserved the periscopes that controllers had used to safely view launches. The control center was at the launch site of the first piloted orbital flight of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.(USA Today, “Cape Canaveral Restores Piece of Space Age History,” 11 May 1998.)
 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) launched into orbit, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, a new weather satellite, the NOAA-K, aboard a 34- year old converted Titan II nuclear missile. The satellite was an Advanced Television Infrared Observation Satellite (TIROS-N) weather satellite, able to see inside clouds, a feature that scientists expected would greatly increase our knowledge of how hurricanes develop and move. The TIROS-N was the latest model of TIROS satellite in four generations. Lockheed Martin had last built a TIROS satellite for NASA and NOAA in 1960. After the launch of the TIROS-N, the satellite would undergo a series of tests by NASA, followed by a round of tests by NOAA, before becoming fully available in time for next year’s hurricane season.(Justin Ray, “New NOAA Weather Satellite Will Keep a Better Eye on Hurricanes,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 1998; Business Wire, “Nation’s Newest Advanced Weather Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully,” 14 May 1998.)
 At a NASA press conference, Ethan J. Schreier of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and his colleagues discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. The new images showed in greater clarity an old galaxy’s black hole “feeding on a smaller, younger galaxy that collided with it.” The scientists explained that the new images revealed young stars in the midst of an “obviously old galaxy,” suggesting that a collision had occurred. The merged galaxy complex, known as Centaurus A, was about 10 million light-years away from the Milky Way. The images, taken with HST’s newest infrared camera, also showed gas and dust feeding an apparent large black hole. An inner disc of gas, swirling around the black hole, was behaving in a manner opposite to scientists expectations, based upon the behavior of other galaxies. Hans- Walter Rix of the University of Arizona theorized that the collision could explain the difference, postulating that the HST “may have caught Centaurus A in the midst of trying to realign itself after its spiral companion plowed into it.” Schreier offered an alternative explanation—that the mass of the merged galaxies was greater than the mass of the black hole, causing the gravitational pull to warp the inner disc.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Hubble Reveals Feeding Black Hole,” 14 May 1998; NASA, “Hubble Provides Multiple Views of How To Feed a Black Hole,” news release 98-71, 14 May 1998.)
 The Iridium World Communications system global, digital wireless communications network completed a series of deployment missions, with the launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California of five Iridium satellites aboard a Boeing Delta II launch vehicle. The successful launch had completed the entire Iridium constellation “in just twelve months.” The world’s first global, wireless telephone company scheduled its commercial service to begin four months following this last launch, once it had completed integrating and testing the Iridium system.(PR Newswire, “Boeing Delta II Rocket Places Iridium Satellites into Orbit,” 17 May 1998.)
 NASA successfully tested a fuel tank made of a new metal mixture, aluminum lithium, never before used in major U.S. manufacturing. The tank made of the new alloy was 30 percent stronger and 5 percent lighter than the aluminum magnesium tanks in use since the days of the Apollo program. The tank showed no leaks, pressure bulges, or other problems, when loaded with 537,000 gallons (2,033,000 liters) of liquid oxygen and hydrogen fuel. Lockheed Martin had developed the new fuel tank to help ensure that NASA would be able to haul large sections of the ISS into orbit.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle’s New Fuel Tank Test a Success,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 May 1998.)
 NASA astronauts presented four employees of Boeing Reusable Space Systems with the Silver Snoopy, one of the most prestigious honors available to people working on NASA’s Space Shuttle program. Mark Brewer of the orbiter electrical-avionics team, Jeffrey Lewis of the mid- module-major assembly team, Michael Argent of the external-tank, umbilical and payload latch- assembly programs, and Larry Echaves of the configuration-management team each received a letter of commendation, a poster, a certificate, and a Silver Snoopy pin that had flown in space.(Romy Jacobson, “Hailing the Right Stuff; NASA Honors Boeing Workers,” Los Angeles Daily News, 20 May 1998.)
 The PanAmSat-owned Galaxy IV, a five-year old communications satellite, “lost its bearings” so that its antennas were not directed toward Earth, causing the “worst outage in 37 years since communications satellites first entered service.” Most of the 45 million pagers in the United States were unable to function during the outage, which “severed electronic links vital to thousands of retailers, news organizations, and broadcasters.” PanAmSat officials said that an attitude-control mechanism failed for an unknown reason and a backup processor failed to turn on, causing the satellite to rotate. At that point, hundreds of thousands of satellite dishes in the United States lost contact with Galaxy IV.(Mike Mills, “Satellite Glitch Cuts Off Data Flow,” Washington Post, 21 May 1998.)
 Chryssa Kouveliotou of the Universities Space Research Association led a team of astronomers at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in confirming the existence of magnetars, a special class of neutron stars with a magnetic field one thousand trillion times the strength of Earth’s. The team calculated the strength of SGR1806-20, first discovered in 1979, by combining data from NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer satellite and the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics.(UniSci Science and Research News, “‘Magnetar’ Generates Most Intense Magnetic Field in Universe,” 21 May 1998; C. Kouveliotou et al., “An X-ray Pulsar with a Superstrong Magnetic Field in the Soft Gamma-Ray Repeater SGR1806-20,” Nature 393, no. 6682 (21 May 1998): 235–237; NASA, “Strongest Stellar Magnetic Field Yet Observed Confirms Existence of Magnetars,” news release 98-87, 20 May 1998.)
 John S. Lewis, Codirector of the Space Engineering Research Center at the University of Arizona in Tucson, testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics concerning the potential danger of nearby asteroids. His testimony supported the idea that any asteroid colliding with Earth in the next 100 years could only be an asteroid not yet known to scientists. Lewis argued that, since an international scientific effort could identify such an asteroid easily, he advocated “a systematic, globally-coordinated search and characterization program that costs less than a single small space mission.” Such a search, he argued, would “give us adequate warning of a threatened asteroid impact,” so that we would “have ample time to design, build, test, and deploy an effective defense against the threat.”(Federal Document Clearing House, “Asteroids: Perils and Opportunities,” government news release of testimony of John S. Lewis before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Washington, DC, 21 May 1998.)
 The U.S. House of Representatives approved Representative David Weldon Jr.’s (R-FL) amendment to the US$271 billion defense authorization bill, to protect funding for launch ranges. In the past six years, the U.S. Department of Defense had diverted money, which would have modernized U.S. Air Force–controlled launch ranges, to cover costs associated with overseas deployments, such as ongoing operations in Bosnia. Weldon stated that diverting funds away from the launch ranges was a “national security issue as well as a critical issue for NASA and commercial space.” Weldon’s amendment reserved US$273.3 million for the Cape Canaveral Range in Florida and US$109.1 million for the Western Launch Range at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Bill Protects Launch Range Money,” 22 May 1998.)
 Scientists published a study in the journal Science, using images from the Galileo probe as evidence that an ocean beneath the surface of Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons, was once warm and salty. James K. Crowley of the U.S. Geological Survey stated that Galileo data showed that “salt absorption patterns on Europa were similar to those on Earth.” Gary B. Hansen, a University of Hawaii geophysicist, added the observation that “the size of the salt bands on Europa’s surface are continuous and stretch across much of the moon,” evidence of a salty ocean beneath the moon’s icy surface. Jeffrey S. Kargel, also of the U.S. Geological Survey, commented on his colleague’s study in Science, saying that salt is an important “piece in the puzzle,” but in the absence of other evidence, does not prove that a salty ocean lies beneath Europa’s surface. Scientists seek other evidence, such as shifting ice plates, cracks in the frozen surface, and a magnetic field.(Michael Kahn for Reuters, “Jupiter Moon Might Have Salt Ocean—U.S. Study,” 22 May 1998; T. B. McCord et al., “Salts on Europa’s Surface Detected by Galileo near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer,” Science 280, no. 5367 (22 May 1998): 1242.)
 Images released at the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston showed what scientists believed was the first evidence of ice on Mars outside of the planet’s polar ice caps. The images showed a 30-mile-wide (48-kilometer-wide) crater containing a discolored area measuring about 12 to 18 miles (19 to 29 kilometers) across the bottom of the crater. Some scientists thought the discoloration indicated the presence of some sort of deposit, possibly frozen mud or sand, evidence that ice is present, or was present in the past. Others offered a different theory about the contents of the images: volcanic activity could explain the apparent deposit in the crater. The images, from Mars Global Surveyor, had 10 to 12 times better resolution than any previous image of the crater. Arizona State University researchers made another announcement regarding Surveyor’s data; the Arizona researchers believed that a “concentration of a rust-colored mineral along the Mars equator indicates it once had boiling hydrothermal vents and perhaps huge lakes.” The mineral, hematite, was the first clear evidence of widespread thermal activity on Mars. NASA officials added that the finding indicated that water “was once stable at or near the surface and that Mars had a thicker atmosphere in its early history, probably 4 billion to 6 billion years ago.”(Sharon L. Lynch for Associated Press, “Mars Discovery,” 28 May 1998; Washington Times, “Minerals Suggest Life in Mars’ Past: Scientists Eye Water Signs for Answers,” 28 May 1998.)
 At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their “solar-bomb theory.” Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, “a seismic wave front surges across the [S]un’s face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond.” The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Sun’s atmosphere, but also “trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes,” 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, “X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun,” Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
 At a NASA press conference, a team of NASA and university astronomers presented an image captured with the HST, discussing their conclusion that the image provides the first direct evidence of a planet in another solar system. Previously, scientists had been able to infer the existence of such planets by observing their gravitational effect on suns, but were unable to see them with telescopes. Located 450 light-years away in the Taurus constellation, a binary star system, the planet appeared to be at least twice the size of Jupiter. Designated TMR-1C, the planet orbited 130 billion miles (210 billion kilometers) from its parent stars. Scientists considered TMR-1C, young by planetary standards, to be forming still.(Martin Merzer, “Scientists: Distant Planet Discovered—Hubble Photo May Confirm Sighting Outside Solar System,” Miami Herald, 28 May 1998.)
 Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
 The European Southern Observatory (ESO) successfully tested the first of four linked, identical telescopes of 8.2-meter (27-foot) diameters, comprising the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The VLT is the world’s largest and most advanced Earth-based telescope, with a collective diameter equal to16 meters (52 feet). The telescope’s “first light” images (its first astronomically useful images) met the design goals. Exposures lasting up to 10 minutes confirmed that the telescope’s tracking was very accurate and stable. The ESO had built the new telescope in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile, where a dry atmosphere and stable climate guaranteed clear skies 350 nights of the year.(Financial Times (London), “Staring Out Across 14 Billion Light Years: Technology Very Large Telescope: The Earth-Based VLT Brings a Twinkle to a European Astronomer’s Eye,” 4 June 1998.)
 A computer failure aboard Mir partially affected the space station’s solar panels, causing the panel to fail to generate sufficient electricity and requiring the crew to use the Soyuz capsule thrusters for steering. To conserve energy, the crew turned off nonessential equipment, including the air conditioner and lights. Although they replaced the computer with a new one, the crew was unable to load the necessary software. The crew feared the failure might delay Space Shuttle Discovery’s launch to Mir, planned for 2 June.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Cosmonauts Replace Mir Computer,” 31 May 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Mir Space Station Has a New Problem—Computer Failure Causes Solar Panels To Turn from Sun,” Seattle Times (WA), 31 May 1998.)
 NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft captured a video of a “short-lived but extremely bright explosion in the atmosphere of the sun.” The explosion was 55,000 miles (89,000 kilometers) long, 200 miles (322 kilometers) wide, and traveled at a rate of 2 million miles (3.2 million kilometers) per hour. The explosions overlapped each other and “snapped,” releasing “vast amounts of energy” as solar flares. Solar flares cause magnetic disturbances that disrupt satellites and power supplies if directed at Earth. In April, NASA had launched the TRACE spacecraft, with a telescope 10 times more powerful than any other telescope focused on the Sun. The telescope studied the transitional region of the Sun’s atmosphere, between the relatively cool surface of the lower atmosphere, with temperatures of 6,000°C (11,000°F), and the corona or upper atmosphere, where temperatures reach 1.7 million°C (35 million°F). The telescope was able to photograph ultraviolet light and to show temperature variations using false colors.(Mark Prigg, “Photos Reveal Sun’s Power,” Sunday Times (London), 7 June 1998; Leonard Novarro for Reuters, “Solar Flare May Disrupt Worldwide Communication,” 8 June 1998.)
 The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
 At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
 The Boeing Company announced the creation of a new subsidiary called Boeing Space Operations, based in Houston, Texas, at the Johnson Space Center, which would provide various services for government and commercial space operations. Rick Stephens, the president of the new subsidiary, stated that the goal of Boeing Space Operations was to make Boeing “the global provider of low-cost, reliable, commercially based space operations services.”(James Wallace, “Boeing Forms a New Unit To Boost Its Space Business,” Seattle Post-Intelligencer (WA), 3 June 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery encountered its first malfunction during Mission STS-91, when the KU- band system failed to switch on after Discovery’s crew deployed its antenna upon reaching orbit. The KU-band downlink carries broadcasts with a high rate of data. The system failure prevented the Shuttle crew from sending televised images or high rates of information to Mission Control. This problem had never occurred before. NASA spokesperson James Hartsfield stated that it was unclear whether the trouble originated with the antenna, transmitter, or other associated equipment. Hartsfield also mentioned that the failure would “prevent immediate analysis of data from the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer.” The S-band antennas worked normally, and the crew was able to talk with ground controllers as usual.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91”; Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Shuttle Soars Toward Final Mir Docking, but Antenna Won’t Send TV Signals,” 3 June 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Lightweight Tank Perfect on First Flight; KU-Band a Problem,” 4 June 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
 During a meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin directed MSFC officials to draw up a new plan for meeting the goals of the Bantam Program. The program’s original goal had been to develop, by 2001, a rocket capable of launching 150-kilogram or 0.15-tonne (331-pound or 0.2-ton) payloads, at a cost of no more than US$1.5 million. None of the rockets developed with NASA funding would have met that cost target. Bantam Program Manager Sherry Buschmann reiterated NASA’s commitment to “achieving a capability to launch small payloads frequently at an affordable cost,” saying that the plan would meet a “legitimate need within the science community.”(Warren Ferster, “NASA Shifts Gears on Low-Cost Launcher: Goldin Renews Commitment to Bantam Goals,” Space News, 8–14 June 1998.)
 NASA announced the astronaut candidate class of 1998, including 8 pilot candidates and 17 mission specialist candidates, and composed of 21 male and 4 female candidates. Among the candidate class was teacher Barbara R. Morgan, the former understudy to Christa McAuliffe. NASA had designated Morgan as Educator Mission Specialist in January 1998.(NASA, “NASA Names Astronaut Class of 1998,” news release 98-97, 4 June 1998. 142)
 Mark H. Thiemens, professor of chemistry at the University of California at San Diego, and a team of researchers published a study in the journal Science disputing NASA’s theory that a rock from Mars contained evidence of life. NASA scientists had studied the rock, found in the Allen Hills ice field in Antarctica, concluding that some carbonate mineral structures in the rock were evidence that microbes had lived in the rock before it “blasted away from Mars,” during the collision of Mars with an asteroid millions of years ago. By contrast, Thiemens’s researchers concluded that the chemical characteristics of oxygen inside the rock originated from the carbon dioxide and ozone of the Martian atmosphere. The team explained that, if a microbe had deposited the oxygen, “the chemical signature of the minerals would have matched that of oxygen in water, not oxygen in the atmosphere.” According to the team, this finding did not provide final proof that the rock had never contained life. However, it provided a significant argument against NASA’s theory, controversial since its first proposal in August 1996.(James Farquhar, Mark H. Thiemens, and Teresa Jackson, “Atmosphere-Surface Interactions on Mars: Δ17Ο Measurements of Carbonate from ALH84001,” Science 280, no. 5369 (June 5, 1998): 1580; Los Angeles Times, “New Meteorite Study Casts Doubt on Theory of Martian Life,” 5 June 1998.)
 Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery attempted, but failed, to fix the spacecraft’s high- speed data-transmission system. NASA believed the source of the problem was in an electronics box in the cargo bay, but stated that only a spacewalk would enable the crew to reach the box. NASA Mission Operations representative Robert E. Castle Jr. remarked that, even with a spacewalk, the astronauts would probably not be able to repair the malfunction. Because of the lack of the high-speed data transmission system, scientists could not view the data that the AMS had collected. Although the Shuttle had stored the data on board, NASA was unable to determine whether the data was useful, or whether the instrument’s adjustment was correct.(Marcia Dunn, “Discover Astronauts Unable To Fix Communications Link,” Buffalo News (NY), 6 June 1998. 505 Mark Carreau, “Astronauts Unable To Spot Mir Hull Breach,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Test Fails To Find Leaks in Mir,” Seattle Times (WA), 7 June 1998.)
 Cosmonauts working aboard Mir conducted the first of two tests, using green fluorescent gas made from combining nitrogen, acetone, and biacetyl gases, to search for leaks in the Spektr laboratory module damaged in a collision in June 1997. However, they were unable to pinpoint the sources of any seepage. Because Mir was nearing its decommission stage, Russia planned no repairs, in the event that the cosmonauts were able to locate the leaks precisely. Instead, the tests were intended as practice for finding leaks on the future ISS.
 Space Shuttle Discovery undocked from Mir, carrying back to Earth Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, the last of seven U.S. astronauts to live aboard the station, and marking the completion of Phase I of the ISS program. Before closing the hatches, Mir Commander Talgat A. Musabayev presented Shuttle Commander Charles J. Precourt with a huge wrench that had been used in spacewalks and would be flown to the future ISS.(Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Discovery Undocks from Mir, Completes Historic Last Linkup,” 8 June 1998.)
 NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST “to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope.” With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGST’s purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, had decided that the “most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed” would be “to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institute’s responsibilities to include the management” of the new telescope.(NASA, “NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
 Michael I. Mott, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator (Technical), one of NASA’s top three managers, announced his decision to leave NASA to join Boeing Space Transportation in Seal Beach, California, as Vice President of Business Development. Mott had served as NASA Associate Deputy Administrator since January 1994.(NASA, “Michael I. Mott To Leave NASA,” news release 98-99, 8 June 1998.)
 The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
 Research scientists working on a US$33 million experiment to search for antimatter in space, spoke at a news conference, announcing that the communication-system breakdown on Space Shuttle Discovery had ruined their tests. The astronauts had been unable to repair Discovery’s main antenna system, which had broken shortly after launch, rendering the Shuttle unable to transmit high-speed data or video back to Earth. Scientists working on the project needed continuous, high-speed data to calibrate the AMS, which was searching space for rare subatomic particles known as antimatter. However, using a patchwork system, they had only been able to receive a few minutes of data each hour, which meant that, although they could see that the AMS was working, the spectrometer was not providing them with enough data to fine tune the magnet. According to Project Manager James Bates, the scientists had failed to accomplish their objectives because of the malfunction.(Seth Borenstein, “Shuttle Physics Testing Thwarted; A Glitch Has Undermined an Antimatter Experiment,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 June 1998.)
 Aerojet announced it had won a US$485,000 contract to build a rocket injector for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) that would help JPL scientists develop propulsion technologies for NASA’s Mars Sample Return Vehicle.(Sacramento Bee (CA), “Aerojet Lands Contract,” 11 June 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 2 p.m. (EDT), returning the U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, to Earth after four and one- half months in space. Thomas, unlike some of his predecessors, took the medical advice typically given to astronauts returning from a lengthy stay in space and allowed medical personnel to carry him off the Shuttle, rather than attempting to walk on his own.(Steven Young for Reuters, “U.S. Space Shuttle Returns with Last Mir Astronaut,” 12 June 1998.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin submitted a 29-page report to lawmakers of the U.S. House of Representatives, officially responding to “an independent review panel’s damning assessment that the [ISS] could cost US$7.3 billion more than NASA estimated.” The panel had also reported that NASA would likely complete the ISS more than four years behind schedule. Goldin acknowledged significant budget and schedule problems but maintained that NASA’s plan remained manageable, despite its shortcomings.(Larry Wheeler for Gannett News Service, “NASA Chief Admits Space Station Project Has Major Woes,” 17 June 1998.)
 The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
 Hughes Global Services Inc. announced the success of its salvage mission to a stranded Asia Satellite Telecommunications Company Ltd. communications satellite. The 3.8-ton (3,500- kilogram or 3.5-tonne) AsiaSat 3 had remained stranded in a useless orbit since its December 1997 launch. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had received US$200 million from insurers. The insurers had told Hughes Global Services to find a new customer, if the salvage mission was successful. Asia Satellite Telecommunications had originally intended AsiaSat 3 to provide television and telephone service in Asia, but the Russian-built launcher had malfunctioned, and the satellite’s orbit had gone awry, rendering it useless. Hughes Global Services had taken possession of the satellite, implementing a “seemingly improbable” mission to salvage the spacecraft. Hughes had sent the satellite around the Moon twice, using the Moon’s gravity to help correct the satellite’s orbit around the Earth, and declared the salvage mission a success, even though the satellite was not stationary, which would limit the number of customers who might lease or buy it.(Andrew Pollack for Associated Press, “Rescue Effort Puts a Satellite in Viable Orbit,” New York Times, 19 June 1998; Associated Press, “US Satellites,” 19 June 1998.)
 Eighteen members of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton, urging him to “abandon plans to reach an agreement in China on expanding space cooperation because of Beijing’s weapons transfers and human rights abuses.” The letter was the House’s response to a 29 April report in the Washington Times, disclosing a plan to conclude a space cooperation agreement at the Beijing summit. The article discussed a draft agreement calling for the free and unrestricted exchange of scientific data between NASA and the State Science and Technology Commission of China, a key developer of weapons-related technology. The lawmakers, warning that the pact would increase the likelihood of China’s sharing technology with rogue states, referred to a CIA report stating that China had aimed 13 of its 18 long-range strategic missiles at the United States. These comments emphasized the concern of members of Congress that China constituted a direct threat to the United States. Many opponents of the agreement insisted that the United States should not share with China technologies or applications that enemies of the United States might use against the American people or U.S. interests.(Bill Gertz, “House Science Panelists Oppose Space Pact with China,” Washington Times, 24 June 1998.)
 James B. Willet, a nuclear astrophysicist who had worked for NASA, died of cancer at his Maryland home. Willet had worked for 20 years on the scientific staff of NASA’s JPL in Pasadena, California, and for three years as JPL’s liaison to NASA Headquarters before joining the Space Research Association in 1993. At JPL, Willet had acted as a science coordinator and team chief for the Galileo Mission. Galileo was orbiting Jupiter at the time of his death. Willet was also a field operations team leader for the Mars balloon-testing program and had conducted research in gamma-ray astronomy. Willet’s duties as liaison officer involved him in the Voyager, Ulysses, and Pioneer programs.(Buffalo News (NY), “James B. Willet Nuclear Astrophysicist,” 20 June 1998.)
 NASA officials at Lewis Research Center (LERC) in Cleveland, Ohio, announced the new five- year collaborative program of LERC and Case Western Reserve University. The program’s name, the Glennan Microsystems Initiative, honored the late T. Keith Glennan, the first NASA Administrator, who had served from 1958 to 1961. Glennan was also President Emeritus of Case Institute of Technology, forerunner of Case Western Reserve University. Backed with US$16 million in federal funds and US$4.5 million in state funds, the initiative planned to “develop and apply the technology known as microelectricomechanical systems for industry and for NASA.” LERC planned to develop systems for use a decade into the future, including power systems for the next space station.(Jennifer Arend, “Lewis Research Launches Effort To Develop Technology,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 20 June 1998.)
 The Huntsville Alabama L5 Society (HAL5), a chapter of the National Space Society, failed in its second attempt to become the first group of amateurs to launch a rocket into space. The society attempted to use a hot-air balloon from a NASA barge in the Gulf of Mexico to launch its rocket, a launch concept known as a rockoon. According to the rockoon concept, a small rocket may “obtain very high altitude because there is little air to slow it down during launch.” James A. Van Allen had been the first to fly rockoons in the 1950s, as part of a joint U.S. Navy- University of Iowa project. The U.S. Navy had abandoned the technique after large, ground- based, sounding rockets became available. NASA’s MSFC signed a cooperative agreement with HAL5 in 1996, continuing the relationship for the High Altitude Lift-Off mission. MSFC had supplied HAL5 with the barge, helium for the balloon, nitrous oxide for the rocket, and some funds for materials. HAL5 sought to “make space more affordable for students, amateurs, experimenters, and researchers.” NASA was examining alternate launch sites and methods in an effort to find ways of reducing the cost of rocket launches.(HAL5 Project, “Space Group Hopes To Launch First Amateur Rocket into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 June 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Space Buffs in Alabama Can’t Get Rocket Launched,” 21 June 1998; William R. Corliss, “Chapter 4: Development of the First Sounding Rockets,” in NASA Sounding Rockets, 1958– 1968: A Historical Summary (Washington, DC: NASA Scientific and Technical Information Office, 1971), http://history.nasa.gov/SP-4401/contents.htm (accessed 30 January 2008).)
 The Lewis Spacecraft Mission Failure Investigation Board, convened by NASA, released its report explaining the reason for the spacecraft’s failure, which had cost NASA more than US$70 million. NASA had developed the Earth-orbiting spacecraft to test advanced scientific equipment and technology for measuring land surface changes. The spacecraft, launched on 23 August 1997, had failed to achieve stable orbit. According to the board’s findings, faulty attitude-control equipment, together with inadequate monitoring, had caused the craft’s destruction upon reentry on 28 September. The investigation board reported that the attitude-control system had not been tested or developed sufficiently. NASA had adapted the system from an earlier design, which had not taken into account the Lewis spacecraft’s spin axis. The small project crew had been unable to monitor and control the craft adequately during the crucial early flight stage. According to the investigation board’s report, this was the primary cause of the mission’s failure.(NASA, “Lewis Spacecraft Failure Board Report Released,” news release 98-109, 23 June 1998; Defense Daily, “NASA Blames Spacecraft Loss on Equipment, Monitoring,” 24 June 1998.)
 U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
 At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
 Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
 James L. Elliot, an astronomer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and his colleagues, together with Lowell Observatory and Williams College, published findings in the journal Nature based on data obtained from NASA’s HST. The data indicated that Neptune’s largest moon, Triton, had warmed up significantly since the Voyager spacecraft’s visit in 1989. Triton’s temperature had risen from 37 K (-393°F or -236°C) to 39 K (-389°F or -234°C), a 5 percent increase. The astronomers traced the warming trend to seasonal changes in Triton’s polar ice caps attributed to “an extreme southern summer,” a cyclical phenomenon occurring every few hundred years. Other possible explanations included a changing frost pattern on Triton’s surface, which could have caused the surface to absorb more of the Sun’s warmth; or changes in the reflectivity of Triton’s ice, which could have caused it to absorb more heat. Because of the warming, Triton’s frozen nitrogen surface was turning into gas, making its thin atmosphere denser. The scientists hoped their study of the changes on Triton would provide insight into global warming on Earth, which has a more complicated environment than Triton. HST’s “detection of an increase in the moon’s atmospheric pressure,” measured with one of the space telescope’s three fine guidance sensors, had provided the clue to the increased surface temperature.(NASA, “Hubble Space Telescope Helps Find Evidence that Neptune’s Largest Moon Is Warming Up,” news release 98-110, 24 June 1998; J. L. Eliot et al., “Global Warming on Triton,” Nature 393, no. 6687 (25 June 1998): 765–767.)
 NASA announced that experts from the ESA and Matra Marconi Space, the prime contractor for the SOHO spacecraft, had met at GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to assess the situation of the noncommunicating spacecraft and to analyze the satellite’s status in the event that ground controllers reestablished contact with it. Participants at the meeting named as cochairs of a joint inquiry board to investigate the incident, Professor Massimo Trella, the ESA’s Inspector General, and Michael A. Greenfield, Deputy Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters.(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Inquiry Board Co-Chairs Named,” news release 98- 118, 30 June 1998.)
 The European Science Foundation and the U.S. National Research Council published a joint study analyzing 13 projects in astrophysics, planetary science, space physics, earth science, and microgravity research. The report advised the United States and its international partners to “set aside a specific part of their annual space budgets to plan for future critical joint exploration projects,” highlighting factors hampering cooperation within the projects analyzed. Hampering factors included cultural differences, poorly defined objectives, and “lukewarm support from the scientific community for projects undertaken more for political than research reasons.” The report set forth recommendations for successfully pursuing cooperative space projects within tight budget constraints.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Study: Space Projects Need Good Science,” 30 June 1998; European Space Foundation, “Transatlantic Study Identifies Keys to Success in International Space Collaboration,” news release, 30 June 1998, http://www.esf.org/media-centre/press-releases/ext-single-news/article/transatlantic- study-identifies-keys-to-sucess-in-international-space-collaborations-220.html (accessed 27 September 2007).)
 PanAmSat Corporation announced the impairment of a critical subsystem of its Galaxy VII spacecraft. A spokesperson for the company said that engineers had not yet determined whether the problem was the same as that which caused the failure of the Galaxy IV spacecraft on 19 May. Both the primary and backup systems keeping the Galaxy IV correctly pointed toward Earth-bound controllers had failed, but although the Galaxy VII had lost its primary system, its backup system had continued to function properly. Hughes Electronics Corporation’s Space and Communications Company, the manufacturer of the two satellites, was investigating the failures. Both satellites were HS601 models, the world’s “best-selling large communications satellite,” with customers including the U.S. Navy, NASA, the government of Mexico, and communications companies throughout the world.(Robert Covington for Reuters, “Second PanAmSat Satellite Encounters Problems,” 2 July 1998.)
 SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHAB’s chairperson said the company would “expand the use of Johnson Engineering’s larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena.” Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to “develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s].” However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB “changed its strategy,” winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttle’s payload bays, as cargo containers for storing “tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russia’s Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.”(Mark Carreau, “Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor,” Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
 Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
 Due to arrive at Mars in October 1999 after a period of orbiting Earth, Japan’s Planet B spacecraft launched from Kagoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu. The Japanese Education Ministry’s Institute of Space and Aerospace Science developed the probe, nicknamed Nozomi, or Hope. The probe carried 14 scientific instruments developed by Canada, Germany, Japan, Sweden, and the United States. NASA provided two instruments for the probe: the Neutral Mass Spectrometer, designed to measure the gas composition of Mars’s upper atmosphere for the first time; and the Ultra Stable Oscillator, deployed to support a radio science experiment, also involving analysis of the Martian atmosphere, and to guide the spacecraft in its orbit around Mars.(NASA, “NASA Instruments on Japanese Planet-B Spacecraft Will Aid Studies of Martian Upper Atmosphere,” news release 98-119, 1 July 1998; United Press International, “Japan Launches First Mars Mission,” 4 July 1998.)
 U.S. Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott (R-MS) announced that Alliant Techsystems would build composite materials, such as booster nose cones, for the Boeing Delta IV rocket at Iuka, Mississippi, a former site of the Tennessee Valley Authority and NASA. The rocket would “compete for Air Force and commercial contracts for satellite launches,” while Senator Lott and U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Chairperson Richard Shelby (R-AL) would continue to investigate whether launching U.S.-made satellites on Chinese rockets was compromising U.S. security. Rod Bitz, the director of corporate communications for Alliant, said, “Iuka was chosen in part because the large structures can be easily shipped by barge to Decatur.” Engineers at the new Boeing plant in Decatur, Alabama, would assemble the rocket.(James W. Brosnan, “Iuka Revving Up for Rockets Again Will Be Part of Delta IV Project,” Commercial Appeal (Memphis, TN), 7 July 1998.)
 In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
 Rocket engineer Max E. Nowak died of natural causes at the age of 89. An original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, which developed the V-1 and V-2 rockets during World War II, Nowak had been among the first of the team members to move to the United States after the war. He had been the assistant to the director of the manufacturing engineering lab during the Apollo program and had directed the assembly of systems for the Saturn I nose cones and Saturn V launch systems.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die,” 12 July 1998.)
 Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
 NASA announced that JSC had modified its contract with United Space Alliance, awarding the contractor more Shuttle work. Three other NASA contractors had previously performed the more than US$900 million of work on the Space Shuttle’s solid rocket booster and other elements. USBI Company at Kennedy Space Center had worked on the boosters; Lockheed Martin Corporation in Houston, Texas, had designed and produced the primary Shuttle avionics software; and Boeing Aerospace Operations in Houston had processed flight equipment.(NASA, “NASA Awards More Shuttle Work to USA,” news release c98-h, 7 July 1998.)
 S. George Djorgovski, an astronomer at California Institute of Technology; Dale A. Frail, an astronomer with the Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory in Socorro, New Mexico; and their colleagues issued a notice to fellow astronomers regarding a gamma-ray burst (GRB) detected on 2 July. Frail and Djorgovski had combined the resources of the VLA and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to pinpoint the source of the burst, which they calculated to be a galaxy, “alive with new-forming stars,” billions of light-years away from Earth. Although scientists did not yet know the cause of GRBs, Frail remarked, “the fact that this burst happened in a hot galaxy where new stars are being rapidly formed is probably the death knell for the theory that collisions between old, dying neutron stars are responsible for the gamma-ray bursts.”(John Fleck, “N.M. Scientists Track Galaxy Blast: Explosion Is Billions of Light Years Away,” Albuquerque Journal (NM), 9 July 1998.)
 Heinrich K. Paetz, an original member of Wernher von Braun’s German rocket team, died of natural causes at the age of 88, the second team member to die within the week. Before retiring from NASA in 1970, Paetz had participated in the Redstone, Jupiter, Saturn I, and Saturn V programs as a member of the test branch.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
 A month after its launch, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began activating the weather satellite, Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-10 (GOES- 10), a backup to the failing GOES-9 satellite. The momentum wheels on GOES-9, similar to a gyroscope, which maintain the satellite’s stability, were “showing signs of impending failure.” GOES-9 was responsible for monitoring weather on the west coast of the United States. GOES- 10, placed in storage mode above the center of the country, would need about 30 days, moving approximately 1o of longitude each day, to move to the west coast location. GOES-10’s well- timed placement in storage mode would ensure data continuity, saving NOAA a 12- to 15-month wait for a time slot for launch, following the imminent failure of GOES-9.(Associated Press, “Failing Weather Satellite Replaced,” 10 July 1998.)
 Rocket scientist Albert E. Schuler died of natural causes at the age of 83, the third original member of Wernher von Braun’s rocket team to die in the same week. Schuler had retired from NASA in 1969, after a career overseeing measurement of instrumentation on test stands and rockets during static firings and overseeing flight instrumentation, guidance, and control on rocket flights.(Associated Press, “3 Rocket Scientists Die.”)
 NASA announced the establishment of a Near-Earth Object Program Office at its Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), responsible for coordinating “NASA-sponsored efforts to detect, track, and characterize potentially hazardous asteroids and comets that could approach Earth,” and with facilitating communication between scientists and the public, were NASA to discover any potentially hazardous objects. NASA selected JPL to host the new program, because of “its expertise in tracking precisely the positions and predicted paths of asteroids and comets.”(NASA, “NASA Establishes Near-Earth Object Program Office at Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” news release 98- 123, 14 July 1998.)
 NASA released “unusually detailed” images of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede taken by the Galileo probe in June 1996 and June 1997. Although the images did not indicate the existence of any form of life, they showed that life had been possible in Ganymede’s oceans billions of years ago. At that time, the moon had water, heat, and organic material, brought by comets from outer space. The images also revealed geological formations, including mountain-like ridges and a valley system of volcanoes. Early in the moon’s history, the volcanoes had supplied water for Ganymede’s oceans, which are now frozen.(Paul Hoversten, “Photos Suggest Life Could Have Existed on Jupiter’s Moon,” USA Today, 16 July 1998; New York Times, “Hints of an Ocean on Jupiter’s Moon Yield Questions About Life,” 16 July 1998.)
 NASA’s Inventions and Contributions Board announced the winners of its 1998 Software of the Year Award. The first winner, Tempest, a breakthrough technology “originally developed to support the science experiments on the ISS,” had “spawned new markets,” and NASA predicted that the technology would continue to do so. NASA’s Ames Research Center had designed the second winner, Center TRACON Automation System Software, a set of three software tools for managing air-traffic–control systems at major airports, to optimize flight operations. Analyzing and predicting aircraft paths, the software created visual representations of arriving traffic flow, providing controllers with “up-to-the-second advisories of information” for pilots, thus reducing time between landings to a minimum. The Federal Aviation Administration had chosen the software for immediate implementation at all major airports.(NASA, “Space Flight, Aviation Programs Receive NASA Software Award,” news release 98-124, 15 July 1998. 543 NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Complete Worldwide Communications Coverage,” news release 98-122, 13 July 1998.)
 NASA officially opened its new communications terminal on Guam, to provide “global, full- time and real-time communications support for NASA’s Space Network customers.” The Guam ground station replaced the interim ground terminal in Canberra, Australia, established to provide continuous, full-time, real-time communications support for NASA’s Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after it had “suffered an on-board tape recorder failure in March 1992.”
 The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellite’s signal. First, Mission Control had “unknowingly activated” two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A “rapid decision” to turn off one of the craft’s gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft “flailing out of control.” Controllers also discovered that “undetected failures,” which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, “had taken out three of the four batteries.”(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes,” news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, “Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin,” Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 28 July 1998.)
 U.S. Senator Jeff Sessions (R-AL) offered an amendment to the Subcommittee on Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies’ FY 1999 appropriations bill, adding US$33 million to the US$150 million budget for NASA already approved by the Senate Committee on Appropriations. The Senate defeated the amendment by a vote of 58 to 37. President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget had requested a US$183 million reduction in NASA’s budget.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Senator Sessions Offers Amendment To Increase NASA’s Budget by $33 Million,” government news release, 17 July 1998.)
 The data transmission system of Galileo malfunctioned during its fifth flyby of Jupiter’s moon Europa when it went into safe mode. Although NASA engineers activated a backup system, the transmission system had lost all data collected when the craft passed within 1,141 miles (1,835 kilometers) of the moon. NASA was investigating the malfunction. NASA had launched Galileo in 1989, and the probe had entered Jupiter’s orbit in 1995, collecting data from moons Io, Europa, and Callisto during its initial two-year mission, completed in December 1997. NASA had extended the mission for two additional years.(Agence France-Presse, “Galileo Probe Suffers Malfunction in Jupiter Moon Flyby,” 22 July 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft Galileo Working Again,” 24 July 1998.)
 Alan B. Shepard Jr., the first American in space, died in his sleep at the age of 74 after a two- year battle with leukemia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remembered him for being “one of the original seven Mercury astronauts, for being the first American to fly in space, and for being one of only 12 Americans to step on the Moon.” A former U.S. Navy pilot, Shepard had first traveled to space on 5 May 1961, just 23 days after the Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human to orbit Earth. Shepard, the lone astronaut in the small space capsule, Freedom 7, rocketed 116 miles (187 kilometers) above Earth, as millions of people watched him live on television. Shepard’s spaceflight proved a significant morale-boosting moment for Americans, in the midst of the Cold War with the Soviet Union, which until then had appeared to be winning the space race. After the flight, President John F. Kennedy presented Shepard with the Distinguished Service Medal, challenging the nation to put a man on the Moon by the end of the decade. Shepard made history again in 1971, when he commanded Apollo 14 on its nine-day mission to the Moon. He delighted Americans watching the expedition on television, when, taking a break from collecting Moon rocks, he hit two golf balls with an improvised club. Shepard, who had retired from NASA and the U.S. Navy in 1974, received the Congressional Space Medal of Honor in 1979. Shepard also engaged in philanthropic pursuits, such as investing in the establishment of the Astronaut Foundation, which provides scholarships. The Astronaut Foundation had also founded the Space Camp program for young people.(NASA, “Statement of NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin on the Death of Alan Shepard,” news release 98- 128, 22 July 1998; NASA, “Alan Shepard, First American Astronaut, Dies at 74,” news release 98-131, 22 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “John Glenn Remarks on Alan Shepard,” government news release, 22 July 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shepard’s Ride Lifted USA into the Space Age,” USA Today, 23 July 1998; Jennifer Harper, “Alan Shepard, First American in Space, Dies at 74: ‘Pioneer’s Pioneer’ also Led Apollo 14, Golfed on Moon,” Washington Times, 23 July 1998.)
 NASA named astronaut Terrence W. Wilcutt to replace James D. Halsell Jr. as NASA’s Manager of Operational Activities at Star City, Russia. Wilcutt was the 10th astronaut to serve in the rotational position, supporting the training and preparation of NASA astronauts at Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center and acting as a liaison between NASA and Russian management. Wilcutt had flown on three missions: the first, in 1994, as the pilot on Mission STS-68, to study the Earth’s surface; the second, in 1996, as the pilot for the fourth Shuttle–Mir docking mission, STS-79; and the third, in 1998, as the commander of Mission STS-89, the eighth docking mission.(NASA, “Astronaut Wilcutt Replaces Halsell in Star City, Russia,” news release 98-127, 22 July 1998.)
 NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had found the youngest cluster of stars ever observed in a galaxy near the Milky Way. The baby stars were “enveloped in a cloud of luminous gases,” in the galaxy known as the Small Magellanic Cloud, about 200,000 light- years from Earth. The HST had discovered the 50 new stars, each 300,000 times as bright as the Sun, “concentrated in a region only 10 light-years across in a cloud known as N81.” Before the capture of the HST’s high-resolution images, astronomers had referred to the area as The Blob.(NASA, “Nearby Star Cluster Yields Insights into Early Universe,” news release 98-132, 23 July 1998; Washington Times, “Hubble Telescope Finds Family of Stars,” 24 July 1998; New York Times, “Genesis in a Cosmic Firestorm,” 28 July 1998.)
 NASA announced that engineers had repaired the malfunctioning data transmission systems aboard Galileo. Although both subsystems were “working redundantly, as they had been designed to do,” it would be up to a week before the probe could resume transmitting scientific data to Earth. Project engineers believed that debris had short-circuited a signal line, causing computer resets.(Agence France-Presse, “NASA Repairs Galileo Probe’s Glitch,” 24 July 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft Galileo Working Again,” 24 July 1998.)
 Two competing teams using NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) discovered the first known accretion-powered millisecond pulsar. The scientists believed the pulsar to be the missing link between two known types of stars: 1) “old, accreting neutron stars, which are powerful sources of [x]-rays generated from the material they are gobbling up from their companions,” and 2) even older “radiowave emitting pulsars that are rotating very rapidly and slowing down gradually.” Because the new star, designated SAX J1808.4-3658, was both emitting x-rays and spinning rapidly, scientists believed it was the link between the accreting and the radiowaveemitting neutron stars. Michiel van der Klis and Rudy Wijnands of the University of Amsterdam found the new pulsar—called the “Holy Grail of X-ray astronomy”—and measured the time between its rapid x-ray pulses, to derive its rotation rate. Van der Klis explained that, based on the fact of accretion, astrophysicists had long theorized that millisecond pulsars existed, but this was the first time that one had been “caught in the act.” Accretion, the process of drawing gas from a nearby “companion” star, causes pulsars to heat up, emitting x-rays. After accretion ends, high-velocity beams of subatomic particles continue to “blow material off the companion,” eventually causing the companion to vanish. Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology led the team that found the pulsar’s 2-hour orbital period, measured the orbit, and inferred the presence of the companion star. Tod E. Strohmayer, a member of the RXTE team at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, suggested, “[x]-ray and particle beam ablation may explain why millisecond pulsars are often found alone, despite the fact that they required a companion star to speed up.” Pulsars “vaporize” their companions, thus hiding the evidence, which is, as Strohmayer described it, the “stellar version of the perfect crime.”(NASA, “Newly Discovered Stellar Cannibal Provides Missing Link,” news release 98-129, 22 July 1998; Rudy Wijnands and Michiel van der Klis, “A Millisecond Pulsar in an X-ray Binary System,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 344–346; Deepto Chakrabarty and Edward H. Morgan, “The Two-Hour Orbit of a Binary Millisecond X-ray Pulsar,” Nature 394, no. 6691 (23 July 1998): 346–348.)
 NASA announced that astronomers had located the “wayward” SOHO satellite after losing radio contact on 24 June, when a programming error on the ground caused its solar panels to switch positions. Two U.S. radio telescopes had located the satellite rotating slowly near its original position, approximately 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) from Earth. Engineers had calculated its exact location after NASA’s Deep Space Network in Goldstone, California, “intercepted the echo of a radio signal transmitted by the giant radio telescope of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Arecibo, Puerto Rico.” The spacecraft’s slow rotation on its axis indicated that it had incurred only minor damage and that its solar panels would soon face the Sun again.(Agence France-Presse, “U.S.-European Satellite Located by Engineers,” 28 July 1998.)
 Aaron A. Crayford and Cody Grosskopf, the two Cloverdale, California, teenagers accused of hacking into military and government computers in January and February 1998, pled guilty to federal hacking charges. The U.S. Attorney’s Office recommended probation and strict restrictions on the boys’ computer use and modem access. Crayford and Grosskopf had reportedly hacked into U.S government Web sites, including the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, the Naval Undersea Warfare Center, the Naval Postgraduate School, NOAA, NASA, the U.S. Air Force, and Pearl Harbor naval base; Web sites of foreign governments, Taiwan and the United Arab Emirates; and Web sites of a number of universities, including the University of California at Berkeley, the University of California at Santa Barbara, the University of California at Los Angeles, the University of California at Davis, California Polytechnic Institute, Columbia University, and Harvard University.(Jody Kleinberg, “Cloverdale Hackers Plead Guilty Probation Recommended for 2 Teens,” Press Democrat (Santa Rosa, CA), 30 July 1998.)
 The U.S. House of Representatives voted 323 to 109 against an amendment, sponsored by Representative Timothy J. Roemer (D-IN), which would have eliminated the ISS program before the launch of the first pieces of the laboratory into orbit. Commenting on the hundreds of thousands of pounds of hardware already constructed, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R-FL) remarked that “to pull the plug now seemed inappropriate to a lot of people.” Despite bad news throughout the past year, requiring NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin to visit Capitol Hill repeatedly to discuss cost overruns and delays, the vote was the “strongest endorsement ever for the station.” The station had survived by only one vote in 1993, the year President William J. Clinton had “reorganized the project and invited Russia to join the international consortium” and to build the laboratory.(Tamara Lytle, “NASA’s ‘Floating Lemon’ Gets Sweet House Boost,” Chicago Tribune, 30 July 1998.)
 NASA announced completion of qualification tests of the first wing assembly for its X-34 technology demonstrator, explaining that the prime contractor, Orbital Sciences Corporation, had integrated the wing assembly with the test article’s fuselage, marking a major milestone in the program.(NASA, “X-34 Completes Critical Milestone,” news release 98-136, 29 July 1998.)
 NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
 Kenneth J. Szalai ended his 34-year NASA career to join IBP Aerospace Group Inc. as the company’s president and chief operating officer. In his last position at NASA, Szalai was Director of Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Szalai had directed DFRC since December 1990. Before becoming the Center’s director, Szalai had been head of the research engineering division at DFRC for eight years. NASA had awarded Szalai, an internationally recognized expert on flight control and flight systems, the Exceptional Service Medal in recognition of his work on the first Digital Fly-by-Wire aircraft. He had also received NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal during his NASA tenure. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Kevin L. Petersen Acting Director of DFRC, effective 1 August.(Jim Skeen, “Dryden Director To Leave NASA for Private Sector,” Los Angeles Daily News, 11 July 1998.)
 NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration announced the winners of the 1998 National General Aviation Design Competition, in which undergraduate and graduate students, enrolled at U.S. engineering schools “participating in a major national effort to rebuild the U.S. general aviation sector,” compete individually or as teams. A 27-member undergraduate team from Virginia Polytechnic Institute won first place for its design, called VicTor, a single-engine, four- seat, high-performance aircraft. VicTor’s special design elements included an ergonomic cockpit with adjustable, side-control sticks and dual airbags; a choice between two high-performance engines; and advanced technology instrument displays. The design also included an upgrade option, “to allow autonomous flight if it becomes a reality.” A 15-member, Pennsylvania State University team won second place for their high-performance, two-person, single-engine, composite-fuselage, tractor-prop light airplane. Third place went to 13 undergraduate students from the University of Virginia for their computer program predicting drag in the design of new small passenger airplanes.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Announce Design Competition Winners,” news release 98-140, 1 August 1998.)
 The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Contacted,” news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite,” 4 August 1998.)
 NASA announced that Boeing Company’s cost overruns for the International Space Station (ISS) had increased by about 30 percent to US$783 million, and that NASA intended to “further cut the company’s bonus fees.” In reporting to NASA the latest cost overruns, Boeing had explained that “continued production and testing and the need to set aside money for contingencies” had caused the latest increase, US$183 million more than the US$600 million previously estimated. Under the terms of NASA’s cost-plus-fee contract, Boeing would lose an additional US$27.5 million in bonus fees, besides the US$78 million reduction that NASA had imposed.(Seattle Times (WA), “Boeing Reports More Space Station Overruns,” 7 August 1998.)
 Following ground control efforts during recent weeks to partially recharge the spacecraft’s batteries, SOHO successfully transmitted telemetry data to NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Station at Goldstone, California. The 1-minute burst of data contained information about SOHO’s temperature and the state of some of its electrical systems, damaged by the extreme cold. The data also indicated that ground control had successfully recharged one of the two batteries. The spacecraft remained in the L-1 Langrangian point in space, which is a point 1 million miles (1.6 million kilometers) away from Earth, where gravity forces are stable and “an object will not change its position relative to the Earth.”(NASA, “New Information from SOHO Increases Chances for Recovery,” news release 98-149, 11 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “SOHO Sun Satellite Comes to Life, Briefly,” 12 August 1998; Associated Press, “Fresh Signals from Crippled Satellite Revive Hope for Sun-Studying Mission,” 13 August 1998.)
 Hughes Electronics Corporation concluded its investigation into the 19 May failure of PanAmSat’s Galaxy IV satellite and the similar problems that later had affected two other satellites. Metallic crystals growing in space, “less than the width of a human hair,” had caused tin-plated electrical switches to short, disabling navigational devices that kept the satellites oriented toward Earth-based controllers. However, the investigation had failed to uncover the source of the failure of Galaxy IV’s backup system, which led to the widespread blackout on 19 May.(Aaron Pressman for Reuters, “Tiny Crystals Waylaid Satellites, Hughes Says,” 11 August 1998.)
 A U.S. Air Force Titan IV rocket, carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office of the Pentagon, exploded 1 minute after liftoff from Cape Canaveral, Florida. More than 20 stories high and weighing nearly 2 million pounds (907,000 kilograms), the Lockheed Martin–built Titan IV was the largest crewless rocket used in the United States. The rocket used solid-fuel boosters similar to those used to launch NASA’s Space Shuttle. The explosion destroyed about US$1.3 billion worth of hardware, making it one of the worst American rocket- launch failures to date. The rocket was about 20,000 feet (6,100 meters) above the Atlantic when it exploded, and the ocean carried the debris and toxic substances away from land. This was the second time a Titan IV had exploded during launch; the first explosion occurred in 1993.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Rocket Explosion,” 12 August 1998; Kathy Sawyer and William Harwood, “Rocket Explodes, Destroying Spy Satellite,” Washington Post, 13 August 1998.)
 A Soyuz TM-28 spacecraft blasted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying the penultimate crew of the Russian space station Mir. The three-member crew was composed of former presidential defense adviser Yuri M. Baturin, Flight Commander Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Engineer Gennady I. Padalka.564 Baturin was the first Russian bureaucrat to travel into space, and his inclusion in the mission attracted “unusually heavy Russian media coverage.” The former Kremlin adviser had trained alongside professional cosmonauts, passing all examinations. Earlier in the year, President Boris N. Yeltsin had fired space physicist Baturin without an explanation, and Baturin had focused since then on training for the mission to Mir.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia Blasts First Bureaucrat into Space,” 13 August 1998; Associated Press, “Mir Mission Under Way Despite Russian Economic Troubles,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 August 1998.)
 As part of an overall restructuring, the Boeing Company announced plans to reduce its workforce by 12 percent over the next 18 months, through the layoffs of as many as 28,000 workers. Much of the restructuring plan focused on the company’s commercial airplane business, affecting those workers who were once part of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, which Boeing had purchased in 1997. In contrast, the company reported it was making strides in its defense and space work.(Tim Smart, “Boeing To Retool, Lay Off Thousands; Condit Cites Need To Reduce Costs,” Washington Post, 14 August 1998.)
 NASA awarded Aerojet, a GenCorp Inc. company, a US$16.4 million contract to provide a de- orbit propulsion stage for the X-38 technology demonstrator vehicle. The contract for design, development, manufacture, test, and delivery of one propulsion stage for the first X-38 spaceflight test included a second option for five operational propulsion units for the crew return vehicle (CRV), if NASA selected the X-38 design for the CRV. Engineers at Dryden Flight Research Center were flight-testing the X-38, a prototype spacecraft intended to lead to the development and construction of a CRV for the ISS.(Defense Daily, “Aerojet Wins $16.4 NASA Contract for X-38 Propulsion,” 20 August 1998.)
 A fire that started in a shed containing an air compressor spread to another building of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), causing extensive damage. No one was injured, and firefighters were able to stop the blaze before it reached laboratories containing hazardous and flammable materials. Fire investigators had not determined the cause of the fire. NASA did not permit the investigators to survey the damage immediately, because of sensitive material housed in the affected building.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire,” 20 August 1998.)
 Phillip Z. Tapper, emergency coordinator for NASA’s GSFC, announced that exposure to smoke and water during the previous day’s fire had damaged parts of two spacecraft. Tapper said that engineers had not yet determined the exact damage to the heat protection panels, which they were planning to install in the Hubble Space Telescope and another spacecraft.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire Damages Spacecraft Parts,” 21 August 1998.)
 NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced the hiring of Space Gateway Support of Herndon, Virginia, to run base operations at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), Patrick Air Force Base, and Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Johnson Controls and EG&G Florida at KSC had previously held base-operations contracts at the military bases. The new joint base-operations- support contract was worth US$1 billion for five years, with the option to renew for another five years. In consolidating the contracts, the agencies intended to cut costs. According to officials, continuing separate base-operations contracts would have cost 30 percent more. Other primary customers under the contract included government contractors for NASA and U.S. Air Force spaceflight operations, payload ground operations, life sciences, expendable vehicles, and launch operations and support.(NASA, “SGS Awarded NASA and Air Force Joint Base Contract,” contract announcement C98-m, 21 August 1998; Joni James, “Base Operations Under 1 Contract,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 August 1998.)
 Fritz Haber, a German engineer recruited after World War II to work on the American space program, died at the age of 86 in Connecticut. An aeronautical engineer, Haber developed a way to simulate a gravity-free environment by flying a plane in a roller-coaster pattern. NASA first used this simulation to train the astronauts in the Apollo program. Before coming to the United States, Haber had developed a way to transport missiles by piggybacking them on another aircraft. Engineers had never used his piggyback design during World War II, but NASA had implemented his idea, carrying the Space Shuttle on a modified Boeing 747 from its landing site in California back to its launch site in Florida.(Ford Burkhart, “Fritz Haber, 86, Dies; Simulated Weightlessness of Space,” New York Times, 29 August 1998. 572 Reuters, “Three Russian Cosmonauts Return Safely to Earth,” 25 August 1998; Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia’s Orbiting Bureaucrat Returns to Earth,” 25 August 1998.)
 Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
 The newly developed Delta III rocket exploded during liftoff, destroying the Galaxy X communications satellite it was carrying into orbit. The launch was the maiden flight of Boeing’s newest version of the Delta rocket, designed to carry 8,400 pounds (3,800 kilograms), twice the payload of the previous version.(Seth Schiesel, “New Type of Rocket To Carry Satellites Explodes in Liftoff,” New York Times, 27 August 1998. 574 NASA, “International Candidates Join 1998 Astronaut Class,” news release 98-155, 27 August 1998.)
 NASA announced the arrival of international astronaut candidates at Johnson Space Center, where they began training as members of the 1998 astronaut class. The international candidates, from Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, and Italy, were Léopold Eyharts, Paolo A. Nespoli, Hans W. Schlegel, and Roberto Vittori of the European Space Agency; Bjarni V. Tryggvason of the Canadian Space Agency; and Marco C. Pontes of the Brazilian Space Agency.
 Pentagon officials announced that, on 12 August, a split-second power outage had caused a Titan IV rocket to explode while launching a secret spy satellite into space. A battery powering the guidance system had failed, interrupting the flow of electricity for a fraction of a second. After the restoration of battery power, the guidance control system had sent a command causing the rocket to pitch down and to the right, while traveling at 675 miles (1,100 kilometers) per hour at 17,000 feet (5,200 meters). The rocket had begun to break up, and the malfunction had triggered the automatic destruct system. In addition, when it had begun to explode, range safety officers had sent the rocket destruct commands, to ensure it would not threaten the coastal population.(Todd Halversen, “Titan 4 Blast Blamed on Brief Battery Power Outage,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 September 1998.)
 The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The board’s findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO “was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures.” However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, “Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead,” New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
 NASA announced that Lunar Prospector’s gamma-ray spectrometer had returned data about the Moon’s elemental composition. Scientists had used the data to develop the first global maps delineating compositional variations of thorium, potassium, and iron ore over the lunar surface. The maps provided insights into how the Moon’s crust had developed. Prospector’s magnetometer and electron-reflectometer data indicated that the Moon contained magnetized rocks on its upper surface, which had created the two smallest known magnetospheres in the solar system. The craft’s Doppler gravity experiment had enabled scientists to develop the “first precise gravity map of the entire lunar surface,” showing seven previously unknown lava-filled craters, which cause gravitational anomalies. NASA also announced that Lunar Prospector had supplied additional evidence of water-ice deposits on both poles of the Moon.(NASA, “Latest Lunar Prospector Findings Indicate Larger Amounts of Polar Water Ice,” news release 98-158, 3 September 1998.)
 NASA awarded contracts to Boeing Information, Space, and Defense Systems; Kelly Space and Technology; Lockheed Martin Astronautics; and Orbital Sciences Corporation Space Access. The five contracting companies would study ways that NASA could meet its requirements for human spaceflight at a lower cost. The studies would examine three scenarios: 1) keeping the Shuttle operational until 2020, 2) replacing the Shuttle when it was cost-effective to do so, and 3) developing an alternative plan in case NASA’s funding remained at FY 1999 levels.(NASA, “NASA Contracts for Future Space Transportation Studies,” news release c98-n, 4 September 1998; Defense Daily, “NASA Awards Future Space Transport Study Contracts,” 8 September 1999.)
 The journal Science published data gathered from NASA’s Lunar Prospector, indicating the presence of hydrogen, often bundled as water molecules, on the north and south poles of the Moon. Alan B. Binder, Chief Scientist for the Lunar Prospector mission, explained that the spacecraft had detected an abundance of hydrogen, and that the science team had interpreted the data to mean that the Moon has 1–10 billion tons (910–9,100 kilograms or 0.9–9.1 billion tonnes) of water. In a previous mission to the Moon to collect data, the spacecraft Clementine had found radar indications of water on the Moon’s south pole. Paul D. Spudis, a member of the Clementine science team, remarked that Prospector’s discovery was significant because “the presence of lunar water has been confirmed by two different research methods.”(D. J. Lawrence et al., “Global Elemental Maps and the Moon: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer,” Science 281, no. 5382 (4 September 1998): 1484–1489; Reuters, “Prospector Finds Water on Moon: NASA Spacecraft Locates Ice at the North and South Poles,” Washington Times, 4 September 1998; Associated Press, “Man in the Moon May Have Plenty To Drink: Abundance of Water Likely; Scientists Foresee Colonization,” Chicago Tribune, 4 September 1998.)
 Boeing successfully launched, from a California launch site, five satellites for the Iridium World Communications network, aboard a Delta II rocket. The Delta II launched two weeks after the “disastrous maiden flight” of the new Delta III rocket, which had exploded during liftoff. Officials announced on 5 September that a problem with the rocket’s control system had caused the explosion, but that they had not yet determined the exact chain of events. The five satellites launched aboard the Delta II rocket replaced satellites that had malfunctioned and could not be included in the Iridium telecommunications constellation.(Justin Ray, “Delta 2 Lifts Five Satellites into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 1998.)
 A Zenit rocket, launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, failed when a computer error caused a premature engine shutdown during the second-stage burn. The rocket fell, crashing in Siberia. The rocket’s failure destroyed 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row,” 13 July 1999; Globalstar Chronology, 13 July 1999, http://www.astronautix.com/craft/glolstar.htm (accessed 6 August 2008).)
 Ghassem R. Asrar, NASA Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about budget concerns and delays associated with the Earth Observing System program. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) had called the hearing to discuss numerous delays in NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise missions. Asrar explained the reasons for the delays, indicating that NASA would work with Raytheon Systems to deliver a scaled-back data system within budget, in time to support two delayed missions. Subcommittee member, Representative David Weldon Jr. (R- FL), “questioned the legitimacy of NASA’s ownership of the Earth Science program,” suggesting that a different agency, such as the National Academy of Sciences or the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), should manage the program. Weldon also questioned whether scientists would be able to make use of the vast amount of data they expected the program to generate. Robert S. Winokur, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, assured subcommittee members that scientists would be able to use the information. Winokur was responsible for coordinating NOAA’s joint efforts with NASA to archive and retrieve environmental data.(Brian Berger, “Earth Science Faces Hurdles: NASA To Forfeit Data Capabilities To Put Key Program on Track,” Space News, 14–20 September 1998.)
 NASA announced that Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had selected Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California, and TRW Inc. Space and Electronics Group of Redondo Beach, California, as industry team members for the Space Interferometry Mission. The Interferometry Mission would measure the precise location of stars and search for planets orbiting nearby stars. The two contracts, which together exceeded US$200 million, included mission formulation and implementation.(NASA, “Contractors Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission,” news release 98-162, 10 September 1998.)
 NASA researchers released images and temperature readings collected by Mars Global Surveyor. The images revealed that the Martian moon Phobos is covered in a layer of dust at least 3 feet (0.9 meters) deep, the result of the impact of meteoroids, occurring over millions of years. Surveyor’s thermal emission spectrometer revealed that, on Phobos, the temperature changes from -170oF to -25oF (-112oC to -32oC) between night and day. Scientists explained that dust accounts for some of the moon’s drastic temperature change, because Phobos does not have an atmosphere enabling it to trap heat. Therefore, the surface’s small particles have only 7 hours to absorb heat from the Sun, losing heat rapidly after sunset. Images of landslides on steep crater slopes indicated that Phobos’s gravity, even at just 1/1,000th of that of Earth, is sufficient to pull objects downward.(NASA, “Martian Moon Phobos Hip-Deep in Powder,” news release 98-164, 11 September 1998; Jane E. Allen for Associated Press, “Martian Moon,” 12 September 1998.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)
 Associate Administrator for the Office of Space Science Wesley T. Huntress Jr. announced the selection of two small spacecraft to undertake the first missions of NASA’s University-class Explorers program, designed to “provide frequent flight opportunities for highly focused and relatively inexpensive science missions.” NASA had selected the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer spacecraft to study the “Local Bubble,” a cloud of hot gas surrounding the solar system and extending approximately 300 light-years from the Sun. NASA selected the Inner Magnetosphere Explorer to study how Earth’s Van Allen radiation belts respond to variations in the solar wind. NASA had scheduled both missions for 2001.(NASA, “NASA Selects First University-Class Explorers,” news release 98-165, 11 September 1998. 164)
 At a ceremony marking its official opening, Virginia Governor James S. Gilmore III announced that Reston-based DynCorp was the first major investor in the Commercial Spaceport Launch Pad at Virginia Space Flight Center on Wallops Island, the nation’s third commercial spaceport. The Virginia Commercial Space Flight Authority, a collaborative effort of the state, the Center for Innovative Technology at Old Dominion University in Virginia, NASA, and private industry, had developed the communications facility, located at one end of NASA’s Wallops Flight Facility. The spaceport was one of 18 sites competing to launch the VentureStarTM, a privately owned space plane still in development, which could eventually carry construction materials to the ISS.(Sonja Barisic, “Firm Gives a Big Boost to Spaceport,” Roanoke Times (VA), 15 September 1998; Karen Jolly Davis, “$4.5 Million Contribution Gives Wallops Island Spaceport a Boost,” Virginian Pilot and the Ledger-Star (Norfolk, VA), 15 September 1998.)
 NASA regained control over SOHO and, after successfully thawing the craft’s fuel, determined that its rocket thrusters were useable. NASA spokesperson William A. Steigerwald of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) explained that flight controllers would check each individual system and instrument next, and would then reestablish full automatic gyroscopic control.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Solar Probe Back Under Control,” 17 September 1998.)
 Scientists studying images taken by NASA’s Galileo spacecraft announced, in a joint teleconference with Cornell University and NASA’s JPL, that Jupiter’s rings appeared to consist of dust, created in the course of millions of years, as asteroids and comets crashed into the four small moons nearest the planet’s surface⎯Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea, and Thebe. The images, captured during several hours in November 1996, when Galileo was able to observe the rings lit up by the Sun, had provided “unprecedented details of the tiny dust particles.” Furthermore, scientists observed that, in the images, “the three rings stopped abruptly at different moons.” Images from a second flyby in September 1997 had confirmed that “the depths of the three rings matched the depths of the moons’ orbits,” and that material in the rings “matched the dark red dust on the moons’ surface.” The scientists said that more moons than rings exist, because some of the moons supply dust to more than one ring.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Jupiter’s Rings Formed by Dust Blasted Off Small Moons,” news release 98-167, 15 September 1998; New York Times, “New Images Clear Up a Jupiter Mystery: Its Rings Are Just Dust,” 16 September 1998; Dennis Cauchon, “Scientists Solve Mystery of Jupiter’s Rings: Pictures Suggest Asteroid Impacts Stirred Moon Dust,” USA Today, 16 September 1998.)
 NASA announced that California Institute of Technology would continue to manage and operate NASA’s JPL under a new five-year contract valued at US$6.25 billion. The contract would support such programs as the Mars Global Surveyor robotic exploration program; the Cassini mission to Saturn; NASA Origins Program missions, including the Space Infrared Telescope Facility; Earth-Observing spacecraft; and the Deep Space Network of communications antennas.(NASA, “NASA Awards New Contract for Operation of Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” news release C98-o, 21 September 1998.)
 NASA awarded its combined space operations contract to Lockheed Martin, covering operations at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland; Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas; Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida; Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama; and Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California. The contract, worth US$1.9 billion for the first five years, with a five-year renewal worth an additional US$1.5 billion, covered the cost of directing, monitoring, and downloading data from spacecraft. NASA estimated that the contract, consolidating work previously done under 17 separate contracts, would save US$1.4 billion over 10 years.(NASA, “Lockheed Martin Space Operations Co. Awarded Contract To Manage NASA’s Space Operations,” contract announcement c98-p, 25 September 1998; Peter Behr, “Lockheed Team Wins NASA Contract; $3.4 Billion Big Beats Out Boeing,” Washington Post, 26 September 1998; Anna Wilde Mathews, “Lockheed Group Wins NASA Pact for $3.44 Billion,” Wall Street Journal, 28 September 1998.)
 NASA announced that an intense wave of gamma rays, emanating from a magnetar 20,000 light- years away from Earth, had struck Earth’s atmosphere on 27 August. Stanford University professor Umran Inan remarked that the occurrence, which had a measurable effect on Earth, was extremely rare, since the event occurred outside the solar system. The radiation wave was “so powerful that it blasted sensitive detectors to maximum or off scale on at least seven scientific spacecraft in Earth-orbit and around the solar system.”(NASA, “Tremendous Gamma-Ray Flare Blasts Earth,” news release 98-172, 29 September 1998.)
 On NASA’s 40th anniversary, President of the Space Frontier Foundation Richard N. Tumlinson and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics about space exploration and the possibility of privatizing space ventures. Tumlinson’s organization advocated limiting NASA’s role to supporting technology and research programs. He proposed commercializing the Shuttle fleet and privatizing NASA field centers, to reduce the costs of space exploration and eventual colonization. Goldin advocated reducing costs as well, but did not respond to Tumlinson’s proposals. He also outlined new technologies that NASA was developing, to cut the cost of rockets and satellites. Goldin remarked that NASA “would form partnerships with industry for ‘cutting-edge research development’,” also emphasizing NASA’s support of government loans to fuel the growth of the space industry in the United States.(Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 2 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “NASA Urged To Sell Shuttles,” 1 October 1998.)
 NASA and Russian Space Agency officials announced that Russia had agreed to sell research time aboard the International Space Station (ISS) for US$60 million, with payment dependent on the Russian agency’s completion of critical milestones. The ISS collaborators, including representatives of the 16 countries participating in the ISS program, had reached the agreement during a week of meetings in Moscow. Russia had missed three target dates because of insufficient funds. The deal, part of NASA’s efforts to bail out its partner and to “prevent costly new delays” in the construction and launch of the ISS, did not release Russia from its obligations to build the service module. As the Moscow meeting concluded, NASA officials also announced that the launches of the first ISS components, the Zarya and Unity modules, remained on schedule, and that the international partners had agreed to reconvene to refine the ISS assembly sequence, at the launch of the Unity module from Kennedy Space Center (KSC).(NASA, “Statement Following Conclusion of Moscow Meetings,” news release 98-176, 2 October 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Agency Makes Sale,” 5 October 1998; William J. Broad, “To Buy Some Time, Russia To Sell U.S. Some Time in Space,” New York Times, 5 October 1998.)
 Pursuant to H. Res. 572, the U.S. House of Representatives agreed to an amended version of H.R. 1702, the Commercial Space Act of 1998.595 The legislation gave the Federal Aviation Administration the authority to issue licenses to private companies for the launch of reusable space vehicles like NASA’s Shuttle. Supporters of the measure stressed that enactment of the law would “better enable American companies to compete in an increasingly competitive international marketplace,” warning that, without this law, the United States would risk losing the space industry to overseas markets. The legislation also required NASA to submit a report and an independently conducted market study to Congress, identifying commercial opportunities and evaluating commercial interest in the development of the ISS.(Jim Abrams for Associated Press, “House Bills Help Federal Workers,” 5 October 1998; Associated Press, “House Sends Senate Bill To Allow Private Space Launches,” 5 October 1998.)
 George W. Lewis Jr., NASA aeronautical engineer and son of George W. Lewis, former research director of NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, died at his home at the age of 81. He had worked for 30 years in Cleveland, Ohio, at Lewis Research Center, which NASA had named for his father.(Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), “George W. Lewis, 81, Was An Engineer at NASA,” 9 October 1998.)
 The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
 U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
 NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HST’s Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASA’s Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HST’s key objectives: to search for the “faintest and farthest objects in the universe.”(NASA, “Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies,” news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
 NASA announced that two of its research pilots had been the first Americans to fly a modified Russian Tu-144 supersonic jetliner, participating in three evaluation flights over a two-week period during mid-to-late September, at Zhukovsky Air Development Center near Moscow. Pilots Robert Rivers of Langley Research Center and C. Gordon Fullerton of Dryden Flight Research Center had flown the jetliner as part of a jointly funded activity under the auspices of NASA’s High-Speed Research Program and the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group. The purpose of the test flights was to gain operational experience and experimental flight data to develop an “environmentally friendly, second-generation, supersonic transport” in the United States.(NASA, “NASA Pilots Fly Russian Tu-144LL Flying Laboratory,” news release 98-186, 13 October 1998.)
 NASA announced that it had restructured and renamed its Office of Aeronautics and Space Transportation Technology, known as Code R, appointing retired U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Spence M. Armstrong to head the newly reorganized Office of Aero-Space Technology. NASA’s spokesperson said that NASA’s management had created three new divisions within the Office⎯Goals, Programs, and Institutions⎯to help NASA achieve its goals. Major goals included accessing space more cheaply, with reusable launch vehicle programs; creating greater synergy between aeronautics and space transportation technology; decreasing aircraft accident rates, while tripling the nation’s aviation-system capacity; diminishing aircraft noise and emissions; and reducing the cost of air travel and the cost of placing payloads in orbit. The role of the Goals Division would be to implement the challenging development of new technologies; that of the Programs Division would be to manage the various programs within the Office, and the Institutions Division would oversee “institutional problems at the field centers.”(NASA, “Aeronautics Enterprise Reorganizes and Changes Name,” news release 98-187, 14 October; Aerospace Daily, “NASA Renames, Reorganizes Code R under Armstrong,” 15 October 1998.)
 NASA officials announced that U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. would not participate in the melatonin portion of a sleep study planned for the upcoming Shuttle mission. The study’s principal investigator, Charles A. Czeisler of Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston said that Glenn had failed to meet one of the medical criteria for the study. Czeisler did not specify the reason, and Glenn declined to elaborate. Researchers had rated the melatonin experiment as one of two top priorities among the human studies to take place during Glenn’s Shuttle flight. Four members of the Shuttle flight for the Neurolab mission, which occurred earlier in 1998, had participated in the melatonin study, and Chiaki Mukai, a member of Glenn’s crew, would be a fifth participant. However, Glenn’s disqualification meant that the scientists would be unable to test two of their four hypotheses.(Lawrence K. Altman, “Glenn Unable To Perform Experiment Planned for Space Flight,” New York Times, 21 October 1998.)
 After experiencing two disastrous launch failures in 1996 and 1997, the European Space Agency (ESA) successfully launched its French-made Ariane 5 rocket and recoverable space capsule from Korou, French Guiana. The 1.6 million-pound (800-ton, 726,000-kilogram, or 726-tonne) rocket carried a 2.6-tonne (2.9-ton, 5,700-pound, or 2,600-kilogram) mock-up of a telecommunications satellite and a 2.8-tonne (3.1-ton, 6,200-pound, or 2,800-kilogram) recoverable capsule. With the successful recovery of the capsule from the Pacific Ocean, France became the fourth country to develop such technology, following the United States, Russia, and China. French scientists had designed the Ariane 5 rocket to carry payloads of 5.9−6.8 tonnes (6.5−7.5 tons, 13,000−15,000 pounds, or 5,900−6,800 kilograms) into geostationary orbit, using twice the power of the Ariane 4; to provide launches for low-altitude orbits and interplanetary space probes; and to lift the cargo vehicle that would be the ESA’s contribution to the ISS.(John-Thor Dahlburg, “Third Try’s the Charm for European Rocket,” Los Angeles Times, 22 October 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Ariane Capsule Test Called a Success,” 21 October 1998.)
 Scientists studying Galileo data published findings in the journal Nature describing the likely presence of a subsurface, liquid, salty ocean on Callisto, Jupiter’s second largest moon. Margaret G. Kivelson, space physics professor at the University of California at Los Angeles and NASA’s Principal Investigator for Galileo’s magnetometer instrument, explained that data showed variability in Callisto’s magnetic field similar to that of another Jupiter moon, Europa. However, neither Callisto’s atmosphere, which lacks charged particles, nor Callisto’s icy crust, is a good conductor for generating a magnetic field. Kivelson explained that a layer of salty melted ice could carry “sufficient electrical currents to produce the magnetic field.” In addition, she noted that Galileo data indicated electrical currents flowing in opposite directions at different times, a “key signature consistent with the idea of a salty ocean.” However, scientists had concluded that, unlike Europa, Callisto was unlikely ever to support life, even if it had an ocean, because of its insufficient energy sources. Callisto’s only apparent source of heat is radioactive elements, whereas Europa’s closer position to Jupiter means it possesses tidal energy.(NASA, “Jupiter’s Moon Callisto May Hide Salty Ocean,” news release 98-192, 21 October 1998; K. K. Khurana et al., “Induced Magnetic Fields as Evidence for Subsurface Oceans in Europa and Callisto,” Nature 395, no. 6704 (22 October 1998): 777–780.)
 NASA successfully launched Deep Space 1, a spacecraft that could “think for itself.” Driven by ion propulsion, Deep Space 1 was the first craft to rely on this technology for its primary propulsion. The craft’s destination was an asteroid 120 million miles (193 million kilometers) away from Earth. Although tracking stations encountered initial difficulties receiving signals from the spacecraft, Deep Space 1 communicated 2 hours after liftoff that it was on “the right course” and “in good shape.” NASA scientists expected the spacecraft to travel 450 million miles (724 million kilometers) to catch up with the moving asteroid. Without the ion-propulsion technology, it would have required 10 times more fuel to reach its target. The craft was also flying with 10 other “futuristic technologies,” such as lens-covered solar arrays to generate additional power, and a radio beacon to communicate with ground controllers without their prompting the probe from Earth.(New York Times, “U.S. Launches a Spacecraft That Thinks for Itself,” 25 October 1998.)
 The third and final Progress cargo spacecraft of the year, Progress M-40, arrived at Mir, docking smoothly and delivering food, water, fuel, a giant space mirror, and other scientific equipment. NASA had delayed the cargo craft’s launch several times since its originally scheduled launch date in August 1998.(Associated Press, “Mir,” 27 October 1998; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 540, 1 November 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx540.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
 Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration reported that they had placed GOES-8, the weather satellite responsible for monitoring the East Coast, in a “safe hold shutdown,” after it had developed problems with its attitude sensors. GOES-10 was then required to watch the entire country, although it could provide images only every 30 minutes, instead of every 15 minutes, as it did when each of the two satellites was able to monitor half of the United States. NASA officials were especially concerned about monitoring East Coast weather, because of worry that winds from Hurricane Mitch, located over the coast of Central America, could interfere with the upcoming launch of the Space Shuttle carrying veteran astronaut, U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr.(Randolph E. Schmid for Associated Press, “East Weather Satellite Shuts Down,” 28 October 1998.)
 NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a five-year, US$99.3 million contract to Sverdrup Technology Inc. of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to provide testing and facility operation, including wind tunnels and arc-jet testing.(NASA, “NASA Awards $99 Million Contract to Tennessee Firm,” contract announcement C98-q, 27 October 1998.)
 NASA awarded KSC Small Expendable Launch Vehicle Services (SELVS-KSC) contracts to Coleman Research Corporation of Orlando, Florida, and Orbital Sciences Corporation of Dulles, Virginia, to provide launch services for NASA and for NASA-sponsored small-class payloads. These indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contracts, ranging in value from US$100,000 to US$400,000, were part of NASA’s effort to fulfill the goals and objectives of its Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. NASA expected to award up to 16 missions over the contract’s five-year period.(NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts for Small Payloads,” contract announcement c98-r, 28 October 1998.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-95 launched from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr.; Pilot Steven W. Lindsey; Mission Specialists Scott E. Parazynski, Stephen K. Robinson, and Pedro Duque; and Payload Specialists Chiaki Mukai and John H. Glenn Jr. The primary objectives of STS-95 included conveying a variety of science experiments inside the SPACEHAB module; deploying and retrieving the Spartan free-flyer payload; performing operations with the HST Orbiting Systems Test; and transporting the International Extreme Ultraviolet Hitchhiker payloads. The historic mission also returned veteran astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. to space. Thirty-six years after Glenn had first orbited Earth, the seventy-seven-year-old astronaut became the oldest person to fly in orbit. As a veteran of NASA’s early Mercury program, Glenn had been the first American to orbit Earth. On 20 February 1962, in a flight lasting 5 hours, Glenn had orbited Earth three times in a tiny capsule. After he had passed a battery of medical tests and participated in astronaut training, NASA had selected U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. as a crew member of STS-95, so that scientists could study “how space travel affects an aging astronaut’s body.”(Bill Sammon, “Senator Upholds Status as Hero with His Return to Orbit,” Washington Times, 30 October 1998; John Noble Wilford, “Pioneer Returns as Crewman in the Shuttle,” New York Times, 29 October 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-95, John Glenn’s Flight; SPACEHAB,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-95.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
 NASA’s Ames Research Center awarded a six-year, US$90 million contract to Logicon Syscon Inc. of Falls Church, Virginia, to provide operations, development, maintenance, and modification of the Center’s aeronautical simulation facilities. The contract included the operation and maintenance of the world’s largest motion-base simulator, the Vertical Motion Simulator, designed to aid in the study of helicopter and vertical short takeoff and landing issues, as well as the Crew-Vehicle Systems Research Facility, designed for the study of human factors in aviation safety.(NASA, “NASA Awards $90 Million Contract to Virginia Firm,” news release c98-s, 2 November 1998.)
 Astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery successfully retrieved the Spartan spacecraft, thus completing a priority project of the nine-day mission. The crew had deployed the satellite on 1 November, to record observations of the Sun’s outer atmosphere and the solar wind. Spartan had lagged 40 miles (64 kilometers) behind the Shuttle, in free flight, as it recorded the data. The flight was the last in a series of four flights begun in 1993 to “gather observations at different points in the [S]un’s 11-year cycle of magnetic activity.” NASA had originally scheduled the mission for November 1997, but astronauts had “failed to send a crucial command” before releasing the satellite, so Spartan had gathered no data. The crew had also tested an experimental laser range-finding device mounted in the Shuttle, aiming at targets on Spartan.(Washington Times, “Glenn Reports No Space Sickness as Discovery Releases Sun Gazer,” 2 November 1998; Washington Times, “Astronauts Snag Sun Observer To Complete a Primary Mission: Glenn, 77, Undergoes More Tests of His Response to Space,” 4 November 1998; New York Times, “Shuttle Easily Regains Satellite, and Photos,” 4 November 1998.)
 Astronaut John H. Glenn Jr. and his crewmates returned to Earth aboard Space Shuttle Discovery. Despite concern that the landing might be rough, because of a missing door on Discovery’s drag chute, the craft landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. The door had fallen off during the 29 October launch. Mission Control had warned Pilot Steven W. Lindsey that a braking chute might deploy unexpectedly, but it remained safely in place throughout the landing process.(Kathy Sawyer, “Glenn Floats Back to Earth on the Wings of Discovery,” Washington Post, 8 November 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-95,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/ sts-95.html (accessed 11 June 2007).)
 The ion-propulsion engine on NASA’s Deep Space 1 probe shut down suddenly after running for 41⁄2 minutes, the first time the probe had turned on its engine since the spacecraft’s launch three weeks before. Ground controllers did not know the cause of the shutdown and made several unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine.(Washington Times, “Engine Failure Strikes Space Probe,” 12 November 1998; New York Times, “Innovative Engine on U.S. Spacecraft Mysteriously Shuts Down,” 13 November 1998.)
 Ground controllers in Madrid, Spain, lost contact with the Voyager 2 spacecraft as it approached the edge of the solar system but were able to reestablish communication. The probe was “powering down to conserve its plutonium energy source” when controllers lost contact. NASA had launched Voyager 2 in 1977. After the craft had toured Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, NASA located it traveling toward the edge of the solar system, at about 5.2 billion miles (8.4 billion kilometers) from Earth. Scientists did not know why controllers had temporarily lost communication with the craft.(Associated Press, “Voyager Glitch,” 18 November 1998. 172)
 Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
 Satellites survived the annual Leonid meteor storm with no major damage. Astronomers had predicted the storm would be the most intense in three decades, because Comet Tempel-Tuttle had swung closer to the Sun in February, as it does every 33 years, creating a greater-than- average amount of comet dust. Scientists had feared that particles traveling at 43 miles (69 kilometers) per second could shred satellites’ solar arrays, damage sensitive instruments, or cause circuits to short.
 NASA’s ER-2 aircraft, a “close relative” of the U-2 spy plane, officially broke the altitude record for medium-weight planes when it flew to 68,700 feet (20,900 meters), nearly twice the cruising altitude of commercial airliners, during a mission to measure components of the atmosphere. A Canadian P-42 aircraft had set the previous record of 62,500 feet (19,050 meters) in 1988. NASA officials said the craft had flown at such altitudes in the past, but this flight was the first time that scientists had documented its altitude and made it public.(Agence France-Presse, “NASA Airplane Flies High into Sky: ER-2 Able To Break Record for Altitude,” Washington Times, 23 November 1998.)
 After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
 Russia’s first privately owned satellite, a Bonum-1 communications satellite, launched successfully from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a Delta rocket. NASA had canceled the first three attempts to launch the satellite because of numerous technical problems. The launch was also the first time a U.S. rocket had placed a Russian commercial satellite in orbit and the first time an American company had built a satellite for a Russian company. Hughes Space and Communications had built the Bonum-1 for Moscow-based Media Most, owner of Russia’s largest television network. The chairperson of the board of Media Most, Vladimir A. Goussinsky, described the event as a “revolution,” because the satellite would provide up to 50 television channels for 200 million viewers in Russia, western Siberia, and Eastern Europe.(Robyn Suriano, “Delta Lifts Russian Satellite,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 November 1998; Orlando Sentinel (FL), “U.S. Broadcast Satellite Was Launched for Russia,” 23 November 1998.)
 NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
 NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory announced that the ion engine responsible for the Deep Space 1 probe’s primary propulsion was back in operation after its unexpected shutdown two weeks earlier. Scientists believed that metallic grit or another type of contaminant located between two high-voltage grids had caused the engine to shut down after running for 41⁄2 minutes.(NASA, “Deep Space 1 Ion Propulsion System Starts Up,” news release 98-215, 25 November 1998; Associated Press, “Spacecraft’s Troubled Ion Engine Restarts,” Washington Post, 26 November 1998.)
 Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
 NASA announced its selection of Litton/PRC of Mclean, Virginia, to perform work under NASA’s sounding rocket operations contract, consolidating several previous contracts. The four- year contract, an indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contract worth between US$11.9 million and US$211.8 million, included two three-year options worth up to an additional US$572.5 million. Goddard Space Flight Center’s (GSFC’s) Wallops Flight Facility, at Wallops Island, Virginia, was to provide services, including design, fabrication, integration, testing, and performance of mission operations for sounding rocket missions. NASA considered the contract an integral part of the Wallops 2000 strategic plan, initiated in 1997 to ensure the facility’s future “stability and vitality.”(NASA, “NASA Selects Litton/PRC for NASA Sounding Rocket Program,” contract announcement C98-t, 1 December 1998.)
 NASA awarded US$33 million in grants to 48 researchers, to conduct microgravity biotechnology research through NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications. To those investigators awarded the 40 grants for ground-based research, NASA provided access to its microgravity research facilities, including aircraft flying parabolic trajectories and sounding rockets. NASA awarded eight grants to flight-definition investigators, to prepare for experiments on the International Space Station (ISS).(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Biotechnology,” news release 98-217, 1 December 1998.)
 NASA modified a contract with Boeing Information, Space and Defense Systems, increasing by US$163.4 million the company’s contract for work on the ISS. Under the modified contract, Boeing would supply additional engineering support and prelaunch testing for the ISS. The original eight-year prime contract, effective since 1995, had a value of US$7.1 billion and covered the construction and integration of the ISS. The modification covered sustained engineering for station elements, engineering support following a component’s delivery to NASA, and support of multielement integrated testing.(NASA, “Engineering and Testing Support To Be Supplied by International Space Station Contract Modification,” contract announcement c98-u, 2 December 1998.)
 NASA announced that Raytheon STX Corporation of Lanham, Maryland, would provide routine data operations, research, and development support for the Space Science Data Operations Office and the National Space Science Data Center at GSFC, under a two-year contract with three one- year options. Valued at more than US$33 million, the contract covered the processing of space- science data and the acquisition, modeling, analysis, archiving, and dissemination of NASA’s archival data to the scientific community, educators, and the public.(NASA, “NASA Selects Raytheon STX To Provide Goddard Support,” contract announcement c98-v, 2 December 1998.)
 After a one-day delay, Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, James H. Newman, and Sergei K. Krikalev. The purpose of STS-88 was to connect the U.S.-built Unity module of the ISS to the first ISS component, Zarya. The Russian Space Agency had placed Zarya in orbit in November. Launch controllers had scrubbed the liftoff of Endeavour planned for 3 December, after the master alarm sounded in the cockpit with only 41⁄2 minutes remaining in the 10-minute countdown window. Engineers had determined that the alarm indicated momentary low pressure in the hydraulics system. The crew experienced no problems with the second launch, until another alarm sounded shortly after they had reached orbit, indicating that one of three hydraulic power units had overheated. The crew then switched to a backup controller to allow the overheated unit to cool before shutting down each unit as planned.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 4 December 1998; Brad Liston for Reuters, “NASA Hopes for Another Shuttle Try on Friday,” 3 December 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-88, First International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-88.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
 A modified L-1011 jetliner flying at 40,000 feet (12,000 meters) dropped a Pegasus XL rocket carrying the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS), designed to study the formation of stars and planets. The launch marked the beginning of a two-year, US$64 million mission to learn more about the “composition of interstellar clouds and monitor how they cool as they collapse to form stars and planets.” The 397-pound (179-kilogram) SWAS would study water, molecular oxygen, atomic carbon, and isotopic carbon monoxide, by means of submillimeter wave radiation, which scientists cannot observe from the ground. NASA’s GSFC managed the mission.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Probe To Study Stars,” 5 December 1998; CNN.com, “NASA Launches Satellite To Study Star Formation,” http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9812/05/swas.launch/ (accessed 27 October 2008).)
 Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
 At an American Geophysical Union meeting, a team of research scientists led by David E. Smith of GSFC discussed new research findings based on data collected in the spring and summer by the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA). The data indicated that the ice cap on Mars’s north pole, although definitely water ice, is much smaller than previously thought. The scientists concluded that the amount of water in the ice cap is not voluminous enough to have created the “deep gullies that scar the surface of the planet,” nor could it have filled an ancient ocean. MOLA images showed the ice cap resting in a deep basin, possibly created by an asteroid impact. Scientists described this formation as unique in the solar system. The team of researchers remarked that their findings raised more questions about Mars’s formation and conditions than they answered.(NASA, “Laser Provides First 3-D View of Mars’ North Pole,” news release 98-219, 7 December 1998; Joseph B. Verrenga for Associated Press, “Icecap Seen on Mars’ North Pole,” 6 December 1998; Maria T. Zuber et al., “Observations of the North Polar Region of Mars from the Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter,” Science 282, no. 5396 (11 December 1998): 2053.)
 Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook a 41⁄2-hour-long spacewalk, to install 40 electrical and data connectors linking the U.S.-built connecting module Unity with the Russian-built power module Zarya. The pair also bolted handrails to the side of Unity and photographed two of Zarya’s backup docking antennas, which had failed to deploy. Russian ground controllers sent commands to power up Zarya, jump-starting Unity’s electrical systems. Ross and Newman then removed thermal covers from Unity’s outside computers to prevent overheating.(Paul Hoversten, “Spacewalkers Complete a Tricky Wiring Job,” USA Today, 8 December 1998.)
 Intel Corporation agreed to grant NASA, the U.S. Department of Energy, Sandia National Laboratory, and the U.S. Armed Forces a royalty-free license to adapt the Pentium chip to withstand extreme radiation, so that other agencies could use it in spacecraft and military equipment.(Dean Takahashi, “Intel Corp. To Send Its Pentium Chip into Outer Space: Firm To Grant Royalty-Free License to U.S. To Adapt Product for Spaceships,” Wall Street Journal, 9 December 1998.)
 Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman undertook their second spacewalk, lasting 7 hours, to install two 100-pound (45.4-kilogram) communications antennas on each side of the Unity module. They hooked one of the antennas to a video cable running from the Zarya module. Then the two astronauts erected a folding sunshade over a computer outside of Unity, bundling loose cables that ran along the exterior of the module. Ross and Newman also removed the restraints that had stabilized the four Unity hatchways during the launch. Finally, Newman successfully tapped free one of Zarya’s stuck antennas, using a 10-foot-long (3-meter-long), extendable grappling hook.(Warren E. Leary, “2 Astronauts Make 2d Space Walk To Install Antennas on Station,” New York Times, 10 December 1998.)
 Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
 After a one-day delay to correct a software problem, Mars Climate Orbiter launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Delta II rocket. NASA had scheduled the 1,400-pound (635-kilogram) robotic craft, paired with Mars Polar Lander, to launch on 3 January 1999. Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, the second pair headed to study Mars following Mars Pathfinder and Mars Global Surveyor, were part of NASA’s “long-term strategy for Mars exploration,” calling for small robotic craft “to leave Earth two at a time,” about every two years. According to NASA’s plan, Climate Orbiter’s first task would be to provide a two-way communications relay between ground controllers and Polar Lander after Lander’s arrival and during its planned 60–90 day mission. Thereafter, Orbiter would generate weather maps and profile the Martian atmosphere for a full Martian year, or 687 days.(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Probe To Examine Climate; NASA Launch Is First of Two Designed To Shed Light on Potential for Life,” Washington Post, 12 December 1998.)
 Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman made their final spacewalk to free the second Russian docking antenna on Zarya, which had failed to unfurl. The pair also finished outfitting the station. The astronauts had required a total of 21 hours over three spacewalks to complete the work.(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup.”)
 Ending one of NASA’s “most successful and historic missions” with a rare night landing, Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after its weeklong linkup with the new ISS. Before departing the ISS on 13 December, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow flew around the station slowly, while the crew photographed the ISS, permitting ground controllers to see the station for the first time. NASA’s Deputy Station Chief Frank L. Culbertson Jr. remarked that the mission was as historically significant as that of Apollo 8, the first piloted mission to the Moon, and that the hardware of ISS was the foundation of “what will put humanity in space forever.”(Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup”; United Press International, “Shuttle Lands in Florida,” 15 December 1998; NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-88,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-88.html.)
 NASA’s tailless, single-engine, 18-foot-long (5.5-meter-long) X-36 airplane resumed flight- testing a system to help a damaged airplane continue its flight. Over a 20-minute period, a pilot used remote control from the ground to fly the plane, sending signals to simulate damage. The first in a series of five to 10 flights, the test was part of Reconfigurable Control for Tailless Fighter Aircraft (RESTORE). RESTORE was testing neural-network software that permitted a plane to reconfigure flight-control surfaces automatically. The software would have both civil and military applications.(Jim Skeen, “A Bird Without a Tail; Craft Will Mimic Damaged Airplane,” Los Angeles Daily News, 18 December 1998.)
 KSC officials broke ground on a complex for testing a NASA experimental rocket, the X-34. Engineers had designed the vehicle⎯a small, winged rocket⎯to launch into orbit from an airplane and to return to Earth, landing like an airplane. Planning flight tests to begin in 2000, KSC hoped the new facility would attract commercial space enterprises, such as Lockheed’s VentureStarTM, still under development. Facilities anywhere in the country would be able to launch the VentureStarTM, once completed, because it would not use boosters or fuel tanks and, therefore, would not require a coastal launch site.(Robyn Suriano, “NASA Breaks Ground for $8 Million Complex To Serve New Rocket, Attract VentureStar,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 December 1998.)
 NASA announced it had renamed the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility the Chandra X-ray Observatory, in honor of the late Nobel Laureate Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. NASA chose the name Chandra because it was the late scientist’s preferred name among friends and colleagues, and because it means moon or luminous in Sanskrit. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented that Chandrasekhar had made “fundamental contributions to the theory of black holes and other phenomena,” which the Chandra X-ray Observatory would study. NASA also announced that it had set a new launch date for the observatory⎯no earlier than 8 April 1999.(NASA, “NASA Renames Telescope and Sets New Launch Date,” news release 98-225, 21 December 1998. 644 Bill Scanlon, “CSU Will Lead NASA Cloud Study $145 Million Project Is Designed To Improve Weather Forecasts, Study Global Warming,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver), 30 December 1998.)
 NASA announced that Colorado State University would lead a US$145 million study of clouds, to better understand global warming and to “dramatically improve” weather forecasts. The five- year project would use a satellite named CloudSat to capture three-dimensional global images of clouds.
