 NASA launched Mars Polar Lander from Cape Canaveral, Florida, atop a Boeing Delta II rocket, three weeks after the launch of its companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter. The craft’s main purpose was to search Mars for signs of water. Lander carried machinery and two microprobes, as well as a microphone to record the sounds of Martian wind. Mars Polar Lander and Mars Climate Orbiter formed a pair, the second launched in a 12-year series of dual missions to explore Mars, with the ultimate goal of collecting a sample of Martian soil to bring to Earth by 2008.(Reuters, “U.S. Mars Probe Launched from Florida,” 3 January 1999; Beth Dickey, “Craft Joins Mars Quest for Water,” New York Times, 4 January 1999.)
 An independent study group commissioned by the U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the loss of business at Florida’s Cape Canaveral Air Force Station. Retired U.S. Air Force General Richard C. Henry had headed the group, comprising 11 government agencies and 19 aerospace firms. After surveying commercial launch companies and satellite manufacturers, the group had measured the cost and ease of doing business at Cape Canaveral against three prime competitors: the European Space Agency’s Kourou Space Center in French Guiana, South America; Kazakhstan’s Baikonur Cosmodrome, primarily used by Russia; and China’s Xichang Space Center. General Richard Henry summarized the crux of the group’s findings: “companies regard Canaveral as superb in location and facilities, but rank it second primarily because of the perception that the commercial customer is second to the government customer.” Companies had sought launch services elsewhere to avoid the bureaucratic red tape associated with Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, operated by the U.S. Air Force. With increasing demand, spaceports in South America, Russia, and China had been doing more business during the previous two decades, at Florida’s expense. The group issued three recommendations to correct the situation and to attract business to Florida: 1) boost the number of launches staged from Cape Canaveral, 2) shift to customer-friendly operations, and 3) modernize launch-support systems at the spaceport, many of which the United States had first implemented in the late 1950s and early 1960s.(Todd Halvorson, “Study: Spaceport Must Change or Lose,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 January 1999. 647 Michelle Mittelstadt for the Associated Press, “NASA Ends Moscow Charter Flights,” 7 January 1999.)
 NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross released a report estimating that NASA had “spent [US]$3 million in ‘excessive costs’” on its Houston-to-Moscow air-charter program. The investigators criticized the program, saying it was more expensive than commercial travel. An investigation had revealed that the flights, which typically used Boeing 727s seating 143 travelers, sometimes carried as few as nine people. The charter flights originated in Houston and usually stopped in Huntsville, Alabama, and Washington, DC, before continuing on to Moscow. A few weeks before the release of the report, NASA’s Office of Space Flight had rejected a recommendation from the Inspector General to terminate the service, arguing that the program “provided ‘tangible and intangible’ benefits to workers on the International Space Station [ISS].” NASA had developed the program as a cost-saving measure and as an alternative to contracting with the U.S. Department of Defense to transport employees involved with the multibillion- dollar space station program. The Inspector General found that the chartered flights averaged around 50 people; NASA had estimated a 90-passenger threshold for the program to realize savings. In response to the demand of U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) that NASA “halt this waste immediately,” Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would terminate the program “as soon as practical.”
 Mario Dario Grossi, radio physicist and engineer, died at the age of 74 in Boston, Massachusetts. Grossi developed the concept of tethered satellites and the hardware to make them possible. Together with a colleague, Grossi had conducted most of his work at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. Grossi had first approached NASA with his concept in 1972, and in 1982 NASA had issued a contract to build a system. In July 1992, NASA had tested the tether in space when astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-46 “reeled out a half-ton [450- kilogram or 0.45-tonne] satellite of the Italian Space Agency dangling on a spaghetti-thin cord 12 miles [19 kilometers] long.” The successful test had provided data that would assist engineers in applying the tether satellite technology to build space stations or in “operating instrument- laden satellites far from the [S]huttle.”(Wolfgang Saxon, “M. Grossi, 74; Created Tether for Satellites,” New York Times, 18 January 1999.)
 The National Research Council Committee on Space Shuttle Upgrades released a report cautioning NASA “not to wait too long to choose between keeping the Shuttle until 2020 or scrapping it after 2012 in favor of a new vehicle like Lockheed Martin’s proposed VentureStar.” The committee, led by former astronaut and former head of the Space Shuttle Program Bryan D. O’Connor, advised NASA to make a timely decision to either phase out the Shuttle upgrade program or make the major investments necessary for the Shuttle to carry out reliably its long- term mission. The panel specifically addressed the Liquid Fly Back Booster (LFBB), the most expensive Shuttle upgrade under consideration, with development costs estimated at between US$2 billion and US$7 billion. The panel’s report revealed that NASA had not investigated enough alternatives to the LFBB to ensure that it was “the most appropriate way to meet the needs of the Shuttle and other programs.”(Aerospace Daily, “NRC Panel Worried NASA Hasn’t Studied Alternatives to LFBB,” 13 January 1999.)
 NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that the plutonium-powered Cassini spacecraft, en route to Saturn, had entered safe mode on 11 January. The craft, NASA’s largest and most complex interplanetary probe, had detected a possible error in its orientation, which prompted it to halt all “non-critical” activity, while maintaining its communications link with Earth.(Associated Press, “Saturn-Bound Spacecraft Develops Problem, JPL Says,” Los Angeles Times, 14 January 1999. 651 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cunningham, Cook Named to Mars Posts,” news release 99-03, 13 January 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/marsappts.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
 JPL appointed Glenn E. Cunningham, Manager of NASA’s Mars Surveyor Operations Project, as the new Deputy Director of JPL’s Mars Exploration Directorate. In the newly created position, JPL tasked Cunningham with overseeing the implementation and operations of all Mars missions through 2013. As Cunningham’s successor, JPL appointed Richard A. Cook, former Flight Operations Manager for the 1997 Mars Pathfinder Lander and Rover Mission, to manage the Mars Surveyor Operations Project.
 At a Boeing Company awards ceremony, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and U. S. Representative Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) recognized “members of the Delta launch team who were instrumental in sending NASA spacecraft to Mars,” awarding Jay L. Witzling, Vice President of Delta Programs, with NASA’s Public Service Medal. Other critical leaders in the program also received awards for their dedication and participation. In his remarks, Goldin commented on the characteristics that made Boeing’s Delta rocket “more and more the launch vehicle of choice.” Goldin explained that the Delta rocket was the least expensive launch vehicle, had the fastest turnaround, and had demonstrated the highest degree of reliability. Goldin also commented that the four launches to Mars aboard Delta rockets had “changed the face of the space program.”(PR Newswire, “Mars Missions Earn Honors for Boeing Delta Employees, NASA’s Goldin and Congressman Rohrabacher Present Awards,” 27 January 1999.)
 NASA announced that NASA scientists and other weather researchers had “gained intriguing new information about upper-level winds that drive hurricanes and about the storms’ devastating impact as they collide with mountains.” The research findings were the result of a seven-week study conducted by NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and several universities during the previous summer, as part of the Third Convection and Moisture Experiment (CAMEX-3). The study’s purpose was to gauge the strength of Atlantic hurricane winds and rainfall. CAMEX-3 researchers had used data collected with special laser instruments aboard NASA’s DC-8 aircraft, which flew through hurricanes Bonnie, Danielle, Earl, and Georges; data collected from NASA’s ER-2 high-altitude aircraft, which flew above the hurricanes to collect “first-of its-kind data”; and data from the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission satellite. Edward J. Zipser of Texas A&M University remarked, “the multi-aircraft datasets obtained by NASA aircraft in these hurricanes are unprecedented in their comprehensiveness.”(NASA, “NASA Hurricane Study Reveals Intriguing Results,” news release 99-4, 15 January 1999.)
 After having agreed in June 1998 to abandon the space station within a year, Russian Prime Minister Yevgeny M. Primakov issued a decree to keep Mir in space for three more years, using private funds, so that Russia could dedicate its insufficient space budget to its ISS commitments. The decree reportedly mentioned that Russian and foreign contractors and investors would develop a plan allowing Mir to remain in orbit without using ISS-allocated funds.(Peter N. Spotts, “Saving Mir: At What Cost to New Space Station? Russians Decree That They Will Keep Aging Orbital Outpost Raises Questions in U.S. About Their Ability To Fund International Project,” Christian Science Monitor, 25 January 1999.)
 Astronomers captured for the first time optical images of a gamma-ray burst (GRB) as it was occurring. Detectors of the Burst and Transient Source Experiment (BATSE) on NASA’s orbiting Compton Gamma Ray Observatory detected the GRB as it began and radioed its position to the Gamma Ray Burst Coordinates Network (GCN) at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). GSFC immediately forwarded the position to astronomers around the world. In response to this signal, the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE) team in Los Alamos, New Mexico, photographed the patch of sky where the GRB was occurring. Using precise information from instruments aboard the Italian-Dutch BeppoSAX satellite, the ROTSE team was able to locate the GRB within the images they had captured. Astronomer Scott D. Barthelmy of GSFC remarked that capturing a burst as it unfolded was the “holy grail” of GCN, and that, previously, optical telescopes had only seen the afterglow of a burst, never the burst itself.(NASA, “Gamma Ray Burst Imaged for the First Time,” news release 99-8, 27 January 1999.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Lori B. Garver as Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Policy and Plans, effective immediately. Garver had served as Acting Associate Administrator since September 1998. She had begun working for NASA in 1996 as Special Assistant to the Administrator. Before joining NASA, she had been Executive Director of the National Space Society, since 1987, and a president of Women in Aerospace. Goldin remarked that Garver’s experience inside and outside NASA had “proven invaluable,” and that she had demonstrated the management skills and policy leadership that her new position required.(NASA, “Garver Named Associate Administrator for Policy and Plans,” news release 99-6, 25 January 1999.)
 NASA announced that it had selected, from among 35 proposals, five candidates for participation in its Medium-Class Explorer (MIDEX) program. Each of the candidates received US$350,000 to conduct a four-month implementation feasibility study. NASA planned to study these proposals rigorously over the following five months, before choosing the two MIDEX program participants. The five proposals selected for further study were 1) the Swift Gamma Ray Burst Explorer, a three-telescope space observatory for studying the position, brightness, and physical properties of GRBs; 2) the NGSS or Next Generation Sky Survey, a four-channel, supercooled, infrared telescope designed to survey the entire sky with 1,000 times more sensitivity than previous missions; 3) FAME, the Full-Sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer, a space telescope designed to obtain highly precise position and brightness measurements of 40 million stars; 4) the AMM or Auroral Multiscale MIDEX Mission, a formation of four identically instrumented small satellites in a near-polar, highly elliptical orbit; and 5) ASCE, Advanced Solar Coronal Explorer, a powerful solar telescope, which would reveal the physical processes in the Sun that lead to the solar wind and explosive coronal mass ejections. NASA had also selected instruments from two proposed MIDEX missions for technology-development funding. NASA awarded US$700,000 each to Richard E. Rothschild of the University of California at San Diego, to develop an x-ray detector for studying black holes of all sizes, and to Gary R. Swenson of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, to develop detectors for studying waves in Earth’s upper atmosphere.(NASA, “Five Explorer Mission Proposals Picked for Feasibility Studies,” news release 99-7, 26 January 1999. 658 Business Wire, “Kathryn D. Sullivan Elected to McDermott International Board of Directors,” 2 February 1999.)
 McDermott International Inc., a worldwide energy services company, announced the election to its board of directors of Kathryn D. Sullivan, President and CEO of the Ohio Center for Science and Industry since 1996. Before serving in that position, Sullivan had been a chief scientist at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and before that, she had been an astronaut and mission specialist at NASA. In 1978 NASA had selected Sullivan as a mission specialist for the first class of Space Shuttle astronauts. In 1984, while serving on a mission aboard Space Shuttle Challenger, she had become the first American woman to walk in space. Sullivan had also flown aboard Space Shuttle Discovery on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) deployment mission in 1990 and aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis with the ATLAS-1 Spacelab flight in 1992.
 The Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel, established by Congress after the Apollo 1 spacecraft fire on 27 January 1967, submitted its annual report to NASA. The panel found Shuttle safety satisfactory, but cautioned that cutbacks, such as hiring freezes and budgetary restrictions, had created a “looming crisis” of future shortfalls in the workforce. The panel warned that NASA was at risk of “losing the core competencies needed to conduct the nation’s spaceflight and aerospace programs in a safe and effective manner.” Budgetary constraints had also caused NASA to postpone planned improvements to the Shuttle fleet and the International Space Station (ISS). The panel’s chairperson remarked that both programs were operating at an “acceptable level of risk,” but that updating Shuttle computers and refurbishing the supply of spare parts would make the programs safer.(NASA, “Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel To Present Report to NASA,” news release N99-8, 4 February 1999; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Space Safety,” 5 February 1999.)
 NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor successfully completed the aerobraking phase of its mission, raising its orbit completely out of the Martian atmosphere and preparing the craft to begin its primary mapping mission. Glenn E. Cunningham, Deputy Director of the Mars Exploration Program at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), described the Mars spacecraft’s “pioneering operation” of aerobraking as a long and arduous task, which had become a valuable learning experience for all involved—engineers and scientists alike. The technique required the spacecraft to use frictional drag “as it skim[med] through the planet’s thin atmosphere,” altering the shape of the craft’s orbit and providing an innovative method to change the orbit using less on-board fuel. NASA had first tested aerobraking in 1994, during the final days of the Magellan mission to Venus. A structural problem with Mars Global Surveyor’s solar panel had delayed the final burn of aerobraking by approximately one year, so that the flight team could ensure that the process would not overstress the weakened panel. The extended aerobraking phase had enabled Global Surveyor to acquire bonus science data, yielding “some spectacular new findings about Mars,” such as a “profile of the planet’s northern polar cap and information about the unique nature of its remnant magnetic fields.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-06, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 23 January 2008).)
 An international team of scientists published findings based on research using data from NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft. The team had sought to locate the origin of solar wind, which interacts with Earth’s magnetic field, creating auroral displays like the Northern Lights, as well as disrupting satellites and communications equipment. The SOHO team believed that the solar wind originated from honeycomb-shaped areas called convection cells, located beneath the coronal holes. Using data from the spectrometer, the scientists had measured for the first time the structure and motion of gases inside the coronal holes. The team reported that, in some places above coronal holes, magnetic field lines do not loop back to the Sun’s surface, but rather, the magnetic lines shoot upward without returning to the Sun, thereby originating the solar wind.(Donald Hassler et al., “Solar Wind Outflow and the Chromospheric Magnetic Network,” Science 283, no. 5403 (5 February 1999): 810; United Press International, “Source of Solar Wind Believed Found,” 4 February.)
 The Russian Space Agency’s “space mirror” failed to unfurl properly at the Mir space station, and Russia officially terminated the experiment. Crew attached the mirror to a cargo spacecraft filled with trash, sending it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere. Engineers had intended the 83-foot (25-meter) mirror to “work like an artificial [M]oon,” acting as a prototype for larger mirrors that “could illuminate [S]un-starved northern cities through the long Arctic nights and spotlight disaster areas.” The experiment’s failure was a “big disappointment” for the Russian Space Agency, which had hoped to display “its ability to conduct pioneering, ambitious projects despite a lack of funds.”(Vladimir Isachenkov for the Associated Press, “Russia-Space Mirror,” 5 February 1999.)
 After a one-day delay, a Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying the US$128 million Stardust spacecraft. Stardust launched on a mission described as NASA’s first attempt to “return to Earth solid extraterrestrial material from beyond our [M]oon’s orbit.” Astronomers expected that, after traveling for about five years, the craft would rendezvous with a medium-sized comet. A device aboard the Stardust would collect tiny particles from the comet before returning to Earth on 15 January 2006.(Michael Cabbage, “Stardust Is Launched To Sweep Comet Debris,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 February 1999.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Kevin L. Petersen, who had been serving in an acting capacity since August 1998, as Director of NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. Petersen had joined Dryden as an aerospace engineer in 1974 and had worked on flight-research projects, including the F-8 Digital Fly-by-Wire, the HiMAT (the Highly Maneuverable Aircraft Technology), and the X-29 forward-swept wing projects. He had served as Chief of the Vehicle Technology Branch, Chief of the National Aerospace Plane Projects Office, and, since January 1996, as DFRC’s Deputy Director.(NASA, “Petersen Named Dryden Director,” news release 99-14, 8 February 1999.)
 NASA released findings from its Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft’s flyby of asteroid 433, known as Eros. The flyby had occurred on 23 December 1998. The NEAR spacecraft’s instruments had collected data revealing that the asteroid was slightly smaller than previously thought, with at least two medium-sized craters and a density comparable to that of the Earth’s crust.(NASA, “NEAR Spacecraft Reveals Major Features of Eros,” news release 99-13, 8 February 1999.)
 An Israeli court indicted Israeli teenager Ehud Tenenbaum and four accomplices⎯Guy Fleisher, Ariel Rosenfeld, Barak Abutbul, and Rafael Ohana⎯for illegal entry of computers in the United States and Israel. The group allegedly hacked into the computer systems of the Pentagon and NASA, as well as those of academic institutions in Israel and Israel’s Knesset.(Chicago Tribune, “5 Are Indicted for Hacking in the U.S.,” 10 February 1999. 667 Associated Press, “Hubble May Have Early Planet Images,” 10 February 1999.)
 NASA released images taken with cameras aboard the HST, revealing the infancy of planets. NASA described the images as a “glimpse of what our solar system looked like 4.5 billion years ago when the Earth and other planets began to condense.” The images did not show actual planets, but rather the discs of dust that surround young stars. The HST images of six young stars, located 450 light-years away in the constellation Taurus, showed important details never before revealed in infrared or radio observations, such as the size, shape, thickness, and orientation of the discs.
 NASA announced the selection of Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni to fly aboard Shuttle Mission STS-102. Guidoni was the first astronaut named to Mission STS-102 and the first European astronaut selected for an ISS mission. The primary purpose of STS-102 would be to deliver a 21-by-15-foot (6.4-by-4.6-meter), multipurpose logistics module, named Leonardo, to the ISS. The Italian Space Agency and NASA had constructed Leonardo under a bilateral agreement that included a flight opportunity for an Italian astronaut. Before his assignment on STS-102, Guidoni had flown in 1996 as a payload specialist aboard Mission STS-75. That 16- day mission had included working with the U. S. Microgravity Payload and testing the NASA- Italian Space Agency Tethered Satellite System.(NASA, “Guidoni To Accompany First Italian Space Station Element to Orbit,” news release 99-18, 11 February 1999; Reuters, “Italian Astronaut To Take Part in Discovery Mission,” 9 February 1999.)
 NASA announced its selection of a team of industry partners to develop a “highway in the sky system,” allowing the average person to travel in small, easy-to-fly, personal aircraft at four times the speed of a car. NASA selected Avidyne Corporation of Lexington, Massachusetts; AvroTec Inc. of Portland, Oregon; Lancair of Redmond, Oregon; Raytheon Aircraft of Wichita, Kansas; Rockwell Collins of Cedar Rapids, Iowa; Seagull Technologies of Los Gatos, California; and Allied Signal of Olathe, Kansas, as the industry partners. NASA tasked the team with completing hardware and software development of an entirely new concept for a cockpit display system, intended to guide the pilot to a preprogrammed destination.(NASA, “General Aviation To Get a NASA-Industry ‘Lift’,” news release 99-17, 11 February 1999.)
 NASA officials announced that the Galileo spacecraft was operating normally again after entering safe mode on 31 January. Galileo’s computer had become confused while flying past Jupiter’s moon Europa. David A. Senske, a member of the Galileo imaging team at NASA’s JPL, explained that the unusual angle Galileo required for studying Europa had caused the computer to malfunction.(Associated Press, “Galileo Craft Resumes Its Jupiter Mission,” 13 February 1999.)
 Scientists studying images obtained by NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published two reports in the journal Nature about Martian volcanic activity. One study reported that the images contained evidence that “ten times more lava” than previously thought had erupted onto Mars’s surface. The other study suggested that at least one of Mars’s volcanoes was still active.(William Hartmann et al., “Evidence for Recent Volcanism on Mars from Crater Counts,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 586; Alfred S. McEwen et al., “Voluminous Volcanism on Early Mars Revealed in Valles Marineris,” Nature 397, no. 6720 (18 February 1999): 584; Rick Callahan, “Mars Was Truly Red Planet⎯as in Red- Hot Molten Lava⎯Scientists Say One Volcano Would Have Coated U.S. 4 Miles Deep,” Seattle Times (WA), 17 February 1999.)
 Soyuz TM-29 launched on a mission to Mir with Russian cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Ivan Bella. Jean-Pierre Haigneré of the European Space Agency was also on board Soyuz.(NASA, “U.S. and Russian Human Space Flight 1961⎯September 30, 2000,” in Aeronautics and Space Report of the President: Fiscal Year 2000 Activities (Washington, DC, 2001).)
 Boeing launched a Delta II rocket from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying the first science satellites from Denmark and South Africa and the U.S. Air Force’s Advanced Research and Global Observation Satellite (ARGOS). The Air Force intended the Boeing-built ARGOS to spend three years in space, “collecting data on the Earth’s global environment and performing technology demonstrations for top-priority military space programs,” as well as testing advanced space technologies for use on the ISS. The launches of Denmark’s Orsted and South Africa’s SUNSAT (Stellenbosch University, South Africa, satellite) were critical milestones for both countries’ space programs. SUNSAT carried remote-sensing experiments to produce images from space at lower cost than larger systems, and Denmark deployed Orsted to study Earth’s magnetic fields and electrical properties.(CNN.com, “Rocket Carries Trio of Science Satellites into Orbit,” 23 February 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/ space/9902/23/argos.launch/index.html (accessed 10 April 2008).)
 The Russian Space Agency signed a cooperative agreement with Russian arms exporter Rosvooruzheniye, “intended to raise Russia’s earnings on the world market and help it develop space hardware.” Russia had earned only US$800 million, compared to the United States’ US$50 billion, in commercial satellite launches during 1998. Rosvooruzheniye hoped the deal would help Russia break into the international space markets.(CNN.com, “Russia’s Space Agency, Arms Exporter Sign Cooperation Deal,” 25 February 1999.)
 A European Ariane 4 rocket launched, carrying two communication satellites from French Guiana. The rocket placed into orbit an Arabsat 3A satellite, providing television broadcasting and telephone communications to the Middle East, North Africa, and Southern Europe, as well as the Skynet 4E satellite, a British armed forces strategic and tactical communications satellite. Both craft would move into geostationary orbits.(BBC News, “Ariane Blasts Off Successfully,” 27 February 1999.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin officially announced the change of the name of Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio, to “John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field.” George W. Lewis had been the research director for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), NASA’s predecessor agency, which built the research facility in 1941. Shortly after Lewis’s death in 1948, NACA had named the facility “Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory” to commemorate him. NASA had modified its name to “Lewis Research Center” in 1958, when the facility became part of the newly formed National Aeronautics and Space Administration. U.S. Senator R. Michael DeWine (R-OH) had proposed the most recent name change for the facility in the FY 1999 appropriations bill for the Departments of Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. Congress had enacted the bill into law on 21 October 1998 (Pub. L. No. 105-276). Goldin remarked that naming the Center for both George W. Lewis and John H. Glenn Jr. was an appropriate tribute to “two of Ohio’s famous names⎯one an aeronautic researcher and the other an astronaut legend and lawmaker.”(NASA, “NASA Announces Field Center Name Change,” news release 99-29, 1 March 1999. 187)
 Medialink Worldwide Inc., a New York–based company specializing in audio-video production and satellite-distribution services, announced it had signed a contract with the European Space Agency (ESA) to help the agency broadcast its news worldwide, via television. The two-year contract required Medialink to “establish and improve the space organization’s relations with broadcast media across Europe,” as well as to produce video news releases and other products “intended to raise the profile of the multinational agency.”(Medialink Worldwide Inc., “European Space Agency Names Medialink for TV Contract,” news release, 3 March 1999.)
 The Federal Laboratory Consortium appointed Donald J. Campbell, Director of Glenn Research Center (GRC), as the 1998 Laboratory Director of the Year for Technology Transfer. The Consortium honored Campbell, NASA’s first African American center director, for his “exemplary contributions to the overall enhancement of technology transfer for economic development.” Industries had created at least 20 new products from GRC-developed technologies in the previous five years. Campbell had also led the Center in establishing the Lewis Incubator for Technology, to help entrepreneurs and start-up companies commercialize NASA-developed technologies, as well as the Garrett Morgan Commercialization Initiative, to help small businesses in Ohio and the Great Lakes region use NASA technologies to become more competitive.(NASA, “Campbell Named Laboratory Director of the Year,” news release 99-32, 4 March 1999.)
 NASA launched its Wide-Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) aboard the three-stage Pegasus-XL rocket. Orbital Sciences Corporation’s L-1011 jet carried the rocket to an altitude of 40,000 feet (12,200 meters) before releasing it. Shortly after WIRE’s release into orbit, it encountered difficulties maintaining its stability, and NASA immediately began to investigate the malfunction. The satellite’s scientific instrument was a “cryogenically cooled telescope designed to shed light on the history of star formation in the universe,” as part of NASA’s Origins program. The 12.5-inch-aperture (31.8-centimeter-aperture) telescope aboard WIRE had no moving parts and was enclosed in a cooling system to keep its mirrors below -436°F (-260°C), to prevent its own heat emission from overwhelming the light it would detect from space.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Star-Gazing Wire Satellite Successfully Launched,” 4 March 1999; Associated Press, “Satellite Launch,” 5 March 1999.)
 The NASA WIRE team declared a spacecraft emergency, as ground controllers worked to recover the spacecraft. The satellite continued to spin, instead of maintaining a stable position in orbit, and had a higher temperature than expected. NASA formed a spacecraft-recovery team headed by David F. Everett of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), as well as an anomaly-investigation board.(NASA, “NASA Working To Correct Spin Rate of Wire Spacecraft,” news release 99-34, 5 March 1999. 188)
 NASA announced the end of the scientific mission of its WIRE satellite, after the craft released into space its entire supply of frozen hydrogen, a critical element of the mission. Preliminary reports indicated that the satellite had released the primary telescope cover three days earlier than planned, exposing the telescope’s cryostat to sunlight. The sunlight had warmed the frozen hydrogen in the cryostat, which was supposed to maintain the telescope’s temperature, causing the hydrogen to vent into space at a much higher rate than planned. Ground controllers believed the fast venting of the hydrogen had caused the satellite to spin, but they did not yet know what had caused the release of the telescope cover.(NASA, “Wire Spacecraft Instrument Runs Out of Hydrogen,” news release 99-37, 8 March 1999.)
 At a briefing at NASA Headquarters, scientists explained how sigmoids⎯fiery S-shapes on the Sun’s surface⎯would help them “predict when potentially dangerous and disruptive blasts of electrically charged gas will come hurtling toward Earth.” These solar explosions, or coronal mass ejections (CMEs), have the power to disable power grids, damage satellites, and scramble communications networks. Previously, scientists could detect solar explosions once they had occurred, providing two or three days for Earth to prepare for potential problems, but they were unable to predict the CMEs. With the Japanese Yohkoh spacecraft’s discovery of sigmoids, scientists would be able to issue a warning five or six days in advance of a solar explosion. Sarah E. Gibson of Cambridge University in England described the sigmoids as slinky-like structures, related to the Sun’s underlying magnetic field. Alphonse Sterling of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science of Japan likened the structures to “loaded guns,” with a high probability of discharging. Scientists explained further that “not every CME is presaged by a sigmoid, but most sigmoids signal very large CMEs.” The Yohkoh images showed that the sigmoid’s S-shape is the precursor to a CME, confirmed by the appearance of an arch shape following the blast.(Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Sun’s Fiery S-Shapes Foretell Massive Solar Blasts,” 9 March 1999.)
 Joseph G. Beerer of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory stated that all of the instruments aboard Mars Global Surveyor were operating, and that the craft had begun mapping Mars, approximately one year later than originally planned. NASA had launched the craft in November 1996, and Surveyor had entered orbit around Mars in September 1997. NASA had delayed the mapping portion of the mission when scientists detected a structural problem with one of the craft’s solar panels. To avoid placing excessive stress on the panel, the flight team had opted to proceed cautiously in aerobraking. Aerobraking, a pioneering operation, was necessary to position the spacecraft for its Mars mapping mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Mars Global Surveyor Successfully Completes Aerobraking,” news release 99-006, 4 February 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mgsbrake.html (accessed 27 December 2007).)
 NASA selected winners of its Government Inventor of the Year and Commercial Invention of the Year awards. Charles E. Clagett, Associate Head of the Component and Hardware Systems Branch at GSFC, won the Government Inventor of the Year Award for his Apparatus for Providing Torque and for Storing Momentum Energy. Clagett had developed the apparatus, known more commonly as the SMEX Reaction/Momentum Wheel, for NASA’s Small Explorer program. NASA had used the apparatus successfully in the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer and the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite. Paul M. Hergenrother, Joseph G. Smith Jr., and Brian J. Jensen of Langley Research Center won the Commercial Inventor of the Year Award for their Phenylethynyl Terminated Imide Oligomers, fifth composition, known as PETI-5, which is a type of glue that holds fibers together. The Langley team had developed PETI-5 as an adhesive for use in various aerospace and commercial applications. Used in high- speed, high-temperature aircraft, PETI-5 had netted US$10 million in sales since becoming commercially available.(NASA, “NASA Selects Top Inventions of the Year,” news release 99-42, 12 March 1999.)
 After assessing its safety aspects, officials from the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA’s) commercial space office approved the first space launch from a platform in the sea. The FAA issued the launch license to an international launch consortium known as Sea Launch. The Boeing Company, based in the United States, was a 40 percent partner in the consortium. The Sea Launch Company planned a demonstration launch for 27 March 1999, from a converted, self-propelled, oil-drilling platform in the Pacific Ocean. The consortium’s initiative, to launch communications satellites from a mid-ocean location at the equator, offered several advantages, such as the capability to lift heavier-than-normal payloads.(Federal Aviation Administration, “FAA Issues Launch License to First International Sea Launch Consortium,” news release APA 34-99, 15 March 1999, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsId= 4952 (accessed 27 December 2007); Associated Press, “FAA Gives Its OK to 1st Spacecraft Launched from Sea,” Salt Lake Tribune (UT), 16 March 1999.)
 Lockheed Martin and its Russian business partners announced the appointment of Wilbur C. Trafton as President of International Launch Services (ILS); Trafton had been Acting President since the previous December. Lockheed Martin, Russia’s Khrunichev State Research and Production Space Center, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia had established ILS in 1995, as a joint venture to market commercial launch services on Russian Proton rockets and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. Before joining ILS, Trafton had been Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Flight. In that position, he had headed NASA’s Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise. Ray Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, remarked that Trafton had brought to ILS “years of experience working on joint space programs with Russia.” Colladay said that Trafton’s background, together with his knowledge of the Atlas product line, made him “particularly well suited to lead ILS.”(Lockheed Martin, “Wilbur Trafton Named President, International Launch Services,” news release, 26 March 1999,” http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/WilburTraftonNamedPresident Internat.html (accessed 21 December 2007).)
 Researchers reported in the journal Science that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had detected hydrogen peroxide on Jupiter’s moon Europa. Hydrogen peroxide does not occur naturally on Earth. A scientific instrument aboard the craft⎯the Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (NIMS)⎯had aided scientists in their study of Europa’s surface. Working like a prism, the instrument had broken up infrared light, detecting dark areas of hydrogen peroxide. The scientists reported that the chemical was forming constantly on Europa, through the process of radiolysis; in this case, the process involved “intense particle radiation” emanating from Jupiter. Principal Investigator for NIMS Robert W. Carlson explained that hydrogen peroxide begins breaking down almost as soon as it forms and, therefore, its life on Europa spans no more than a few months. The short lifespan of the chemical limited the scientists’ ability to study the long- term chemical history of Europa. However, scientists would be able to apply their observations of short-term chemical changes on Jupiter to the study of how the moons of Jupiter interact with the planet, as well as to the study of similar processes elsewhere in the solar system.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Galileo Finds ‘Bottle Blonde’ Chemical on Europa,” news release 99-022, 25 March 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/europaperoxide.html (accessed 21 December 2007); R. W. Carlson et al., “Hydrogen Peroxide on the Surface of Europa,” Science 283, no. 5410 (26 March 1999): 2062– 2064.)
 A dummy satellite reached its orbit, 23,000 miles (37,000 kilometers) above Earth, signaling an important success for the Sea Launch Company. The international consortium, which had invested US$500 million to develop the first commercial, marine-based launch system, launched the dummy satellite from the Odyssey, a converted oil rig located 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) south of Hawaii. A Zenit-3SL rocket, built jointly by Ukraine and Russia, carried the satellite aloft. One hour after launch, the satellite separated from the third stage of the rocket at an altitude of 1,200 miles (1,900 kilometers), to continue to its ultimate position.(Associated Press, “Satellite Reaches Orbit After First Commercial Launch from Ocean,” 30 March 1999. 689 European Space Agency, “Mission to Mars Set To Revolutionize ESA’s Working Methods,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 1999.)
 The ESA signed a 60 million Euro contract with Matra Marconi Space, to design and build the Mars Express spacecraft, with a planned launch date of June 2003. The agency chose that target date because the planets would be in optimal alignment, allowing for minimum travel time to Mars with maximum payload capacity. Major space missions can require upwards of 11 years from concept to launch, and only six years remained before the 2003 date, so the ESA selected a contractor with the means to develop missions quickly and inexpensively. Matra Marconi demonstrated that it would be able to streamline the development of Mars Express, building and launching the mission for about half the budget required for similar efforts.
 Advanced Communication Systems Inc. announced that the Naval Air Systems Command had awarded its Aerospace Division a five-year contract with option years. The Naval Air Systems Command intended the US$46 million Aircraft Structural Life Surveillance contract to assist the U.S. Navy in developing, verifying, executing, and enhancing methods and processes for monitoring aircraft structural fatigue. Advanced Communication’s Aerospace Division Vice President Thomas M. Brennan remarked that the contract covered air vehicle technology that would “have application across all military services, as well as NASA and the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration].”(PR Newswire, “ACS Wins $46 Million Aircraft Structures Contract,” 5 April 1999.)
 NASA appointed Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway as Manager of the International Space Station (ISS) Program, effective 19 April. Holloway replaced Randolph H. Brinkley, who departed NASA for the private sector. NASA named Ronald D. Dittemore to replace Holloway as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Holloway had begun his NASA career in 1963, working in the Mission Control Center, where he planned activities for Gemini and Apollo flights. He had served as a flight director in Mission Control early in the Space Shuttle Program, becoming Chief of the Flight Director Office in 1985. In the 1990s, he had served as Deputy Manager for Program Integration with the Space Shuttle Program, followed by an appointment as Director of the Phase I Program of Shuttle–Mir dockings. Holloway had begun managing the Space Shuttle Program in 1995.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Holloway Named Space Station Manager, Dittemore To Head Shuttle; Brinkley Leaves NASA for Private Sector,” news release J99-9, 6 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/ releases/1999_2001/j99-9.html (accessed 15 January 2008).)
 NASA announced the departure of Gretchen W. McClain, a senior space station official at NASA Headquarters, naming as her replacement in an acting capacity, W. Michael Hawes, NASA’s Chief Engineer for the ISS. In 1997 NASA had appointed McClain as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station). In that position, she was responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and undertaking liaison activities with the executive branch, Congress, industry, and international partners. McClain left NASA to return to private industry.(NASA, “McClain To Leave NASA; Hawes Named Acting Chief of Space Station,” news release 99-50, 8 April 1999.)
 U.S. Air Force officials announced that, despite initial media reports of a successful launch, the previous day’s launch of the USA 142 aboard a Titan IVB rocket had failed. The USA 142, also called the DSP 19, an American geosynchronous military satellite, had launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The failed launch had placed the Defense Support Program satellite in a useless orbit after an attached rocket engine failed. This was the first launch attempt since the explosion of a Titan IVA in August 1998. Engineers had designed the Titan IVB, an improved version of the Titan IV, to survive the electrical malfunction that had led to its predecessor’s demise. Because of a policy of secrecy concerning military spy satellites, the U.S. Air Force had delayed informing its public affairs office about the launch failure. Although senior Air Force officials knew of the loss of the satellite, they were unable to make the event public until they were certain that the failure had not entailed the release of classified information. The Air Force had designed the satellite, a highly sensitive, 2-ton (1,800-kilogram or 1.8-tonne), infrared telescope, to detect missile launches and nuclear detonations.(Robyn Suriano, “Air Force Says Security Questions Delayed Announcement,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 April 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
 Celebrating the anniversary of the flight of Yuri Gagarin on 12 April 1961, Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin presented state medals to several dozen cosmonauts and space officials during a Cosmonaut’s Day ceremony. Yeltsin briefly praised Mir’s achievements in his remarks at the Kremlin, but when Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev presented him with a model of the new ISS, Yeltsin asked Koptev whether Mir would stay aloft. Koptev responded in the affirmative, but explained during a press conference afterward that private investors had not yet produced funds for Mir’s continued operation. Vitaly I. Sevastyanov, a lawmaker and former cosmonaut, called on Russians to contribute money to a charity formed to keep Mir in orbit.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 12 April 1999.)
 NASA announced the discovery of a “mysterious class of ‘middleweight’ black holes.” Two teams of astronomers studying x-ray light at NASA and Carnegie Mellon University had independently found evidence of this new class of black hole. Astronomers did not know what process had formed the newly discovered black holes, 100 to 10,000 times as massive as the Sun and located in spiral-shaped galaxies throughout the universe. Before this discovery, astronomers had known of only two types of black holes: 1) stellar black holes, formed from the “remains of dead stars several times heavier than the Sun” and compressed to a “diameter of a few miles or less”; and 2) supermassive black holes, which have masses equal to 1 million to 1 billion Suns and likely formed in the “early universe from giant gas clouds or from the collapse of clusters of immense numbers of stars.” Edward H. Colbert and Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had observed hints of the black holes while studying x-rays from 39 nearby galaxies. Andrew Ptak and Richard Griffiths of Carnegie Mellon University had studied x-ray light in galaxy M82, which was not one of the set of galaxies that the Goddard team had studied. Both teams had identified unique x-ray light indicative of a class of black holes that was neither stellar nor supermassive.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover ‘Middleweight’ Black Holes,” news release 99-51, 13 April 1999.)
 Landsat-7 launched successfully from Vandenberg Air Force Base. Although Lockheed Martin, Missiles and Space, had built Landsat-7, the newest land-surface observation satellite, with a design life of five years, the company’s spokesperson remarked that 15 years after its 1984 launch, Landsat-5 continued in operation. The upper stage of the rocket that launched the commercially built Landsat-6 in October 1993 had failed to fire the satellite into orbit, destroying the craft and prompting NASA and the U.S. Geological Survey to resume control of the Landsat program in 1994. The latest model in the satellite series carried “a new generation of remote-sensing devices far more sophisticated than the equipment on satellites mapping Earth over the past decade.” Raytheon Remote Sensing of Santa Barbara, California, had built the craft’s enhanced thematic mapper to measure solar radiation reflected off the Earth’s surface. The device was capable of capturing images of Earth’s surface in 114-mile-wide (183-kilometer- wide) swaths and could resolve images as small as 50 feet (15 meters) across.(Frank Sweeney, “New Earth Camera Launched into Orbit,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 20 April 1999.)
 Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and French cosmonaut Jean-Pierre Haigneré replaced scientific equipment on Mir’s exterior during a planned 5-hour spacewalk that went overtime. The pair overcame “numerous technical blips,” to complete the French portion of the tasks and most of the Russian portion. Malfunctions in their spacesuits’ ventilation systems delayed both men in leaving the station. Other problems included equipment failure during a simulated repair to an imaginary hole on Mir’s superstructure; an unsuccessful attempt to retrieve data from a pollution study in process around the station; and the failure to install a new Russian-sponsored experiment to measure cosmic rays. Cosmonauts succeeded in other tasks during the spacewalk, including the recuperation of a French-sponsored test and the installation on the station’s hull of comet technology designed to gather space dust for analysis. Haigneré was on his second mission to Mir, but this was his first spacewalk.(Agence France-Presse, “Cosmonauts Struggle Through Grueling Space Walk Program,” 19 April 1999.)
 At the 14th Annual NASA Continual Improvement and Reinvention Conference on Quality Management, Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented the George M. Low Award, NASA’s highest honor for quality and technical performance, to four U.S. companies: 1) Barrios Technology Inc. of Houston, Texas, for its small-business product; 2) Kay and Associates of Edwards, California, for small-business service; 3) Raytheon Support Services Company of Annapolis Junction, Maryland, for the large-business service category; and, 4) Thiokol Space Operations of Brigham City, Utah, for the large-business product category. NASA had evaluated the recipients for performance, delivery according to agreed cost and schedule, innovation, management leadership, alignment of organizational goals with NASA’s strategic plans, customer orientation, and adherence to the Total Quality Management philosophy. Thiokol Corporation, which had won the Low Award in 1991 and Marshall Space Flight Center’s Contractor Excellence Award in March 1999, had manufactured the reusable solid rocket motor for the Space Shuttle, as well as providing launch support and refurbishment services for the motor. Over the past seven years, Thiokol had never delayed its delivery of hardware. Its cost reduction efforts had saved NASA US$152 million.(NASA, “Four Aerospace Firms Win NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release 99-53, 22 April 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-053.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); Cordant Technologies Inc., “Thiokol Propulsion Wins NASA’s Highest Honor for Quality,” news release, 3 May 1999.)
 Scientists Peter Smith of the University of Arizona and Justin Maki of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory published a report in the Journal of Geophysical Research summarizing the results of the Mars Pathfinder Mission. After an exhaustive review of more than 17,000 images from the Pathfinder’s 1997 mission, the report had concluded that Mars’s air and dirt are yellowish-brown in color, not red. Viking probes of the 1970s had likewise indicated that Mars is not red, but rather yellowish-brown. However, Mars appears red to the naked eye from Earth, and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) data had indicated that Mars is red. The scientists reported that the detailed analysis using Pathfinder data had revealed that the HST, not Pathfinder, needed to be recalibrated.(Salt Lake Tribune (UT), “The Red Planet? Mars Is Really Yellowing Brown: Pathfinder Discovers What Hubble Missed,” 24 April 1999.)
 Lockheed Martin launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base an Athena II rocket, carrying the Ikonos I satellite, a civilian satellite capable of capturing the detailed images that only spy satellites could produce in the past. Launch officials had planned to cease communications with the craft 8 minutes after liftoff and to reestablish contact later in the flight, but had not been able to reestablish contact once initial communications ended. Officials were unable to determine whether the craft had remained in orbit. Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems had built the satellite; Raytheon had built the communications, image processing, and other elements of the system; and Eastman Kodak had built the digital camera system. The camera on board Ikonos I was capable of resolving objects as small as 1 square meter (11 square feet), enabling the satellite to distinguish between a car and a truck. Before the manufacture of Ikonos, only military satellites had possessed the ability to photograph Earth in such detail.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Contact Fails During Flight: Civilian Satellite Lost After Launch,” 29 April 1999.)
 NASA announced it had completed negotiations on a US$625.6 million contract with Lockheed Martin Michoud Space Systems to purchase the last set of materials required to build 60 new Space Shuttle external fuel tanks. Although it was the sixth and last in a series of purchases of fuel tanks, this was the first purchase NASA had made consisting entirely of super lightweight tanks. The tank’s design was the same as that of the lightweight tank design NASA had previously used, but the new tanks were 7,500 pounds (3,400 kilograms) lighter, and used a new aluminum lithium alloy. NASA and industry partners had developed the lighter alloy, 30 percent stronger than the material used to manufacture the lightweight tank, to enable the Shuttle to deliver ISS components into the proper orbit.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “NASA Completes Purchase of Material for 60 Shuttle External Tanks,” news releases 99-069, 28 April 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-069.html (accessed 5 February 2008).)
 NASA announced that the magnetometer on board Mars Global Surveyor had revealed “banded patterns of magnetic fields on the Martian surface,” bearing a “striking similarity to patterns seen in the crust of the Earth’s sea floors.” Scientists interpreted the patterns as evidence that the Martian crust had shifted in the past. The discovery of banded patterns on the floor of Earth’s oceans had provided a record of Earth’s magnetic history, validating the theory of plate tectonics. Jack Connerney of NASA’s GSFC, a member of Global Surveyor’s magnetometer team, explained, “if the bands on Mars are an imprint of crustal spreading, they are a relic of an early era of plate tectonics on Mars.” He added that such tectonic activity on Mars is likely extinct, unlike on Earth. The spacecraft’s magnetometer had been able to capture the magnetic field observations because of the extended aerobraking phase, devised to protect against further damage to one of the spacecraft’s solar panels. The period of aerobraking had permitted the magnetometer to “obtain better-than-planned regional measurements of Mars.” Each time it reached the lowest point of its elliptically shaped orbit, below the planet’s ionosphere, the probe encountered minimal magnetic interference and enabling it to obtain additional data.(NASA, “Magnetic Stripes Preserve Record of Ancient Mars,” news release 99-56, 29 April 1999.)
 In its third consecutive failure, the second loss within one month, the U.S. Air Force launch of a Titan IV rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, placed a geosynchronous military communications satellite, the USA 143, also known as Milstar 2, in a useless low-Earth orbit. (Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 546, 1 May 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx546.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
 After a search of nearly two weeks, a team of salvagers funded by the Discovery Channel located the Liberty Bell 7, the Mercury space capsule flown by astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, which had been lost at sea on 21 July 1961. Grissom had survived the splashdown and had been rescued from the Atlantic Ocean. He had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo I launchpad fire that he had done nothing that could have caused the hatch to blow out following the splashdown. The cause of the accident remained a mystery and “forever marred” Grissom’s otherwise successful 15-minute suborbital flight, the nation’s second piloted spaceflight. The salvagers’ remotely operated submersible had located and recorded video of the capsule about 300 miles (480 kilometers) southeast of Cape Canaveral, Florida, 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the surface of the ocean. Expedition leader Curt Newport said the video showed that the capsule was in “amazingly good condition.” It was “still shiny in spots,” the window and parachute liner were intact, its periscope was extended, and the words “United States” and “Liberty Bell” were “plainly visible.” Newport explained the difficulty of locating the capsule, comparing the attempt to find it to searching for the Titanic⎯the Liberty Bell’s capsule, smaller than one of the Titanic’s boilers, was hidden in water 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) deeper than the doomed ocean liner. Although the submersible located two cameras and a tape recorder with the capsule, which might possibly help to explain why the hatch blew open prematurely, it was doubtful that the film from those items would be salvageable after 38 years underwater. Although the discovery of the hatch itself would more likely provide an answer, Newport estimated that the hatch could be a mile from the capsule. The capsule remained in the ocean, for recovery at a later unspecified date.(Washington Times, “Salvagers Able To Locate Grissom’s Space Capsule,” 3 May 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Sunken Spacecraft,” 3 May 1999.)
 A Boeing Delta III rocket, carrying an Orion satellite for Loral Space and Communications, malfunctioned shortly after launch, leaving the satellite in the wrong orbit. In the inaugural launch in August 1998 of a Boeing Delta III, a rocket designed to carry twice the payload of the Delta II, the rocket had exploded in midair. In this second attempt at flight, the rocket had survived the initial launch, but malfunctioned when the second stage failed to ignite properly, leaving Orion in an orbit lower than planned. Engineers were uncertain whether it would be possible to boost the satellite using on-board fuel and thrusters.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “New Boeing Rocket Malfunctions, Satellite Enters Wrong Orbit,” 5 May 1999.)
 Lockheed Martin Corporation named former Martin Marietta President and Chief Operating Officer A. Thomas Young to lead an independent review of the management, engineering, manufacturing, and quality control processes of its space and missile business, specifically Astronautics, Missiles and Space, and Michoud Space Systems. The company had experienced a “series of expensive and well-publicized failures of its rockets and satellites,” including two in the previous week, when a Titan IV placed one military satellite in the wrong orbit and when another satellite, the remote-sensing Ikonos, lost contact with the ground. The company instructed the panel to submit a report to senior Lockheed management by 1 September.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Comprehensive Space Sector Review, Former Martin Marietta President Will Chair Independent Panel,” news release, 4 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesComprehensiv.html (accessed 7 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Panel To Review Lockheed Failures: Former Company President To Head Probe of Aerospace Foul-Ups,” Washington Post, 5 May 1999.)
 The U.S. Air Force officially declared the US$1.2 billion launch of a communications satellite on 30 April a “mission failure.” A malfunction in the upper stage booster of the Titan IVB rocket had stranded the Milstar satellite in the wrong orbit. The Air Force established an investigation into the failure, which was its “third costly space failure in nine months.”(Reuters, “U.S. Air Force Investigates Costly Satellite Loss,” 4 May 1999.)
 Following a series of launch failures, Lockheed Martin Corporation announced management changes in three of its business sectors. Raymond S. Colloday, President of Lockheed Martin Astronautics, retired, effective immediately, and G. Thomas Marsh, Executive Vice President of Missiles and Space, succeeded him. Lockheed named the President of Missiles and Space, K. Michael Henshaw, as President and Chief Operating Officer of the Energy and Environment Sector, effective 1 June. In that position, Henshaw succeeded Robert J. Stevens, who had served in dual positions but was directed to “devote his full attention” to his role as Corporate Vice President of Strategic Development. Albert E. Smith, President of Aerospace Electronics Systems and of Sanders, a Lockheed Martin company in Nashua, New Hampshire, succeeded Henshaw as President of Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space of Sunnyvale, California. Lockheed named Walter P. Havenstein President of Sanders and Acting President of Aerospace Electronics System, a promotion from his former position as Executive Vice President. In addition to the recent launch failures, Lockheed had been “bedeviled” by problems in its space business, including a 10 percent reduction in sales in its Space and Strategic Missiles Sector and a 17 percent decline in operating profit, after inadequate preparation and cancellations had caused the delay of commercial satellite launches.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Announces Management Changes,” news release, 11 May 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LockheedMartinAnnouncesManagementCh.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Tim Smart, “Lockheed Revamping 2 Units: New Leaders Named After Series of Launch Failures,” Washington Post, 12 May 1999.)
 The U.S. Air Force “officially declared dead” its US$800 million Milstar communications satellite. Launched atop a Titan IV rocket on 30 April and placed in the wrong orbit, the Milstar would “never reach its intended 22,300-mile-high [35,900-kilometer-high] orbit.” U.S. Air Force representative Aaron Renenger stated that the useless satellite “could remain in orbit for hundreds of years,” but posed no threat to other spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Air Force Declares Military Satellite Dead,” 12 May 1999.)
 The U.S. Air Force announced that it had postponed indefinitely Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck’s departure from his command of the 45th Space Wing, with responsibility for all military and commercial launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Air Force spokesperson did not state the reasons for the change. Starbuck was to report on 3 June as Director of the Expeditionary Forces Management Team at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. His replacement, Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton, a former Space Shuttle Commander, was to report on 3 June to Patrick Air Force Base, to replace Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing.(Robyn Suriano, “Starbuck Staying Put at Helm of 45th Space Wing,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 May 1999. 711 NASA, “Nobel Prize Winner To Lead NASA Astrobiology Institute,” news release 99-61, 18 May 1999; Warren E. Leary, “Search for Life Beyond Earth Gets a Leader,” New York Times, 19 May 1999.)
 NASA announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine, as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, effective immediately. NASA had created the Astrobiology Institute in July 1998, a “virtual organization” comprising NASA’s centers, universities, and other scientific entities for the study of “the origin, evolution, distribution, and destiny of life in the universe.” The Institute, with a multidisciplinary focus, sought to bring together astronomers, biologists, chemists, exobiologists, geologists, and physicists, to search for the origins of life. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin made the announcement of Blumberg’s appointment at Ames Research Center in Mountain View, California, the site of the Institute’s headquarters. Goldin stated that NASA had tasked the Astrobiology Institute with “providing the ‘intellectual underpinnings’ for building new types of instruments and space probes for finding life in the solar system and beyond.”
 President of the Aerospace Industries Association John W. Douglass testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space that the nation needed an “enlightened” national space program, combining “public and private investment in synergistic ways.” Douglass stated that the government needed to “remove barriers to the growth of commercial space.” He said that the most critical action needed for the industry’s growth was renewal of the indemnification provisions of the Commercial Space Launch Act, because without such provisions, U.S. companies are unable to compete with the government-backed programs of foreign competitors. Douglass also testified that U.S. launch ranges lacked modern facilities, causing launch delays. Such delays “wreak havoc” in the commercial world, because launch sites require more time to reconfigure a launch than convenient for commercial enterprises. He cited the export licensing process as a serious problem, because it was causing the U.S. commercial space industry to lose market share in both satellite and launch services. Additionally, Douglass called the “dramatic drop” in funding for aerospace research and development over the last two decades a “serious structural problem,” which the United States should correct, to remain competitive in the world market.(“AIA Urges Congress To Remove Barriers to Commercial Space Industry,” Aerospace News, 20 May 1999.)
 U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) announced the findings of a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) investigation into NASA’s computer security. Thompson had requested the study, which found that government specialists were able to penetrate several mission-critical systems and could have stolen, modified, or destroyed system software and data. GAO had found that 135 of the 155 mission-critical systems reviewed did not meet all of NASA’s requirements for risk assessment. Specifically, NASA had not conducted an Agency-wide review of information-technology security since 1991; 60 percent of reviewed systems had not been independently audited for security or weaknesses; NASA had no security training program; and NASA field centers did not report security incidents to a central location. GAO had also found that NASA had no policy for determining what type of information its staff could post on public Web sites, rendering it vulnerable to Internet attacks. NASA also had no policy for protecting mission-critical systems from well-known Internet threats.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Thompson Says NASA Must Tighten Computer Security,” government news release, 20 May 1999; U.S. General Accounting Office, “Information Security: Many NASA Mission-Critical Systems Face Serious Risks” (report no. GAO/AIMD-99-47, Washington, DC, May 1999), http://www.gao.gov /archive/1999/ai99047.pdf (accessed 7 February 2008).)
 The U.S. Air Force announced that Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton would not replace Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing at Patrick Air Force Base, but would lead the 9th Reconnaissance Wing at Beale Air Force Base near Sacramento, California. Starbuck was to remain in command of the 45th Space Wing indefinitely until the Air Force had chosen another successor. The change followed “the U.S. launch industry’s worst string of accidents in more than a decade,” including “three consecutive failures of Air Force Titan rockets” launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Air Force also reported that, earlier in May, a military navigation spacecraft had sustained US$51 million in damage during a thunderstorm. The Air Force announced that it had opened a formal investigation into that incident, in addition to the investigation President William J. Clinton had ordered into the string of launch failures. The President had appointed the CIA, the U.S. Department of Defense, and NASA to carry out that investigation.(Robyn Suriano, “Chilton Not Coming to Cape; Starbuck To Remain Indefinitely,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 21 May 1999.)
 An international team of astronomers, led by Wendy L. Freedman of the Carnegie Observatories, held a news conference to announce their findings regarding the age of the universe. Freedman’s team had concluded that the universe was between 12 billion and 13.4 billion years old, at least 1 billion years younger than predicted. Freedman’s international team had studied eight years of calculations, made observations using NASA’s Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and used a range of celestial measurements to recalculate the age of the universe. Among those measurements was the “Hubble constant,” used in mathematical equations to “gauge the speed at which galaxies are accelerating away from each other.” Named for Edwin Hubble, who had discovered 70 years ago that the universe is expanding, the Hubble constant is an essential piece of the equation determining the age and size of the universe. The team’s findings drew criticism from other astronomers. Although the Australian physicist Charles H. Lineweaver had conducted separate research with the same result as that of Freedman’s team, some astronomers associated with the Carnegie Observatories and Harvard University did not agree with the Freedman team’s conclusions. Allan Sandage of the Carnegie Observatories stated that he believed that the team’s methodology contained systematic errors and that the final number was not correct. Harvard University astronomer Robert P. Kirshner had led a third team, using the Hubble constant to study the age of the universe, but although he calculated a different age than the other teams, Kirshner downplayed the differences in their results, remarking that “what was once a very big disagreement is now narrowing down.”(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Hubble Completes Eight-Year Effort To Measure Expanding Universe,” news release H99-65, 25 May 1999, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/releases/1999/H99-65.html (accessed 2 January 2008); Robert Lee Hotz, “Scientists Calculate Most Precise Age Yet for Universe; Astronomy: New Data, Hubble Telescope Help Two Separate Teams Put Range at 12 Billion to 13.4 Billion Years,” Los Angeles Times, 26 May 1999.)
 India’s government-run space agency began commercial operations with the launch, from an island in the Bay of Bengal, of its Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle C-2 (PSLV), carrying Indian, German, and South Korean satellites. PSLV carried into orbit Oceansat-1, India’s remote- sensing satellite, intended to carry out oceanographic research; KITSAT-3 of South Korea’s Satellite Technology Research Center; and the German Aerospace Center’s Tubsat. Chairperson of Indian Space Research Organization Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan stated that India could “offer to launch satellites at a much cheaper rate than other countries with launch facilities.” Without naming how much India was charging for its newly inaugurated launch services, Kasturirangan said that in the international market it would cost US$1 million to piggyback a satellite.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Indian Rocket with Korean and German Satellites Takes Off,” 26 May 1999.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery launched successfully from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after a one-week delay and a six-month “launch drought.” NASA had delayed the launch of Mission STS-96, scheduled for 20 May, after a violent thunderstorm earlier in the month damaged the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, requiring repairs. The previous six months had been the longest period in NASA’s history without any launches since the Challenger disaster, which grounded the Shuttle fleet for two and one-half years. However, problems with the Shuttle fleet had not caused the delay during recent months. Delays in the construction of a critical Russian- built component for the International Space Station (ISS), as well as ongoing problems with a grounded NASA x-ray telescope, had disrupted the launch schedule. Discovery’s crew included Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Rick D. Husband, and Mission Specialists Ellen Ochoa, Tamara E. Jernigan, Daniel T. Barry, Julie Payette, and Valery I. Tokarev. During the 10-day ISS Assembly Mission 2A.1, the crew planned to deliver supplies to the ISS; to repair U.S. and Russian equipment; to install mufflers that would reduce the noise of the Russian fans; and to conduct a spacewalk, attaching one crane and part of another to the outside of the station. STS- 96 (ISS 2A.1) was the first mission to dock with the new ISS.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-96, Second International Space Station Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_ pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-96.html (accessed 6 February 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 27 May 1999.)
 NASA released its first three-dimensional global map of Mars. The Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter (MOLA), an instrument aboard NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor, had generated the data for the high-resolution map, created from measurements gathered in 1998 and 1999. David E. Smith of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, Principal Investigator for MOLA and the lead author of a study published in the journal Science, said that, according to the new topographic map, Mars is slightly lopsided⎯the northern hemisphere is low and smooth, but the southern hemisphere had many craters and an elevation of about 5 kilometers (3.1 miles) higher than that in the north. Additionally, Smith noted that the depression in Mars’s northern hemisphere is “distinctly not circular,” indicating that it formed from internal geologic processes rather than an external impact. Carl B. Pilcher, NASA’s Science Director for Solar System Exploration, commented that the data MOLA had collected enabled scientists to know “the topography of Mars better than many continental regions on Earth.” Pilcher said that the data would “serve as a basic reference book for Mars scientists for many years,” inspiring “new insights about the planet’s geologic history.”(NASA, “First Global 3-D View of Mars Reveals Deep Basin and Pathways for Water Flow,” news release 99-66, 27 May 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-066.txt (accessed 7 February 2008); David E. Smith et al., “The Global Topography of Mars and Implications for Surface Evolution,” Science 284, no. 5419 (28 May 1999): 1495–1503.)
 NASA announced that spacecraft engineers who had worked on NASA’s new Quick Scatterometer (QuikSCAT) had won an American Electronics Association Technical Achievement Award for the “development of a spacecraft at a record-setting pace of one year.” Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had built the satellite for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), assembling the QuikSCAT faster than any construction of a spacecraft since the 1958 Explorer I satellite. To accomplish this fast pace, NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had developed a new procurement system called the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, to accelerate NASA’s purchase procedure. The new acquisition process had enabled NASA to take advantage of “low-cost commercial technology from the burgeoning spacecraft industry,” to develop satellite systems such as the QuikSCAT. NASA had been able to reduce the time needed to select a contractor and to initiate spacecraft development, from one year to 30 days. Chip Barnes, a QuikSCAT spacecraft system engineer at Ball Aerospace commented that the production had involved a “remarkable effort to get the spacecraft built, integrated, and tested in an 11-month time frame.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Quikscat Team Wins American Electronics Achievement Award,” news release 99-045, 3 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/aeaaward.html (accessed 12 February 2008). 720 Associated Press, “Shuttle Astronauts Release Satellite, Head for Home,” Washington Post, 6 June 1999.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. Shortly before returning to Earth, astronauts aboard Discovery had completed their last assignment, releasing Starshine, an educational satellite that 25,000 students worldwide would track over the following seven to eight months, to calculate the atmosphere’s density. The US$1 million Starshine, a 19-inch (48.3-centimeter) sphere, “covered with 878 small, circular mirrors” that schoolchildren had polished, had become visible from the ground once it had “popped” from its canister in the Shuttle’s cargo bay. In addition, the astronauts had spent six of their 10 days in orbit at the new International Space Station (ISS), where the crew had performed maintenance tasks. Discovery’s crew had delivered 2 tons (1,800 kilograms or 1.8 tonnes) of tools, water, and other supplies for the first permanent crew of the ISS, scheduled to arrive in the spring of 2000.
 AlliedSignal Inc. agreed to acquire Honeywell Inc., in a stock deal worth US$13.8 billion. Aerospace business, with revenues totaling about 40 percent of the enterprise, was the centerpiece of the agreement, in which AlliedSignal added Honeywell’s business in cockpit electronics (avionics) and global-positioning equipment to its own market in aircraft engines and collision-avoidance systems. An analyst with Frost and Sullivan, a California-based, market- research firm, remarked that the merger put the combined company ahead of Rockwell Collins as “the no. 1 player in avionics.” The new company would retain the name of Honeywell and maintain its headquarters at AlliedSignal’s base in New Jersey.(Ameet Sachdev, “Aircraft Supply Titan Is Created,” St. Petersburg Times (FL), 8 June 1999.)
 Following a series of recent launch failures, Boeing Company announced the convening of an independent panel of experts to examine its rocket programs, specifically Boeing’s Delta, Sea Launch, and Inertial Upper Stage programs. To head the panel, Boeing had selected Sheila E. Widnall, former Secretary of the U.S. Air Force and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The panel was tasked with examining organizational roles and responsibilities within Boeing; recent launch failure investigation findings; processes used for government, civil, and commercial launches; acceptance processes for major subsystems and complex assemblies from suppliers; and manufacturing, assembly, transportation, and storage activities of Boeing launch programs.(Associated Press, “Boeing Forms Independent Panel To Review Space Failures,” 9 June 1999.)
 A Boeing Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar cellular telephone satellites. Counting this launch, Globalstar Inc. had placed in orbit 24 of the 32 satellites the company needed to begin regional cellular phone service. The company had planned to begin offering global cellular service in the latter part of 1998, but in September 1998, a failed launch destroyed a dozen satellites aboard a Ukrainian Zenit II rocket. Globalstar had launched its first eight satellites on Delta II rockets, during February and April 1998, and 12 more satellites, early in 1999, on three Russian Soyuz rockets. Globalstar was competing with its industry rival Iridium World Communications Inc., which had placed a complete constellation of 66 satellites in orbit and had begun offering global cellular service before the end of 1998. To meet Globalstar’s launch demands over the summer of 1999, Boeing had increased the pace of manufacturing at its Pueblo, Colorado, rocket factory. In addition, Boeing brought 50 to 70 workers from its Delta launch team at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to join its Cape Canaveral workforce in Florida.(Todd Halvorson, “Boeing and Globalstar Begin Flurry of Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 June 1999.)
 Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in China’s Shanxi Province launched two Iridium World Communications satellites into orbit aboard a Chinese Long March 2C rocket, replenishing the 66-satellite Iridium constellation, which provides telephone, paging, and fax communication services worldwide. The satellite was the 57th launched from Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center and the 15th consecutive successful launch since October 1996 for the Long March rocket series.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Iridium Launches Two More Satellites,” 11 June 1999.)
 The Boeing Company named former cosmonaut Vladimir G. Titov as the company’s director for Space and Communications, Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, located in Boeing’s Moscow office. With the appointment, Titov became responsible for initiating new business opportunities, working closely with Boeing’s ISS program members and with Russian and Ukrainian partners on the Sea Launch program. A cosmonaut since 1976, Titov had commanded several Soyuz missions, served as a mission specialist on two Space Shuttle missions, and lived aboard Russia’s Mir space station, logging 387 days in space, including nearly 19 hours of extravehicular activity.(The Boeing Company, “Director Space & Communications for Russia and CIS Named,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990615r.html (accessed 8 February 2008).)
 Keith R. Hall, Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Air Force for Space and Director of the National Reconnaissance Office, and Edward C. “Pete” Aldridge Jr., Chief Executive Officer of the Aerospace Corporation, which provides technical analysis for the United States and international space programs, testified before the U.S. House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence’s Subcommittee on Technical and Tactical Intelligence, regarding three rocket-launch failures. All of the launch failures⎯an explosion after launch in August 1998, a missile-warning satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 9 April 1999, and a military communications satellite launched into the wrong orbit on 30 April 1999⎯had involved Lockheed Martin Titan IV rockets. The three mission failures had cost taxpayers “at least [US]$3 billion.” Hall explained that the U.S. Air Force had traced the three launch failures to human error. The investigators had traced the most recent failure specifically to a misplaced decimal point. Aldridge, whose company had been responsible for checking U.S. Air Force rockets for defects prior to launch, explained that the mistake “got through,” despite the system in place to prevent such occurrences. Aldridge remarked that his company’s workforce of engineers, scientists, and support personnel had decreased by 30 percent since 1993, and that the recent launch failures had caused further delays, resulting in increased costs for the Titan program. Both Aldridge and Hall requested federal funding. House Subcommittee Chairperson Michael N. Castle (R-DE) asked whether the military rocket program, which receives less supervision than NASA, needed greater congressional oversight. Castle announced that the subcommittee would hold further public hearings on the failures.(Stephen Sobek for Gannett News Service, “Human Error Called Culprit in 3 Rocket Launch Failures,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 16 June 1999.)
 The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) detached the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite-L (GOES-L) from an Atlas IIA rocket, returning the satellite to the integration facility Astrotech, where engineers planned to recondition its batteries and purge it of gaseous nitrogen, to prevent degradation. NOAA had planned to store the satellite in orbit, ready to replace one of the weather satellites, GOES-8 or GOES-10, but GOES-L had been on the launchpad since 6 May. On 15 May, NASA and NOAA had decided to delay the launch of GOES-L until they had received the results of the investigations into the recent Titan and Delta launch failures.(NOAA, “Weather Satellite De-mated from Launch Vehicle, NOAA and NASA Announce,” news release, 15 June 1999, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases99/june99/noaa99GOESDemate.html (accessed 12 February 2008).)
 NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg announced several immediate management changes in the Office of Space Flight. NASA appointed William F. Readdy, former Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, as Deputy Associate Administrator, with primary responsibility for daily management of personnel and program activities. Having participated in Shuttle missions in 1992, 1993, and 1996, Readdy was an astronaut on flight status, eligible for future Shuttle missions. NASA appointed W. Michael Hawes, a former chief engineer for the ISS, as Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Development (Space Station), responsible for directing the space station budget, establishing and implementing station policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners. Norman B. Starkey replaced Readdy as Director for Space Shuttle Requirements, assuming responsibilities that included directing the Space Shuttle budget, establishing and implementing Shuttle policy, coordinating external communications, and serving as a liaison to the executive branch, Congress, industry, and NASA’s international partners.(NASA, “NASA Selects Key Space Flight Managers,” news release 99-71, 16 June 1999.)
 NASA disclosed that a sequence of computer commands issued by flight controllers on the ground had failed to fire the ISS’s engines, placing the uninhabited space station in potential danger. The cause of the failure was human error. Flight controllers had sent commands directing the new space station to move out of the path of a piece of space junk, which posed a danger to the craft. A U.S. military organization tracking such objects had predicted that the “fairly large” piece of space junk of Russian origin would pass within 0.6 miles (1 kilometer) of the space station on 13 June. However, the debris came no closer to the new ISS than 4.5 miles (7.2 kilometers). A collision could have destroyed the uninhabited space station. NASA’s Deputy Program Manager for Space Station Operations, Frank L. Culbertson Jr., explained that, because the space station’s computers had rejected the flight controllers’ faulty commands, the station had no motion control for an entire orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 18 June 1999.)
 A Lockheed Martin Titan II rocket launched successfully, carrying JPL’s QuikSCAT satellite. Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation had built QuikSCAT in 11 months, setting an industry record. JPL stated that the satellite had “opened its solar arrays as planned an hour after launch, and a tracking station in Norway acquired the first signal from the spacecraft 18 minutes later.” NASA had originally scheduled the satellite’s launch for November 1998, but delayed it when a Titan IVA exploded after launch, carrying a payload for the National Reconnaissance Office. NASA had postponed the QuikSCAT launch until engineers could determine whether Titan II used any of the hardware that had caused the explosion on the Titan IVA. Following the launch of a Titan IVB rocket that placed a Milstar satellite in a faulty orbit, NASA had again delayed the QuikSCAT’s launch, pending investigation of the failure. The successfully launched QuikSCAT satellite was on a two-year mission with the option of a third year, to “gather about 400,000 detailed measurements of the speed and direction of winds over the ocean’s surface.” NASA intended the US$98 million mission to “improve weather forecasting and detect the onset of conditions like El Niño.” Engineers had designed the QuikSCAT to radiate microwave pulses over wide areas and to listen for the pulses’ echo. Those return signals would “allow scientists to determine wind speeds and directions at the surface of the oceans. Understanding the interaction [of wind and ocean circulation] is important for weather prediction.” Under the terms of NASA’s first contract using the Rapid Spacecraft Acquisition process, Ball Aerospace had provided the QuikSCAT spacecraft bus, launch interface, system integration, test, launch support, and two years of mission operations.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Lockheed Martin’s Titan Launches with QuikScat Satellite,” 20 June 1999; “Satellite Launched on Weather Mission,” New York Times, 20 June 1999; Aerospace Daily, “QuikSCAT Makes It to Space After Six-Month Delay,” 22 June 1999; Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corp., “BATC Launches Its First Commercial Spacecraft,” news release, 19 June 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=30 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
 NASA announced the appointment of N. Jan Davis, Director of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Independent Assurance Office, as Deputy Director of the new Flight Projects Directorate at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, effective July 1999. NASA had tasked the Directorate with overseeing “development of crucial parts of the ISS,” such as connecting Nodes 2 and 3, the Multi-purpose Logistics Modules, commercial EXPRESS (EXpedite the PRocessing of Experiments to the Space Station) racks, the environmental and life support systems, and the Payload Operations Integration Center. Davis had begun her NASA career at MSFC in 1979, leading a team “responsible for structural analysis of the Hubble Space Telescope, the telescope-servicing mission, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory.” She had also served as “lead engineer for the redesign of the Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster External Tank attach ring” before becoming an astronaut in 1987. Davis had flown on three Shuttle missions, logging more than 670 hours in space.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “Astronaut Jan Davis Returns to Marshall Space Flight Center,” news release 99-102, 21 June 1999, http://www.msfc.nasa.gov/news/news/releases/1999/99-102.html (accessed 11 February 2008); James McWilliams, “Ex-Astronaut Named Marshall Executive,” Huntsville Times (AL), 22 June 1999.)
 NASA’s JPL announced that Discover Magazine had awarded NASA’s Solar Electric Propulsion Technology Application Readiness (NSTAR) program team its Award for Technological Innovation in the exploration category. The annual awards “honor teams whose innovations improve the quality of everyday life.” The NSTAR program team won the award for its work on the futuristic ion-propulsion system used on NASA’s Deep Space 1 spacecraft.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Ion Propulsion System Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 99- 054, 22 June 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/discoverawards.html (accessed 11 February 2008).)
 NASA successfully launched its Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) telescope aboard a Delta II rocket. FUSE’s three-year mission was to measure the abundance of deuterium, or heavy hydrogen, which stars consume every day and convert to helium. Astronomers hoped that the study of deuterium would help them understand better “what the universe was like moments after creation.” The FUSE scientists sought to determine how much deuterium still exists and how much of it stars consume regularly, thereby calculating “the original makeup of the universe.” NASA had nearly cancelled the FUSE project in the early 1990s, because of cost overruns and missed deadlines, but in 1994 NASA had asked Johns Hopkins University to manage the project. Project managers at Johns Hopkins had scaled down the scientific instrument and used existing equipment instead of developing new technologies. The Canadian Space Agency had provided the camera, the French Space Agency had provided the spectrograph, and other U.S. universities had provided various parts for the telescope. Orbital Sciences Corporation had built the spacecraft using an existing design to reduce costs further. NASA considered the spacecraft and its launch a success; NASA’s Science Director Edward J. Weiler remarked, “We have never had a satellite as sensitive as FUSE.”(Washington Times, “Special Telescope To Look for First Signs of Creation,” 25 June 1999; Steven Young for Reuters, “NASA Launches Telescope To Seek Universe’s Origin,” 24 June 1999.)
 NASA announced that the WIRE Mishap Investigation Board had concluded that NASA’s Wide- Field Infrared Explorer (WIRE) satellite had failed after its 4 March 1999 launch, “because of an incorrectly designed electronics box.” The premature firing of explosive devices⎯the pyrotechnics⎯had caused the instrument’s telescope cover to eject too early in the mission, thus exposing the instrument’s frozen hydrogen to the Sun. The frozen hydrogen was necessary to cool the telescope’s infrared detectors. The satellite had lost the frozen hydrogen within 48 hours of its launch, rendering the instrument incapable of carrying out its scientific mission. Darrell R. Branscome, Deputy Associate Administrator (Enterprise Development) for NASA’s Office of Space Flight and chairperson of the eight-member investigation team, emphasized that there had been no component failure, but “simply a case of a design error that allowed power to get to the explosive charges before it should have.” The board’s report also concluded that engineers had failed to identify the design errors in the circuitry controlling the pyrotechnical functions. Unlike the other systems in the satellite, the electronics box design had received no peer review.(NASA, “Investigation Finds Design Errors Caused WIRE Spacecraft Failure,” news release 99-74, 25 June 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-074.txt (accessed 11 February 2008).)
 NASA announced its decision to end a US$240 million project to land a small spacecraft on a comet, so that scientists could learn how to destroy a comet if it were on course to collide with Earth. NASA had planned to launch the probe in 2003 and to land it on the surface of Comet Tempel 1 in 2005. After landing, the probe was to drill into the nucleus of the comet, helping scientists understand the comet’s composition. Manager of the Space Technology 4 project Brian Muirhead remarked, “we know very, very little about how comets are formed and what their constituency is,” adding that anyone serious about planetary protection must learn more about comets. NASA’s JPL was in the early stages of developing the Space Technology 4/Champollion project and had only spent US$10 million. NASA had also considered canceling Mars Surveyor 2001, but had already spent US$100 million on that project. Other projects were experiencing cost overruns also, such as the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, which needed an extra US$60 million to cover last-minute development problems. NASA intended to redirect some funds from Space Technology 4 to other missions experiencing funding difficulties, such as Chandra.(Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Comet Lander,” 29 June 1999.)
 The Russian Defense Ministry launched Raduga-1, an early-warning-system satellite for detecting missile launches, aboard a Proton-K booster rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Ground controllers lost communication with the satellite minutes after its launch, and just as it reached its preliminary orbit, both the satellite and the second stage of the rocket crashed in a remote region of Kazakhstan. Russian space officials initially stated that the satellite had crashed in an uninhabited area, but a Russian television network reported that a large piece of the Proton rocket had fallen onto farmland in the Karaganda region of Kazakhstan, nearly hitting a house. Nobody was injured in the crash.(United Press International, “Russian Satellite Crashes into Kazakhstan,” 6 July 1999. 737 Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Halts Russian Space Launches,” 6 July 1999.)
 Pending the outcome of an investigation into the crash of a Russian Proton rocket the previous day, the Kazakhstan government banned Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, causing a potentially significant disruption to Russia’s commercial satellite launch program. Kazakhstan’s foreign ministry informed the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs that launches from the facility would cease until investigators had identified the causes of the crash and evaluated the damage sustained. The ministry did not indicate how long the ban would remain in effect. Kazakhstan investigators collected soil and water samples to test for possible hazardous material dispersed in the crash.
 Astronaut Charles P. “Pete” Conrad Jr. died at age 69 of injuries sustained in a motorcycle accident. George W. S. Abbey, Director of Johnson Space Center, described Conrad, the third man to walk on the Moon, as a person who “combined skill and ability with wit and humor to become one of the courageous pioneers who took humankind beyond the bounds of our planet.” As an example of Conrad’s wit, Abbey quoted his parody of the famous words Neil A. Armstrong had uttered when taking his first steps on the Moon. Upon leaving the lunar module Intrepid on 19 November 1969 for his own moonwalk, Conrad had quipped, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” Conrad had been a member of NASA’s second candidate class of astronauts in 1962 and had flown on the Gemini 5 mission with L. Gordon Cooper Jr. The pair had spent a record eight days in orbit in August 1965, perfecting techniques for later lunar missions. In September 1966, Conrad had commanded the Gemini 11 mission; during that mission, he and Richard F. Gordon Jr. had linked their Gemini spacecraft with an Agena target vehicle, establishing a record for the fastest space rendezvous and docking in history. Conrad had also served as Commander of the Apollo 12 mission in November 1969, with Alan Bean and Richard Gordon as crewmates. During his final spaceflight in 1973, Conrad had been the first Commander of Skylab, the first American space station. The Skylab crew had spent 28 days in space, establishing another endurance record. Conrad had won the Congressional Space Medal of Honor, two NASA Distinguished Service Medals, two NASA Exceptional Service Medals, two Navy Distinguished Service Medals, and two Distinguished Flying Crosses.(NASA Johnson Space Center, “Third Man To Walk on Moon Dies in Motorcycle Accident,” news release J99- 24, 9 July 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1999_2001/j99-24.html (accessed 2 January 2008).)
 Ukraine’s Prime Minister Valery Pustovoitenko appealed to Kazakhstan’s Premier Nurlan Balgimbayev to permit the launch of the Okean-O research satellite aboard a Ukrainian Zenit rocket, despite the launch ban following the 5 July crash of a Russian rocket. Ukrainian officials expressed concern that a delay beyond 15 July, with the rocket’s lengthy stay on the launchpad, would endanger the prospect of a successful launch. The Ukrainian space program, seeking to compete in the lucrative commercial space market, was under pressure to make a successful launch after the crash in September 1998 of a Zenit rocket, destroying 12 of Globalstar Inc.’s communications satellites.(Pavel Polityuk for Reuters, “Ukraine Appeals for Rocket Launch amid Kazakh Row.”)
 After a two-day delay because of high-altitude winds, the Boeing Company successfully launched a Delta II rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, carrying four Globalstar communications satellites. An hour after launch, the rocket deployed the 988-pound (448-kilogram) satellites in pairs, bringing the total number of satellites in Globalstar Inc.’s constellation to 28, 4 less than the 32 needed to begin network service.(Justin Ray, “Third Try Was the Charm for Delta 2 Rocket,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 July 1999. 741 Washington Times, “Air and Space Director Killed in Glider Crash,” 14 July 1999.)
 Donald D. Engen, Director of the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum, and William Ivans, an internationally known, award-winning pilot from La Jolla, California, died when the motorized glider that Ivans was piloting broke apart and crashed. Investigators were attempting to determine the cause of the accident. Larry Sanderson, President of the Soaring Society of America, remarked that “both victims were top pilots in ‘an extremely well-built aircraft. So it had to be a very unusual set of circumstances that stressed the craft’.” Both Engen and Ivans were officers of the Soaring Society, and Ivans, a pioneer in the field, had won many awards for high-altitude soaring. Engen had retired from the U.S. Navy in 1978, with the rank of vice admiral and had been a test pilot for many years. After retiring from the Navy, he had served for two years on the National Transportation Safety Board and as administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration between 1984 and 1987. He became Director of the National Air and Space Museum in 1996, following the resignation of Martin O. Harwit.
 President Nursultan Nazarbayev set Kazakhstan’s conditions for permitting Russia to launch a Progress cargo craft carrying supplies to the Mir space station, scheduled to lift off from Baikonur Cosmodrome on 14 July. Kazakhstan had suspended all Russian launches from the facility, following the crash of a Russian Proton-K rocket on 5 July. Nazarbayev’s terms for permitting the launch of the Progress craft included Russia’s payment of its US$300 million debt for the lease of Baikonur Cosmodrome and a visit of high-level Russian officials to the Proton-K rocket’s crash site.(Sujata Rao for Reuters, “Kazakhstan Sets Terms for Russian Space Launch,” 13 July 1999.)
 Kenneth R. Timmerman, President of Middle East Data Project Inc., testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics that Iran was designing a new missile named Kosar, capable of reaching the continental United States. Timmerman stated that NASA had given Russian aerospace entities millions of dollars for the Russian space program, but that Russia had diverted those funds to support Iran’s missile program. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) remarked that each new report of Russian proliferation activities raised the possibility that NASA was inadvertently subsidizing Russian industries, which the United States believed were helping Iran to threaten the United States’ friends and allies in the Middle East and in Europe. Henry D. Sokolski, Executive Director of the Nonproliferation Policy Education Center, testified that legislation sponsored by Representative Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY) was critical to ensuring Russia’s cooperation with the nonproliferation efforts of the United States. Gilman’s legislation would require the President of the United States to determine whether Russia was “assisting Iran’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.” If the President determined that Russia was furnishing such aid to Iran, the federal government would prohibit NASA from “transferring U.S. tax dollars to the [Russian Space Agency] or any enterprise under the [Russian Space Agency] jurisdiction.” An unnamed NASA official testified that to replace the operational capabilities that Russia provided to the International Space Program would cost as much as US$5 billion.(Audrey Hudson, “Analyst Fears U.S. Helps Iran Develop Missile via Moscow: Russia Diverts Aid from Its Space Agency,” Washington Times, 14 July 1999.)
 The Boeing Company announced that it had completed negotiations on a cooperative agreement with NASA to develop an experimental space plane. The US$173 million contract stipulated that Boeing and the federal government share costs equally. Boeing and NASA hoped that the X-37 space plane, previously called the Future-X Pathfinder, would “serve as a test bed for new reusable launch technologies,” helping to achieve the “goal of reducing the cost of placing space vehicles and cargo into orbit.” Boeing envisioned a vehicle that would be “unpiloted, autonomously operated, and capable of speeds up to Mach 25, while demonstrating aircraft-like operations.” NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center led the X-37 government team, comprising the U.S. Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base and NASA facilities, including Ames Research Center, Kennedy Space Center, Goddard Space Flight Center, Langley Research Center, and Dryden Flight Research Center.(The Boeing Company, “NASA, Boeing Sign X-37 Vehicle Agreement,” news release, 14 July 1999, http://www. boeing.com/news/releases/1999/news_release_990714t.html (accessed 19 February 2008); John O’Dell, “California Southland Focus Boeing, NASA Agree on Space Plane Contract,” Los Angeles Times, 15 July 1999.)
 Kazakhstan partially lifted its ban on launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, permitting a Russian Progress cargo spacecraft to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Kazakhstan had agreed to permit the Progress launch after receiving Russia’s promise to pay a US$115 million fee for the use of the launch facility. Russia had agreed to pay US$50 million in cash by November 1999 and US$65 million in goods by 2000. Kazakhstan’s launch ban on Proton-K rockets remained in effect.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan Lifts Space Ban, Russian Launch Cleared,” 14 July 1999; Associated Press, “Russia- Kazakhstan-Space,” 14 July 1999.)
 A Russian Progress M42 cargo spacecraft launched with a Soyuz-U rocket to deliver supplies to the Mir space station. Supplies included equipment necessary to keep an uninhabited station operational and equipment for conducting a controlled reentry, in the event that Russia could not obtain the resources necessary to continue operation. The launch was the first since Kazakhstan’s partial relaxation of a launch ban at Baikonur Cosmodrome.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 549, 1 August 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx549.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
 A Russian rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome, carrying a scientific satellite into orbit. It was the second launch from the facility since Kazakhstan partially lifted the launch ban imposed following the crash of a Proton-K rocket on 5 July.(Washington Times, “Russian Satellite Launched in Kazakhstan,” 18 July 1999. 210)
 The United Nations opened a conference, scheduled to run through 30 July, on space technology and exploration, the first such conference held in 17 years. The primary goals of the Unispace III conference included 1) adopting the Vienna Declaration, which provided “international guidelines for the use and environmental protection of outer space”; 2) addressing the cleanup of debris in space, including satellites or parts of spacecraft no longer in use, but continuing to orbit; and 3) ensuring the accessibility of information from outer space to all people, regardless of a country’s ability to support costly space exploration programs. In his opening remarks, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan “urged the peaceful use of outer space,” suggesting the necessity of a legal instrument, such as the Vienna Declaration, to prevent space from “becoming another arena of military confrontation.” Because joint development programs between the UN and private industries were necessary to achieve the conference’s goals, businesses involved in space technology participated in Unispace for the first time.
 The salvage team lifted astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom’s Mercury capsule to the surface of the Atlantic Ocean just one day before the 38th anniversary of the astronaut’s historic suborbital flight. The second American in space, Grissom had flown in his Liberty Bell 7 Mercury capsule on 21 July 1961. After its ocean landing, the capsule’s hatch had blown open prematurely, nearly drowning him. Both the location of the capsule and the cause of the accident had remained a mystery until 1 May 1999, when a salvage team led by Curt Newport and funded by the Discovery Channel had discovered the spacecraft 3 miles (4.8 kilometers) beneath the ocean. Even after the team had retrieved the capsule, the cause of the accident remained a mystery. The salvage team had yet to locate the capsule’s hatch, which Newport believed had the greatest potential for determining what had caused the malfunction at the end of Grissom’s flight.(Los Angeles Times, “Grissom’s Mercury Capsule Recovered,” 21 July 1999; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Expedition Begins To Recover Mercury Capsule from Ocean,” 2 July 1999.)
 During a spacewalk lasting nearly 6 hours, cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev searched for the source of a leak that was slowly causing pressure loss in Mir; they also attempted to install an antenna needed for an experiment. Both efforts failed. The leak, first detected in late June 1999, was “above the allowable limit.” Although it posed no immediate threat to the space station, if the leak continued for three more months, the station would become uninhabitable.(Nikolai Pavlov for Reuters, “Mir Crew Spacewalks To Seek Pressure Leak,” 23 July 1999; Kansas City Star (MO), “Antenna Failure Prevents Mir Test: Two Cosmonauts Give Up After Trying To Fix It for Six Hours,” 24 July 1999.)
 After two delays, Space Shuttle Columbia launched on Mission STS-93 from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, under the command of Eileen M. Collins, NASA’s first female Shuttle commander in 38 years of human spaceflight. Commander Collins’s crew comprised Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby and Mission Specialists Steven A. Hawley, Catherine G. Coleman, and Michel Tognini. Columbia carried on board the US$1.5 billion Chandra X-ray Observatory, previously known as the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility (AXAF), as well as secondary payloads and experiments⎯the Southwest Ultraviolet Imaging System to capture ultraviolet imagery of the Earth, Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Jupiter; plant growth experiments; biological cell-culture studies; and the Treadmill Vibration Information System and High Definition Television System, which the crew planned to test. NASA had scrubbed both of the Shuttle’s earlier launch attempts late in the countdown, halting the 20 July launch 6 seconds before blastoff because of a technical malfunction and the 22 July launch because of stormy weather. The U.S. Air Force and the Boeing Company postponed a commercial launch to permit NASA a third chance to deliver Chandra into orbit. However, the Shuttle continued to have problems. During the 8-minute climb into outer space, a 0.5-second-long short circuit shut down computers controlling two of the Shuttle’s three main engines. Furthermore, Columbia was 4,000 pounds (1,800 kilograms) short of liquid oxygen fuel in its external fuel tank, leaving the craft in orbit 7 miles (11 kilometers) lower than planned. Fuel carried aboard the orbiter made up the shortfall. Seven hours into the flight, the crew deployed Chandra into orbit, accomplishing its primary mission.(USA Today, “Shuttle Lifts Off with Woman in Command,” 23 July 1999; Brad Liston for Reuters, “Shuttle Roars into History After Launch Problems,” 23 July 1999; Beth Dickey, “After Hiccup at Liftoff, Shuttle Puts Telescope into Space,” New York Times, 25 July 1999; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-93, Chandra X-ray Observatory,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-93.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
 Commander Eileen M. Collins became the first woman to “land a spaceship of any kind, anywhere,” when she guided Space Shuttle Columbia to a safe late night landing at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, the 12th nighttime touchdown in the Shuttle program’s 95-flight history. A few hours after the landing, NASA confirmed that hydrogen fuel had leaked from one of the craft’s main engines during liftoff on 23 July. Columbia’s mission, lasting just five days, was the shortest planned flight in nine years.(Atlanta Journal (GA), “Shuttle Columbia: Woman Commander Kept Cool During Snafus,” 28 July 1999; Los Angeles Times, “1st Shuttle Led by Woman Lands Safely in Florida,” 28 July 1999.)
 Two Russian cosmonauts carried out a successful 51⁄2-hour spacewalk outside Mir, installing equipment and opening the antenna that they had failed to unfold properly in a previous spacewalk. Russian space officials said that the spacewalk was most likely the last to occur at Mir. This was the seventh spacewalk for Mir Commander Viktor M. Afanasyev and the eighth spacewalk for Flight Engineer Sergei V. Avdeyev, who had spent a record-making, cumulative total of 717 days in space.(Reuters, “Mir Cosmonauts Make Final Spacewalk,” 28 July 1999.)
 NASA announced that, after Space Shuttle Columbia’s return to Earth on the night of 27 July, engineers had found “three little holes” in its right engine nozzle, confirming that the Shuttle had leaked hydrogen fuel during liftoff. The holes, 0.25 inches (0.64 centimeters) in size, had caused the craft to lose up to 5 pounds (2.3 kilograms) of fuel during each second of its 81⁄2-minute climb to orbit.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Confirms Hydrogen Leak in Columbia Shuttle,” 29 July 1999.)
 NASA scientists announced that, because the Deep Space 1 spacecraft had aimed its camera incorrectly when it flew within 15 miles (24 kilometers) of a small asteroid named Braille, the craft had failed to capture an image. However, the craft had succeeded in its primary mission to test 12 new technologies during the flyby, thereby validating the instruments’ future use in solar- system probes. Deep Space 1 was equipped with “a mind of its own,” enabling it to navigate through space without much assistance from ground control. The craft had traveled at 35,000 miles (56,000 kilometers) per hour relative to the asteroid, which was 117 million miles (188 million kilometers) from Earth. The flyby of the Braille asteroid, the final test of Deep Space 1’s Autonomous Navigation System, had been the closest any spacecraft had come to an object in our solar system without landing.(Washington Times, “Spacecraft Misses Asteroid Snapshot: Camera Can’t See Rock Called Braille,” 30 July 1999.)
 NASA’s Lunar Prospector crashed into a frozen crater on the Moon, but detected no water upon impact. Scientists, believing that the crater held frozen water, had hoped that the “fire and violence of the collision would vaporize ice,” sending a “wet plume, detectable by special instruments, spiraling into the lunar sky.” Telescopes equipped with ultraviolet detectors recorded hours of data after the impact, searching for the “chemical signature” of water. The Prospector mission, which had lasted 18 months following its 6 January 1998 launch, had used five instruments to “map the magnetic, chemical and gravitational character of the [M]oon.”(Associated Press, “Spacecraft Smashes into Moon: Scientists Hoping for Evidence of Ice Vapor in Lunar Sky,” Washington Post, 1 August 1999.)
 NASA announced the student winners of the 1998–1999 National General Aviation Design Competition, sponsored by NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). A team of 33 students at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, had produced the winning design, “aimed at attracting customers who want to move from propeller-driven craft to jets without needing a significant increase in pilot skill.” A 13-member team from Pennsylvania State University in University Park, Pennsylvania, won second place for their “Baracuda,” an acronym for Boldly Advanced and Refined Aircraft Concept Under Development for AGATE, a national, general aviation revitalization program. The team’s “conventional-layout, modern- composite airplane featuring advanced aerodynamics, systems, and avionics” was a four-place, single-engine, jet-powered aircraft. A three-university team⎯the University of Virginia, Old Dominion University in Hampton, Virginia, and Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York⎯won third place for a “highly innovative design known as the ‘Yeah Man’,” a craft with two tail booms, each with vertical tails. The aircraft, which NASA scientists had tested in the Full Scale Wind Tunnel at Langley Research Center, showed good aerodynamic characteristics.(NASA, “NASA and FAA Pick Student Aircraft-Design Contest Winners,” news release 99-87, 2 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-087.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 NASA selected two software programs for the 1999 NASA Software of the Year award from 50 entries representing more than 150 corporations, universities, and government laboratories. In the 1970s, NASA’s Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field (GRC)⎯at that time, the Lewis Research Center⎯had begun to develop the first award-winning program, the Genoa/Progressive Failure Analysis Software System, to simulate and predict “aging and failure in all sorts of structural materials, including high-tech alloys and ceramics used in airplanes, cars, engines, and bridges.” In 1998 NASA’s Small Business Innovation Research program had commercialized the software, primarily for the use of aircraft manufacturers. Ames Research Center and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) had developed the other winning software, the Remote Agent program, a “precursor to self-aware, self-controlled robots, exploring rovers and intelligent machines.” NASA had used the Remote Agent software to plan three days of activities for Deep Space 1, and the spacecraft had “carried out the plan without ground intervention.”(NASA, “NASA’s 1999 Software of the Year Makes Cars Safer and Spacecraft Cheaper,” news release 99-90, 5 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-090.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); NASA, “NASA SBIR Success-Genoa,” http://sbir.gsfc.nasa.gov/SBIR/successes/ss/3-048text.html (accessed 22 February 2008). 758 SPACEHAB Inc., “Ground Breaking Deal Opens New Space Frontier: SPACEHAB Buys First Commercial Rights Aboard International Space Station,” news release, 9 August 1999, http://www.spacehab.com/news/1999/ 99_08_09.htm (accessed 25 February 2008).)
 SPACEHAB Inc. and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) signed a contract granting SPACEHAB the use of one of the CSA’s experiment lockers on the International Space Station (ISS), beginning in May 2001. According to the agreement between the two organizations, the CSA had committed to commercializing half of its allocated space aboard the space station, a global first in space commercialization.
 NASA and the National Research Council of Canada signed a protocol at the Aerospace North America conference in Vancouver, British Columbia, founding the Aircraft Icing Research Alliance and drafting the Aircraft Icing Research Strategic Plan, to “provide a framework for collaboration to develop critical aircraft icing technologies.” The Alliance planned to add more partners, such as the United States’ FAA, Environment Canada, Transport Canada, and other government agencies, universities, industrial firms, and organizations interested in aviation-icing research.(NASA, “NASA and Canada Join Forces To Combat Aircraft Icing,” news release 99-92, 11 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-092.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 Robert Thomas “R.T.” Jones, who had “led the development of the swept-back jet wing design that revolutionized air travel and enabled planes to break the sound barrier,” died at the age of 89. Jones had begun designing the swept-back wings in 1944, when airplane wings were perpendicular to the fuselage, while working at NACA (National Advisory Committee on Aeronautics), NASA’s predecessor agency. In 1945 Jones had conducted airflow studies, showing that a cone-shaped shock wave cut across the tips of straight wings, causing deterioration at Mach 1, the speed of sound. Jones had concluded that a swept-back design would preserve the wings and reduce drag. Although his idea was initially ignored, “virtually every commercial and military jet uses the design today.” Jones’s later research had included work on the oblique wing, “mounted on a pivot on top of the fuselage.” The oblique wing maintained a right angle to the fuselage for maximum lift during takeoff, but the pilot could manipulate it so that, at cruising altitude, one wing tip pointed forward and one backward, saving fuel, generating less engine noise, and eliminating the sonic boom. Although Jones’s oblique wing design had never advanced beyond the testing stage, some aeronautical designers continued to study its possibilities.(Washington Post, “Robert Jones Dies; Led Breakthrough on Wing Design,” 15 August 1999.)
 NASA’s largest balloon⎯39 million cubic feet (1.1 million cubic meters) in volume and 60 stories high⎯lifted off from Lynn Lake in Manitoba, Canada, to carry out a 38-hour flight more than 20 miles (32 kilometers) above Earth. The balloon carried a Japanese-built instrument, the Superconducting Solenoidal Magnet, to collect particles of antimatter. Shuji Orito of the University of Tokyo led the project, called BESS (Balloon Borne Experiment with a Superconducting Solenoidal Magnet); NASA sponsored the United States’ portion of the mission and Monbusho sponsored the Japanese portion.(NASA, “Balloon-Borne Instrument Collects Antimatter,” news release 99-93, 16 August 1999, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-093.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 Kazakhstan’s Finance Minister, Uraz Dzhandosov, announced that Russia had paid US$12.5 million as a first installment of its debt to Kazakhstan, fulfilling a condition of the agreement between the two countries. Kazakhstan had demanded the payment as part of the terms of lifting the launch ban it had imposed on Russia when a Russian Proton rocket exploded after liftoff from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan.(Russia Today, “Russia Pays First Part of Baikonur Debt, 12 August 1999. 214)
 China confirmed that it had fired its new Dong Feng-31 (DF-31) missile during a test launch on 2 August, publicizing details of the successful launch of the long-range, ground-to-ground, intercontinental, strategic ballistic missile. The Chinese Guangzhou Daily reported that the “three-stage, solid-fuel rocket was launched from northern Shanxi province and crashed down in the western territory of Xinjiang.” Jane’s Defence Weekly estimated that the DF-31 had an 8,000-kilometer (5,000-mile) range and was capable of carrying a 700-kilogram (1,500-pound) nuclear warhead. Robert Karniol, a foreign correspondent covering Asia for the defense industry publication Jane’s, remarked that “the DF-31 should be operationally deployed by China in 2000,” and that the country expected to build 10 to 20 of the missiles, some replacing 1960s-era missiles with half the range of the DF-31. The Guangzhou Daily also reported that China had developed the technology for piloted spaceflight. Wang Xinqing, head of the China Carrier- Rocket Research Institute, which designs military- and civilian-use rockets, stated that the core of the program was the development of a new series of carrier rockets, Long March 5. Wang Xinqing also refuted a report by the U.S. Congress alleging that China had stolen the United States’ missile and nuclear warhead technology, insisting that China had perfected the rocketry before the United States had achieved it.(Matt Pottinger for Reuters, “China Details Missile Test, Planned Space Flight,” 12 August 1999.)
 The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) published a report critical of the X-33 program jointly sponsored by NASA and Lockheed Martin, concluding that the program was unlikely to meet its original cost, schedule, and performance goals because of increased costs, delayed testing, and revised objectives. However, NASA and Lockheed Martin responded that they expected the program to “achieve technical requirements, such as demonstrating the feasibility of building large liquid hydrogen fuel tanks made of graphite composite material.” The purpose of the X-33 Program was to develop and demonstrate advanced technologies for use on future reusable launch vehicles, such as the company’s VentureStarTM.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Transportation: Status of the X-33 Reusable Launch Vehicle Program” (report no. NIASD-99-176, Washington, DC, 11 August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99176.pdf (accessed 4 March 2008).)
 NASA’s GRC announced that, for the first time, researchers had suspended particles of frozen hydrogen in liquid helium, the first step toward creating new rocket fuels that could revolutionize rocket-propulsion technology. Researchers had poured small amounts of liquid hydrogen at a temperature of 14 K (-435°F or -259°C), just above freezing point, onto the surface of liquid helium of a temperature just above absolute zero, at 4 K (-452°F or -269°C). The liquid hydrogen had formed small, solid hydrogen particles, which floated on the surface of the helium. Scientists planned to use the suspension to create “futuristic atomic fuels,” making it possible to develop rockets with “liftoff weights one-fifth that of today’s [rockets] or with payloads three to four times more massive.” In addition, the suspension could “reduce or eliminate on-orbit assembly of large space vehicles,” thereby contributing to the exploration of the entire solar system.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Rocket Fuels Researchers Suspend Frozen Hydrogen Particles in Helium,” news release 99-65, 12 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/news/pressrel/1999/99_65.html (accessed 25 February 2008).)
 A burst of radiation from Jupiter hit NASA’s Galileo spacecraft as it gathered data about Jupiter’s moon Callisto, causing computer malfunctions. However, NASA reported, “recently loaded software automatically restarted command sequences, minimizing the loss of science data.” James K. Erickson of NASA’s JPL, Project Manager of the Galileo Program, remarked on the highly variable nature of the radiation, explaining that, previously, the spacecraft had entered safe modes during radiation bursts, resulting in the loss of data. Galileo’s instruments had only lost about 1 hour of data during the radiation burst, successfully recording data about magnetic fields and particles. Project scientists expected that the data would help them study the event. To emphasize the value of the software, Erickson stated, “If we didn’t have the automatic restart software, we wouldn’t be getting any data at the encounters.”(Michael A. Dornheim, “Unexpected Jovian Radiation Hits Galileo,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 151, no. 8 (23 August 1999): 42.)
 A team of astrophysicists at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center announced that they had found the first direct evidence of a black hole pulling in matter. Using the Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics, an x-ray satellite belonging to Japan and the United States and launched in 1993, the team observed superheated gas in the accretion disc of the black hole. Previously, scientists had only “seen” the phenomenon by observing these accretion discs, or “the swirling matter circling around as it is being pulled into the black hole.” However, this time, the Goddard team had observed a “strange feature” buried in the x-rays that the gas emitted. Energy had been redshifted, an occurrence described as an “astronomical Doppler effect,” because, just as the compression of sound waves, for example, causes the sound of a siren to rise and fall as it passes an observer, light stretches as it speeds away from Earth. The team observed light that was being stretched⎯redshifted⎯moving at about 6.5 million miles (10.5 million kilometers) per hour, toward a black hole in galaxy NGC 3516.(Reuters, “Evidence of Super Gravity Reported: Backs Black Hole Astronomy Theory,” Washington Times, 17 August 1999.)
 Swedish state prosecutors charged Charlie Malm and Joel Soederberg of Stockholm, who had broken into NASA computer systems between October and December 1996, with violating Sweden’s computer laws and with buying stolen equipment. In the trial, scheduled for sometime in the fall, NASA intended to demonstrate that the pair had “caused NASA great economic loss.” Malm and Soederberg had also broken into the computer systems of the U.S. Air Force, U.S. Army, and U.S. Marines, as well as the system of a British Internet company.(Susanna Loof for Associated Press, “Swedes Charged with U.S. Hacking,” 16 August 1999.)
 NASA announced its selection of three very small satellites, each about 16 inches (41 centimeters) across and 8 inches (20 centimeters) high, to conduct the Nanosat Constellation Trailblazer mission, the fifth mission in NASA’s New Millennium program. NASA had developed the New Millennium program to test technology for future missions, with the goal of dramatically reducing the weight, size, and costs of missions, while simultaneously increasing science capabilities. NASA scheduled the US$28 million Nanosat Constellation mission to launch in 2003 as a secondary payload on an expendable launch vehicle.(NASA, “NASA Selects Miniature Spacecraft To Test Space Technology,” news release 99-95, 19 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-095.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 NASA announced that it had completed negotiations for a contract worth up to US$1.73 billion, to purchase 73 Space Shuttle reusable solid rocket motors from the Thiokol Propulsion company. Each Shuttle flight used two of these motors as the primary component of the Shuttle solid rocket boosters, providing 6.6 million pounds (2.9 million kilograms) of thrust, 71.4 percent of the thrust needed for liftoff. The contract covered the manufacture and delivery of the new motor components through September 2004, as well as postflight review of the last motors flown through 2005.(NASA, “NASA, Thiokol Complete $1.7 Billion Shuttle Motor Agreement,” news release c99-c, 24 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/1999/c99-c.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 SPACEHAB Inc., the first company to “commercially develop, own, and operate habitable modules that provide laboratory facilities and logistics re-supply aboard NASA’s Space Shuttles,” and leading global provider of commercial payload-processing services, participated in a Brazilian industry conference. Brazsat, a Brazilian commercial space company, hosted the Third Commercial Space Workshop, in Rio de Janeiro on 23 and 24 August. North American, South American, and European industry and government leaders attended the workshop, where SPACEHAB’s Chief Executive Officer Shelley A. Harrison delivered one of two keynote addresses. Participants at the workshop, which had the theme “Commercial Space Technologies and its Benefits in the New Millenium,” presented “state-of-the-art space technologies, research spin-offs and applications in areas of microgravity research, remote sensing, telecommunications satellites, distance learning, telemedicine and other disciplines” of human spaceflight.(SPACEHAB Inc., “SPACEHAB Participates in Key Brazilian Industry Conference: SPACEHAB CEO Addresses Industry Officials on Essential Space Initiatives,” news release, 31 August 1999, http://www.spacehab. com/news/1999/99_08_31.htm (accessed 3 March 2008).)
 Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation announced that NASA had selected the company to build two spacecraft for the Space Technology 3 (ST-3) Mission, part of NASA’s New Millenium Program. The contract, valued at US$50 million, covered the development and manufacture of the two spacecraft as well as the integration and testing of completed systems. NASA planned for the two spacecraft, flying 0.5 miles (0.8 kilometers) apart, to demonstrate interferometry, simulating a single large telescope. NASA’s JPL was responsible for developing the interferometer and formation-flying sensing technologies, as well as for managing the mission.(Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corporation, “BATC Wins NASA Contract for Two Spacecraft To Test Space Technology,” news release, 25 August 1999, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=36 (accessed 25 February 2008).)
 NASA released two initial images from its Chandra X-ray Observatory. One image traced “the aftermath of a gigantic stellar explosion in such stunning detail” that scientists believed they had detected evidence of a neutron star or black hole near the center. The second image showed “a powerful x-ray jet blasting 200,000 light-years into intergalactic space from a distant quasar.” Chandra was still in its orbital “check-out and calibration phase” when it captured the images, confirming that the observatory was performing up to expectations.(NASA, “NASA Unveils First Images from Chandra X-ray Observatory,” news release 99-98, 26 August 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-098.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 Cosmonauts Viktor M. Afanasyev and Sergei V. Avdeyev departed Mir with their French colleague Jean-Pierre Haigneré, leaving the station empty for the first time in 131⁄2 years. On 2 August, in preparation for the departure, the crew had installed a new computer, which provided orientation and docking management systems to keep the station in orbit during the absence of a crew. The crew had also installed a ground-controlled backup system, which would prevent the station from crashing to Earth if a malfunction occurred on board the station.(David Hoffman, “Cosmonauts Abandon Mir: Russian Space Station Faces Demise After 13 Years Aloft,” Washington Post, 28 August 1999; Andrei Shukshin for Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Has New Computer in Control,” 2 August 1999; Reuters, “Russia’s Mir Crew Fit Equipment To Leave Station,” 6 August 1999.)
 Lockheed Martin cleared its Atlas II rocket to resume the 1999 launch schedule, after having placed its schedule on hold when a Delta III launch failed in early May. Delta’s RL10B-2, upper- stage engine was similar to the RL10A-4 used on Atlas’s Centaur upper stage. The Boeing Company and Pratt & Whitney had led the investigation of the Delta III launch failure, with the support of Lockheed Martin. Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin Astronautics had formed two panels “to ensure that no aspects of commonality between the RL10 engine versions were overlooked.” The Senior Engineering Review Panel and the Senior Management Review Team had addressed potential causes of launch failure identified in the Delta III investigation, ruling out those factors that did not apply to Atlas flights. When the investigators had determined that “an engine- brazing process that left voids in combustion chamber structural jacket splice joints” was common to all RL10 engines, Lockheed Martin had instituted a new set of inspection and analysis measures for accepting or rejecting each engine. Lockheed Martin intended to use the inspection techniques on new production chambers; Pratt & Whitney planned to continue using its standard procedure, with its Flight Certification Board certifying each set of RL10 engines for all Atlas missions.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin’s Centaur RL10 Engines Cleared for Flight,” news release, 30 August 1999,)
 GAO published a report, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems,” reiterating its previous recommendation to NASA to plan for a scenario in which Russia was unable to fulfill its commitments to the ISS. Although the report recognized that NASA was in the process of drafting such a plan, GAO’s sole recommendation to NASA was to ensure the contingency plan’s completion before the launch of the Russian-built Service Module.(Jonathan Lipman, “GAO Warns NASA About the Russians,” Space.com, 30 August 1999, http://www.space. com/news/spacestation/gao_30.html (accessed 9 April 2008); U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station: Russian Commitment and Cost Control Problems” (report no. GAO/NSIAD-99-175, Washington, DC, August 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/1999/ns99175.pdf (accessed 25 February 2008).)
 http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINSCENTAURRL10ENGINESCL. html (25 February 2008). The Independent Assessment Team on Mission Success, which Lockheed Martin had commissioned in May 1999 after a series of Titan IV launch failures, met its 1 September deadline, reporting its findings and recommendations to Lockheed’s senior management. Lockheed Martin had tasked the investigating team with assessing program management, engineering and manufacturing processes, and quality-control procedures within the company’s Space and Strategic Missiles Sector. Having discovered problems in accountability, quality, subcontract and supplier management, and cost emphasis, the Team recommended that the company develop a “fly-out plan” for Titan IV’s remaining missions, improve its quality control, and improve its management of suppliers and subcontractors. Chairperson of the review panel A. Thomas Young remarked that regardless of the problems the team had uncovered, the panel had also found “enormous fundamental technical strengths” throughout the sector, as well as “highly capable and dedicated” staff. Young also commented that the new leadership team was “off to a positive start.” Vance D. Coffman, Chairperson and Chief Executive Officer for Lockheed Martin, “endorsed the panel’s findings and pledged Lockheed Martin to implementing its recommendations.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Implements Space Panel Recommendations,” news release, 8 September 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINIMPLEMENTSSPACE PANELR.html (accessed 27 February 2008).)
 Kazakhstan lifted its ban on launches of Russian Proton rockets after Moscow paid US$270,000 in compensation for the 5 July crash of one of the booster rockets and completed an agreed-upon joint investigation. The lifting of the ban cleared the way for two Russian Yamal-100 communications satellites to launch aboard a Proton rocket on 6 September. Although initially the country had banned all launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome, which Russia had rented since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan had modified the ban to bar only Proton rocket launches, pending a joint investigation of the accident.(Russia Today, “Kazakhstan Ends Russia Proton Rocket Ban,” 1 September 1999.)
 NASA announced its decision to ground the entire Space Shuttle fleet while technicians continued detailed inspections of the fleet’s wiring. During the first month of inspections, following the discovery that faulty wiring had caused a short circuit during Columbia’s 23 July launch, technicians had located dozens of nicked or exposed wires. Shuttle managers had decided to extend the inspections to allow technicians to examine additional parts of each Shuttle. Technicians had replaced damaged wiring, encased some wires in plastic tubing, added Teflon wrapping to others, and replaced some connectors, to protect the wiring systems against future damage. Manager of the Space Shuttle Program Ronald D. Dittemore explained that the wiring problems “appeared to have been caused by work-related mechanical damage”⎯from being rubbed or stepped on or from having “heavy objects set down on them.” The age of the wiring, normal wear, or vibrations from Shuttle operations did not appear to have caused the damage.(Warren E. Leary, “Shuttle Fleet Is Grounded by Damage to Wiring,” New York Times, 4 September 1999. 219)
 NASA announced that its new orbiting SeaWinds radar instrument, flying aboard the QuikSCAT satellite, was successfully tracking Iceberg B10A, which had broken off the Thwaites glacier of Antarctica in 1992, drifting into a shipping lane. Earlier in 1999, Iceberg B10A had disappeared when conventional methods of tracking sea-surface ice⎯ships’ radar, shipping reports, optical images from satellites, and microwave sensor data⎯were unable to track it. David G. Long of the SeaWinds science team at Utah’s Brigham Young University remarked that, although “a ship was dispatched to the iceberg’s last known position, we were unable to find it until we started receiving data from the SeaWinds instrument in July.” During its first pass over Antarctica, SeaWinds had spotted the iceberg, and the National Ice Center in Suitland, Maryland, had confirmed that the iceberg was B10A. Scientists had continued to track it as it moved through the Drake Passage and headed northeast between Tierra del Fuego, at the southern tip of South America, and the Antarctic Peninsula. At that time, the National Ice Center had issued an iceberg navigation warning to Argentina.(NASA, “New NASA Ocean Radar Watches for Breakup of Giant Iceberg,” news release 99-102, 3 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-102.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 NASA announced that scientists at Ames Research Center (ARC), who were developing an autonomous robot called the Personal Satellite Assistant (PSA), had completed a key test of the robot’s components. NASA planned to use the robot to support future space missions, equipping it with a variety of sensors to monitor environmental conditions inside a spacecraft, such as the amounts of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and other gases in the air; the amount of bacterial growth in the environment; the air temperature; and the air pressure. The development of the PSA was the next phase in developing advanced information technologies, following the success of the Wireless Network Experiment, which NASA’s ARC had conducted for the International Space Station (ISS) in 1995. Atlantis astronauts had discovered that wireless computer network systems worked well in a space environment during Mission STS-76, when they tested these networks and found that radio signals from wireless computers did not interfere with the electronic equipment of the Shuttle or of Mir. The experiment’s success had prompted the astronauts to recommend using handheld, wireless, portable data assistants to support mission operations on the future ISS. ARC scientists had taken the idea a step further, designing autonomous intelligent robots that would free the astronauts’ hands. ARC scientists had also designed the PSA to handle routine “housekeeping chores,” such as monitoring inventory and performing environmental sensor-calibration checks, so that astronauts would have more time to focus on research tasks.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA Developing Autonomous Robot for Future Space Missions,” news release 99-53AR, 8 September 1999.)
 A Russian Soyuz booster launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome 450 miles (724 kilometers) north of Moscow, carrying German, French, and Swedish research devices. In selecting the launch location, Russia was attempting to increase its use of the Plesetsk launch facility because of its problems continuing to launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia had rented the Baikonur launch facility from Kazakhstan.(Reuters, “Russian Rocket Blasts Off from Plesetsk Cosmodrome,” 9 September 1999. 220)
 NASA’s Inspector General Roberta L. Gross published findings and recommendations on behalf of NASA’s Office of Inspector General, regarding Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr.’s proposed Triana satellite project, named for Rodrigo de Triana, the sailor on Christopher Columbus’s 1492 voyage who had first spotted North America. The Triana project would call on NASA to provide “continuous, satellite-generated images of the Earth for posting on the Internet.” Gross suggested that it was “ill-advised for the financially strapped [A]gency to fund a new system to collect pictures of Earth when many images” were already widely available. Gross said the Triana project would cost four times as much as the Vice President’s US$50 million estimate, noting that NASA had already spent US$41 million on the project, even though Congress had not yet endorsed it. She criticized NASA for “pressing forward with the project without fully assessing the scientific value of photographing the Earth.” NASA had scheduled the satellite for launch aboard a Space Shuttle in December 2000.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “Assessment of the Triana Mission” (final report no. G-99-013, Washington, DC, 10 September 1999), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-99-013.pdf (accessed 3 March 2008); Steve Lash, “Gore’s Pet Project Not Worth Its Cost, NASA Auditor Says,” Houston Chronicle, 17 September 1999. 784 Greg Schneider, “AlliedSignal Technical Gets a New President; Adamson Is Former Astronaut, Shuttle Executive, Engineer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 September 1999; NASA Johnson Space Center, “Biographical Data: James C. Adamson,” http://www.jsc.nasa.gov/Bios/htmlbios/adamson-jc.html (accessed 28 October 2008).)
 AlliedSignal Technical Services, based in Columbia, Maryland, named as its president former astronaut and Space Shuttle Program Office executive James C. Adamson, who had logged 334 hours in orbit during Missions STS-28 and STS-43. AlliedSignal Technical Services had a staff of 1,800 in Maryland and responsibility for oversight of most of the “spacecraft ground and flight control at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt [Maryland].” In accepting the appointment, Adamson was leaving his position as Chief Operating Officer of United Space Alliance (USA), which operated the Shuttle program for NASA.
 Lockheed Martin announced a “sweeping reorganization” of key leadership positions, in response to recommendations of the review panel chaired by A. Thomas Young. The Young Panel had urged the company to make structural changes to correct quality-control problems at Astronautics, the unit responsible for Atlas, Titan, and Athena rocket development. In response to the panel’s recommendation to divide the two tasks of product assurance and mission success, Astronautics President G. Thomas Marsh appointed John P. Mari as Vice President of Product Assurance and Roman Matherne as Vice President for Mission Success. Marsh named John Parker, President of the former Mission Success and Product Assurance Section, to head the operations post in Lockheed Martin’s VentureStarTM Program, which the company hoped to develop into a future reusable launch vehicle with the potential to replace the Space Shuttle. Marsh appointed Joel S. Porter as Vice President for Business Development and Advanced Programs for Astronautics, succeeding Matthew B. Foster, who resigned. Other changes at Astronautics included the appointment of Claude McAnally as Vice President of Operations; the appointment of Grover W. Hall Jr. as Vice President of Technical Operations; and the separation of Technical Operations from Manufacturing Operations to better delineate responsibility and accountability, according to the recommendations of the Young Panel. Lockheed tasked Gareth D. Flora, under Marsh’s supervision, with developing, managing, and improving subcontract management. In addition, Flora became responsible for ensuring that the company properly implemented the recommendations of the investigating team, as well as those of a separate U.S. Air Force review of the aerospace industry.(Jeffrey Leib, “Lockheed Replaces Key Staff in Astronautics Unit,” Denver Post (CO), 21 September 1999.)
 NASA announced the establishment of a review panel to examine the overall safety of Shuttle maintenance and refurbishment practices following the discovery of maintenance-related damage to the Shuttle fleet’s electrical wiring. NASA had named Director of ARC Henry McDonald to chair the panel. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg indicated that the other team members, not yet named, would include top maintenance experts from NASA, the military, the commercial aerospace industry, and the commercial aircraft industry. NASA required the team to assess NASA’s standard practices and recommend improvements, with preliminary findings due in October.(NASA, “NASA Forms Independent Industry-Government Team To Review Shuttle Maintenance and Refurbishment Practices,” news release 99-104, 20 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99- 104.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 Space.com, an Internet site devoted to covering the news and science of space, appointed Sally K. Ride as its President. Lou Dobbs had begun Space.com in July 1999, after resigning as president of CNN’s Financial News. Ride, the first American woman in space, had worked closely with Dobbs as he launched the site. The position was her “first foray into the cyberspace after a long career in space research, policy, and education.(Andrea Orr for Reuters, “Space.com Names Space Woman as Company President,” 21 September 1999.)
 Former astronauts Michael J. McCulley, Vice President and Deputy Program Manager for USA, and William F. Readdy, NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Flight, testified before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics regarding wiring damage found in Space Shuttles Columbia, Discovery, Endeavour, and Atlantis. In its first official report since discovering that frayed wires had caused the short circuit 5 seconds into Columbia’s launch on 23 July, NASA informed committee members that wiring inspections and maintenance had cost US$350,000. NASA had not yet calculated the cost of the ongoing safety “stand down.” NASA also indicated that it did not intend to pay USA the US$2.5 million the company would have earned if it had punctually delivered the next Shuttle scheduled for launch. McCulley had indicated that his company accepted “full responsibility for wiring damage” found in all four Shuttles, despite the fact that the wiring problems might have stemmed from maintenance conducted before USA took over operational responsibility. Committee members expressed their concern that NASA planned to request more money for the repairs, but Readdy replied that such a scenario was unlikely, because USA would be responsible for making the repairs. Committee members also were worried about whether Shuttle launches and flights could maintain adequate safety levels when the Shuttle team had only a few opportunities to practice their skills. NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance Frederick D. Gregory responded that simulation launches, in combination with a flight rate of two launches per year, were sufficient to keep a launch team’s skills sharp.(Larry Wheeler, “Shuttle Wiring Inspections, Maintenance Cost $350,000,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 September 1999; Tamara Lytle, “NASA Officials Bring Wiring Problems to House Panel’s Attention,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 September 1999.)
 NASA scientists lost contact with the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its Martian orbit and disappeared behind the planet, a little less than a year after the launch of its Mars mission in December 1998. Mars Surveyor Project Manager John B. McNamee said that the orbit-insertion burn, a 16-minute-long burn to slow the spacecraft down as it enters orbit, had begun on time. The team of NASA scientists observed 5 minutes of the burn before the craft went behind Mars. At that point, the craft stopped communicating. Communication did not resume at the time the team expected the craft to reappear from the far side of the planet. McNamee reported that the latest navigation results showed that the craft had entered its orbit lower than his team had planned, indicating that NASA’s navigation predictions at the tracking station may have been incorrect. Carl B. Pilcher, Science Director for Solar System Exploration at NASA Headquarters, commented that, although losing the spacecraft was very serious, the loss was “not devastating to the Mars Surveyor Program as a whole,” because the mission of Mars Polar Lander, scheduled to arrive at Mars two months after Mars Climate Orbiter, was independent of that of Orbiter.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “NASA’s Mars Climate Orbiter Believed To Be Lost,” news release, 23 September 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/mcolost.html (accessed 3 March 2008); Reuters, “NASA Loses Contact with Mars Orbiter,” 23 September 1999.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia, the oldest of NASA’s four orbiters, landed at a U.S. Air Force plant in California for a “long-overdue tune-up.” The orbiter’s overhaul, expected to last until July 2000, came months late because of delays related to the launch of the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Columbia astronauts had deployed Chandra during a mission in July 1999. The inspection and overhaul was Columbia’s fourth since entering service in 1981.(Associated Press, “Shuttle Tuneup,” 25 September 1999.)
 NASA announced that after just two months in space, the Chandra X-ray Observatory had taken “a stunning image of the Crab Nebula,” revealing for the first time “a brilliant ring about the nebula’s heart.” The Crab Nebula, located 6,000 light-years from Earth, in the constellation Taurus, is the remnant of a star that Chinese astronomers had observed exploding in 1054 A.D., when it “appeared suddenly and remained visible for weeks, even during daytime.” Astronomers had used “virtually every astronomical instrument” to study the Crab’s area of the sky, discovering that unlocking its mysteries led to “insight after insight” into how the universe works. Astronomers had linked the origin of pulsars to supernovas and confirmed the cosmic origin of chemical elements through the study of the “expanding cloud of filaments” in the Crab. The new image showed the Crab pulsar “accelerating particles up to the speed of light and flinging them out into interstellar space at an incredible rate.” Using Chandra’s “exceptional resolution,” scientists had traced the jet all the way to the neutron star, where the ring pattern clearly appeared. Previously, Hubble Space Telescope images had revealed “moving knots and wisps around the neutron star,” and other x-ray images had shown the outer portions of the jet, only hinting at the ring structure.(NASA, “Chandra Discovers X-ray Ring Around Cosmic Powerhouse in Crab Nebula,” news release 99-109, 28 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-109.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); Paul Hoversten, “Photos Get to the Source of Pulsar,” USA Today, 29 September 1999.)
 NASA released preliminary findings of an internal peer review conducted at Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) after the apparent loss of the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft as it entered its orbit on 23 September. The results of the review indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the Mars Climate Orbiter spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California led to the loss of the spacecraft.” The peer review discovered that “one team had used English units while the other used metric units for a key spacecraft operation.” NASA’s systems engineers had failed to detect the error. In addition to the JPL committee, NASA had formed a separate review committee of experts from within and outside of JPL and planned to establish an independent failure-review board shortly.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Team Finds Likely Cause of Loss,” news release 99-113, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-113.txt (accessed 15 February 2008).)
 NASA announced that new findings from the Galileo spacecraft indicated the presence of sulfuric acid on the frozen surface of Jupiter’s moon Europa. Sulfuric acid is a corrosive chemical found in car batteries. Robert W. Carlson of NASA’s JPL, the lead author of a paper published in the journal Science, was Principal Investigator for Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer, which located the chemical. The new findings corroborated Galileo’s earlier spectrometer data analyses, suggesting the presence of sulfate salts on Europa. Despite indications that a liquid ocean may exist under Europa’s crust, Carlson had initially thought the presence of sulfuric acid would end debate over whether it was possible for Europa to contain biological life. However, his colleague Kenneth H. Nealson suggested the opposite, remarking that sulfur and sulfuric acid are oxidants⎯energy sources known to us on Earth. Therefore, Nealson proposed that the findings should encourage scientists to search for “any possible links between the sulfur oxidants on Europa’s surface and natural fuels produced from Europa’s hot interior.”(NASA, “Battery Acid Chemical Found on Jupiter’s Moon Europa,” news release 99-112, 30 September 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-112.txt (accessed 15 February 2008); R. W. Carlson et al., “Sulfuric Acid on Europa and the Radiolytic Sulfur Cycle,” Science 286, no. 5437 (1 October 1999): 97–99.)
 V. Philip Rasmussen Jr., Head of the Department of Plants, Soils, and Biometeorology at Utah State University, began work as NASA’s first and only agricultural extension agent, with the task of disseminating to American farmers satellite data that could increase their productivity. In 1917 Congress had established the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Cooperative Extension Service, operating out of land-grant universities and serving every county in the country. Through this program, the federal government had made research-based agricultural information available to the public in exchange for federal resource support at the universities. Initially, Cooperative Extension Service agents had focused on farm and ranch questions, but the program had evolved to assist home gardeners, greenhouse users, and businesses as well. After studying the land-grant university system, NASA had decided to create a space-grant consortium system to provide the public with access to space science, such as the sciences of remote sensing and crop management. These scientific fields had developed significantly since the 1970s, when Rasmussen had used Landsat data strategically to predict Russian crop yields. At that time, the U.S. government was not using Landsat data to assist American farmers, but under NASA’s new space-grant program, Rasmussen’s primary task would be to make such satellite data available, through the existing county extension service, so that county agents could teach farmers how to use the data to improve crop yield. Rasmussen described his extension work⎯using the global positioning satellite (GPS) program in tandem with the geographic information system⎯as “precision agriculture,” because farmers could use the data to make informed adjustments concerning methods of watering and fertilizing fields of various soil types.(Joe Bauman, “NASA Agent Tackles Down-to-Earth Work,” Deseret News (Salt Lake City, UT), 23 October 1999.)
 The Perseus B research aircraft, built by Aurora Flight Sciences Inc., sustained moderate damage when it crashed on a California highway during a flight from NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) in Edwards, California. The craft was a “developmental vehicle designed to operate at high altitudes for extended periods on scientific sampling missions,” one of several aircraft that NASA was evaluating as part of its Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program. Controllers could operate the craft remotely from a ground station, or the Perseus B could navigate autonomously along a preprogrammed flight path. At the time of the accident, ground-based Aurora Flight Sciences mission controllers at Edwards Air Force Base were guiding the Perseus B. DFRC flight safety officials, with assistance from Aurora Flight Sciences operations staff, formed an accident investigation team to determine the exact cause of the crash.(NASA, “Perseus B Damaged in Crash on California Highway,” news release 99-115, 1 October 1999.)
 NASA announced that scientists studying high-resolution images from Mars Global Surveyor had detected no evidence that ocean shorelines once existed on Mars. Previously, researchers had interpreted features in images from NASA’s Viking missions of the 1970s as remnants of ancient coastlines. However, Surveyor images taken in 1998, with a resolution 5 to 10 times sharper than images that Viking had produced had not provided evidence that water in a coastal environment had formed those features. Michael C. Malin of Malin Space Science Systems, Principal Investigator for the Mars Orbiter Camera aboard Surveyor, remarked that although scientists could not rule out the presence of oceans on Mars at one time, the evidence in the new images appeared to undermine the “foundation for the ‘ocean hypothesis’ developed in the 1980s on the basis of suspected shorelines.” Nevertheless, Malin acknowledged “significant other evidence of water on Mars in the past,” suggesting that as the Mars Orbiter Camera continued to acquire new high-resolution images, scientists might have new clues to the role of water in the evolution of Mars.(NASA, “New Mars Images: No Evidence of Ancient Ocean Shorelines,” news release 99-114, 1 October 1999.)
 The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) successfully conducted the first of a series of tests of a proposed missile defense system. An unarmed Minuteman missile, carrying a dummy warhead and decoy balloon, launched over the Pacific Ocean from Vandenberg Air Force Base; 20 minutes later an Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle, a 55-inch-long (1.4-meter-long), 120-pound (54.4-kilogram) device built by Raytheon Corporation, launched aboard a booster rocket from the Marshall Islands. The two missiles collided 10 minutes later, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) from California and 140 miles (225 kilometers) above the ocean. According to the CIA, when DOD conducted the test, North Korea, Iran, and Syria were developing long-range missiles that could hit the United States.(Associated Press, “Missile Test Sparks Russian Gripes,” 4 October 1999.)
 NASA announced its selection of three graduate students to receive Michelson fellowships offered by NASA’s Origins Program and its Space Interferometry Mission. NASA awarded a fellowship to Philip M. Hinz of the University of Arizona for his work building a new type of nulling interferometer designed to null the glare from nearby stars, thereby enabling scientists to observe, in infrared wavelengths, dust and giant planets orbiting the stars. NASA chose Erin M. Sabatke, also of the University of Arizona, to work on creating models of large, stretched, flat, plastic membranes, for collecting light from several telescopes placed on separate spacecraft flying in formation. Sabatke planned to explore the use of this technique to photograph planets around other stars. NASA selected Benjamin F. Lane, a student at California Institute of Technology, for his work advancing the “technique of using two stars with a narrow angle separating them to measure relative motion of one with respect to the other, utilizing a ground- based interferometer.” NASA had named the fellowship program for the first American to win a Nobel Prize in physics, Albert Michelson, known as the father of interferometry. Interferometry is a technique of combing and processing light from multiple telescopes to obtain a clear image of distant objects. The fellowship covered tuition, a student stipend, and a small budget for travel and other research expenses, for three years of graduate research at the student’s host institution.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Three Planet-Hunters Earn NASA’s Michelson Fellowships,” news release 99-086, 4 October 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/fellowships.html (accessed 7 March 2008).)
 Vladimir Petrovsky, a member of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, condemned the United States’ 2 October testing of its proposed missile defense system, noting that testing could “aggravate relations not only between the United States and the Asian-Pacific region, but also between Japan⎯a U.S. ally in the development of the system⎯and other countries.” Russia had refused to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which would have permitted the United States to develop a full-fledged missile defense system. Preventing either country from developing missile defense systems, the Cold War–era treaty acted as a deterrent by keeping both the Soviet Union and the United States vulnerable to attack. Officials in Washington, DC, stated that DOD was testing a missile defense system intended to destroy lone missiles launched by rogue states or terrorists, not a system meant to protect against a multi-missile attack from a major nuclear power.(Associated Press, “Missile Test.”)
 Analyzing data from NASA’s Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) spacecraft, researchers proved for the first time that smoke from forest fires inhibits rainfall. TRMM, a mission of the United States and Japan and part of NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, had been producing continuous data since December 1997. Daniel Rosenfeld of the Institute of Earth Sciences at Hebrew University in Jerusalem had studied the data, finding that clouds polluted with heavy smoke significantly inhibit warm rain processes. When smoke pollutes them, cloud tops must “grow considerably above the freezing level” to produce rain through a different process. Rosenfeld remarked that the results of his research had validated earlier studies, which showed that urban air pollution inhibits rainfall. Christian D. Kummerow, a TRMM scientist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) commented that such findings were “making the first inroads into the difficult problem of understanding humanity’s impacts on global precipitation.”(NASA, “Spacecraft Provides First Direct Evidence: Smoke in the Atmosphere Inhibits Rainfall,” news release 99-110, 5 October 1999.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, to head the Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board. Mars Climate Orbiter had disappeared on 23 September as it entered orbit around Mars. Goldin tasked the board with independently reviewing all aspects of the mission’s failure, to verify whether it had been the result of an inadequacy in NASA’s interplanetary navigation systems. Preliminary findings from an internal peer review at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory indicated that “a failure to recognize and correct an error in a transfer of information between the spacecraft team in Colorado and the mission navigation team in California” had caused the loss of the spacecraft. Goldin instructed the board to report its initial findings by 3 November.(NASA, “Head of Mars Climate Orbiter Investigation Board Named,” news release 99-117, 6 October 1999.)
 NASA researchers at MSFC unveiled an experimental 50-foot (15-meter) track using magnetic levitation (maglev) technology to propel a 30-pound (13.6-kilogram) model of a spacecraft, at a speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour, in 0.5 seconds. MSFC researchers had sought to reduce launch costs, as well as to reduce space-vehicle size with the development of a maglev launch-assist system. The maglev track was theoretically capable of propelling and releasing a spacecraft at 600 miles (965 kilometers) per hour; wing design would then lift the craft and “give it a kick start” before the ignition of the rocket’s engines. MSFC Manager of Launch Technologies Sherry Buschmann commented that the researchers believed the use of maglev technology could cut launch vehicle size by 20 percent. NASA’s industry partner in the experimental technology was PRT Advanced Maglev Systems Inc. of Park Forest, Illinois.(NASA Marshall Space Flight Center, “New NASA Track Races Toward Cheaper Trips to Space,” news release 99-260, 4 October 1999; Kent Faulk, “NASA Spacecraft Float to Future: Researchers Test Levitation as Way To Boost Launches,” Birmingham News (AL), 7 October 1999.)
 NASA released new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images of the cores of spiral galaxies like the Milky Way, and astronomers studying the images for clues about galactic development discussed their findings at a briefing at NASA Headquarters. Two complementary surveys by independent research teams had concluded that the Hubble images confirmed the evolutionary link between a disc-like cloud of dust and gas at the center of a galaxy and a bulge of millions of stars at the center of the disc-like cloud. The central bulge stabilizes a galaxy’s development, controls the birth of stars in the galaxy’s core, and “holds secrets as to how and when a galaxy formed.” Reynier F. Peletier of the University of Nottingham in the United Kingdom confirmed that central bulges of “more tightly wound spirals” formed at approximately the same time in the early universe. C. Marcello Carollo of Columbia University, who had led a team studying galaxies with small bulges and “bar-like structures that bisect the nucleus,” had discovered that such galaxies developed more recently. Both teams had used HST’s visible-light and infrared cameras to determine the stars’ true colors, a measure of the age of the stars inside the galaxies’ core.(NASA, “Starry Bulges Yield Secrets to Galaxy Growth,” news release 99-107, 6 October 1999; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Tackles Questions About Cosmic Bulges,” 6 October 1999.)
 A Delta II rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, carrying a NAVSTAR Block 2R GPS satellite, the third in a new series of GPS spacecraft; Lockheed Martin was under contract with the U.S. Air Force to launch 21 GPS craft. The NAVSTAR Block 2R military navigational satellite became the 28th operational spacecraft in the GPS constellation, to replace an older satellite in the network after completing a one-month test period. The U.S. Air Force had originally planned to launch the replacement craft in May 1999, but after a rainstorm had damaged the satellite while it was sitting on the launchpad, the Air Force had returned it to Lockheed Martin Missile and Space for repairs. Two hurricanes, a tropical storm, and other rainstorms had caused additional weather delays, preventing the launch of an alternate replacement satellite.(Irene Brown, “Delta Rocket Soars into Space,” Space.com, 7 October 1999.)
 NASA’s Galileo probe survived intense radiation emanating from Jupiter during a “do-or-die effort,” when the spacecraft came within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io. The craft experienced computer problems when passing through the densest part of Jupiter’s radiation belt, but 1 hour after Galileo’s closest encounter with Io, all of its systems had resumed normal functioning. Duane Bindschadler, Manager of Science Operations for the Galileo Program, explained that close-up study of Io could help scientists learn about the behavior of volcanoes, thereby helping them predict the behavior of volcanoes on Earth. However, because Jupiter’s radiation field could damage or destroy the spacecraft, NASA had planned the close flyby for the end of the two-year extended mission, following Galileo’s original two-year mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Succeeds in Historic Flyby of Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon,” news release, 11 October 1999; Reuters, “Galileo Probe Risks Ruin for a Closer Look at Io,” Washington Post, 12 October 1999.)
 Space Imaging Inc., a private company owned by Lockheed Martin and based in Thornton, Colorado, released a photograph taken from space of the intersection of 14th Street, NW, and Constitution Avenue in Washington, DC. President William J. Clinton had approved the development of private space cameras in 1994, but Space Imaging had been the first company to successfully build and launch a spacecraft with such a camera, launching its Eastman Kodak– built camera on 24 September and testing it on 30 September. The commercial image rivaled the products of military spy technology, showing objects as small as 3 feet (0.9 meter) wide. Space Imaging’s test image showed the Washington Monument, part of the Ellipse, and the buildings of the U.S. Department of Commerce and the Museum of American History.(William J. Broad, “Giant Leap for Private Industry: Spies in Space,” New York Times, 13 October 1999. 228)
 At the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences, research group leaders from the University of Texas at Austin announced that scientists had sifted through the data from Earth-based observatories and from spacecraft such as the HST, obtained from the controlled crash of NASA’s Lunar Prospector into a crater near the south pole of the Moon on 31 July. The researchers reported that they had identified “no observable signature of water” in the Moon’s crater. The announcement confirmed the conclusion reached at the time of the crash. The Lunar Prospector spacecraft had launched on 6 January 1998. In March 1998, mission scientists had announced the first tentative findings of the presence of water ice on both of the Moon’s poles. The controlled crash, proposed by engineers and astronomers at the University of Texas, was “a low-budget attempt to wring one last bit of productivity from the low-cost” mission. NASA had accepted the proposal because of the successful peer review of the idea, and because the craft’s useful life was nearing its end.(NASA, “No Water Ice Detected from Lunar Prospector Impact,” news release 99-119, 13 October 1999; Associated Press, “Craft’s Crash into Moon Finds No Water,” Los Angeles Times, 13 October 1999.)
 NASA announced its selection of the next two missions of its Medium-Class Explorer (MIDEX) Program. The first mission, headed by Neil Gehrels of NASA’s GSFC and planned for launch in 2003, was the Swift Gamma Ray Burst Explorer, a three-telescope space observatory designed with the “unique ability to rotate in orbit and point its gamma-ray telescope, x-ray telescope, and ultraviolet/optical telescope at gamma-ray bursts [GRBs] within minutes of the burst’s first appearance.” The second mission, led by Kenneth J. Johnston of the U.S. Naval Observatory, was the Full-Sky Astrometric Mapping Explorer (FAME), scheduled to launch in 2004, a space telescope designed to “obtain highly precise position and brightness measurements of 40 million stars.” From a group of five missions selected in January 1999, NASA had chosen these two missions for detailed four-month feasibility studies, examining cost, management, and technical plans, such as small business involvement and educational outreach. NASA had originally received 31 full proposals in August 1998. Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler remarked that the selection of the two missions had been the most difficult he had made during his 21 years at NASA, because, over the years, the space science community had been submitting to NASA a steadily increasing number of first-class concepts for smaller missions.(NASA, “NASA Selects Missions To Search for Planetary Systems and Observe Cosmic Explosions,” news release 99-120, 14 October 1999.)
 Two satellites, the China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS-1), sometimes called ZY-1 in Chinese reports, and the Brazilian Saci-1 satellite, launched atop a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Taiyuan Launch Center in central China. Brazil and China had jointly financed the 1,500-kilogram (3,307-pound) CBERS-1, which carried three high-resolution cameras for monitoring environmental and vegetation conditions in Brazil and China, as well as in other, unspecified locations. Brazil had designed the 60-kilogram (132-pound) Saci-1 microsatellite to monitor cosmic rays, the magnetic field, and plasma. Shortly after launch, communications with the craft failed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 552, 1 November 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx552.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
 NASA released its newest and most accurate map of the continent of Antarctica, created from data that the Canadian Space Agency’s (CSA’s) RADARSAT-1 satellite had collected over an 18-day period during the spring of 1997. Vexel Corporation of Boulder, Colorado, had developed software to generate a mosaic of the continent from “many small images made from different angles and orientations of the satellite.” Project officials and scientists remarked that the most important discoveries resulting from the radar images concerned the network of ice streams; the new satellite data revealed that the streams traveled “enormous distances at speeds up to 3,000 feet (914 meters) per year⎯100 times faster than the flow of surrounding ice.” The CSA had begun planning RADARSAT in 1980, because of Canada’s interest in using a high- resolution radar satellite to monitor shipping channels in the Arctic. NASA’s negotiations with the CSA had resulted in an agreement: NASA would launch the satellite and provide software and data analysis in exchange for access to some of the data the satellite produced. Additionally, the CSA would make at least two imaging scans of Antarctica. RADARSAT had launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base on 4 November 1995, but, until 1997, Canadian controllers had not completed a difficult rotation of the satellite, necessary to place Antarctica in full view. Once correctly oriented, RADARSAT had been able to complete the imaging in 18 days because it could collect data anytime of the day or night and in any weather. The last satellite map of Antarctica had used images from five different satellites, spanning the years 1980 to 1994.(NASA, “NASA Unveils New, Most Accurate Map of Antarctic Continent,” news release 99-122, 18 October 1999; Malcolm W. Browne, “Under Antarctica, Clues to an Icecap’s Fate: Radar Uncovers a Network of Ice Streams Larger and Faster than Expected, and More Ominous,” New York Times, 26 October 1999.)
 President William J. Clinton signed into law the FY 2000 appropriations bill for the Department of Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Other Agencies, which included the US$13.65 billion NASA budget. Congress had approved NASA’s budget on 7 October. In keeping with the President’s original request, the final appropriation included full funding for the International Space Station and the Space Shuttle program; US$80 million for Spaceliner 100, an MSFC program to find new propulsion technology; US$25 million for Shuttle upgrades; US$5 million for the National Center for Space Research and Technology, a joint venture including MSFC, the University of Alabama in Huntsville, and private industry; and US$3 million to continue research into tether-guided satellites. The U.S. House of Representatives’ version of the bill had cut US$900 million from NASA’s funding, but the U.S. Senate had approved a budget equal to NASA’s FY 1999 budget: US$13.6 billion. House Republicans had voted to eliminate funding for Triana, a controversial Earth-observing satellite first envisioned by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr., but the House and Senate conference committee had voted on a compromise, providing for the National Academy of Sciences to review the program and forbidding NASA from launching Triana until 1 January 2001.(Brett Davis, “Congress Approves Full NASA Budget,” Huntsville Times (AL), 8 October 1999; Stephen Koff and Tom Diemer, “Cleveland NASA Unit, CMHA Get Funding,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 21 October 1999.)
 British astronomers Martin J. Ward of the University of Leicester and Keith Mason of Mullard Space Laboratory at University College, London, announced that NASA had selected them to participate in its Swift Gamma Ray Burst Explorer mission. NASA’s mission called for the two scientists to use a pair of specialized telescopes, one measuring ultraviolet and visible light and the other measuring x-ray light, to study GRBs, the “unpredictable powerful explosions in space that sometimes last less than one second.” A collaboration of Italian, British, and U.S. scientists, the Swift Gamma Ray Burst Explorer was one of NASA’s medium-class explorer missions, scheduled for launch in 2003.(Reuters, “British Scientists Selected for New NASA Project,” 21 October 1999.)
 Brazilian space officials, having lost contact with their country’s Saci-1 satellite days after its launch, asked NASA to help them rescue the US$4.6 million satellite. Saci-1 had launched on 14 October from China along with another satellite, the CBERS-1, which the two countries had built jointly. Brazil asked NASA to photograph the satellite, check its condition, and devise a plan for its recovery. President of the Brazilian Space Agency Luis Meira Filho remarked that Brazil had not given “the satellite up for lost,” because space officials knew its location. The CBERS-1 satellite was functioning normally and had returned images of Brazil.(Reuters, “Brazil Asks NASA Help To Rescue Lost Satellite,” 21 October 1999.)
 NASA released an image of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io, captured at the closest range ever accomplished. The image, which NASA’s spacecraft Galileo took during a flyby of the moon on 10 October, showed a lava field near the center of an erupting volcano named Pillan, with visible new lava flows from its volcanic center. To capture most of the new images of Io, Galileo had used a fast camera mode, in which the camera preprocesses the image, averaging the brightness in its adjacent parts. However, Io’s radiation had disrupted the process, degrading the quality of the images. Radiation had not affected images, including the newly released image of Pillan, taken in other camera modes. Galileo Project Manager James K. Erickson remarked that Galileo would not use the fast camera mode during the next Io flyby.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Closest-Ever Picture of Volcanic Moon Io Released,” news release, 22 October 1999.)
 New York Governor George E. Pataki awarded NASA astronaut Eileen M. Collins of Elmira, New York, the state’s highest award, the Jackie Robinson Empire State Freedom Medal, for her achievement as the first female Space Shuttle Commander. Collins had been Commander of the historic Mission STS-93. During that mission, she and her crew had deployed the Chandra X- ray Observatory, the heaviest, largest, and most powerful x-ray telescope ever launched into space. Governor Pataki described Collins as “a bold pioneer of the reaches of space” and remarked that “her talent, intelligence and courage set an example that every woman and every man can hope to duplicate in their lives.” Every year New York presents the Empire State Freedom Medal, established in 1997, to “those who best demonstrate the qualities of determination, dignity, fairness, and honor that were exemplified by Jackie Robinson, who broke major league baseball’s color barrier.”(NASA, “First Female Shuttle Commander Eileen Collins Receives Jackie Robinson Medal,” news release 99- 125, 27 October 1999.)
 A Russian Proton rocket carrying a communications satellite manufactured by Lockheed Martin exploded 6 minutes after launching from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, the second failure of a Proton rocket in three months. The Russian Space Agency formed a commission to investigate the crash. Kazakhstan had temporarily banned Proton launches from Baikonur following a launch failure on 5 July, but Proton rockets had launched from the facility successfully on 6 and 26 September.(Miles O’Brien, “Russian Rocket Explodes After Liftoff: Incident Likely To Delay International Space Station,” CNN.com, 27 October 1999, http://www.cnn.com/TECH/space/9910/27/proton.explodes/ (accessed 10 April 2008). 817 United Press International, “Kazakhstan Bans Russian Space Launches,” 28 October 1999.)
 Kazakhstan imposed a new ban on Russian launches from Baikonur Cosmodrome following the previous day’s crash of a Proton booster rocket, which had malfunctioned shortly after launch. Without naming a figure, Kazakhstan announced that it would require Russia to pay compensation in an amount significantly higher than the fee that Kazakhstan had charged Russia after the 5 July Proton crash. In addition, the Kazakhstan government formed a special commission headed by Deputy Prime Minister Alexander Pavlov to investigate the accident.
 NASA announced that Administrator Daniel S. Goldin would present Simon Ramo and Bernard A. Schriever with NASA’s Distinguished Public Service Medal on 5 November at the start of a daylong conference. NASA, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, the National Air and Space Museum, the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, and the National Space Society were cosponsoring the conference, “Developing U.S. Launch Capability: The Role of Civil-Military Cooperation.” The award recognized the leadership of Ramo and Schriever during the early years of the U.S. space program. Ramo had been the chief scientist and leading civilian in the Air Force program to build the first U.S. intercontinental ballistic missile system. His work had fostered cooperation between the U.S. Air Force and aeronautics industry, the necessary foundation of the space program. Schriever had pioneered the development of the first ballistic missile for the United States; the resulting rocket technology had led to NASA’s successes in its early human spaceflight programs.(NASA, “NASA Honors Missile Pioneers at Launch Vehicle Conference,” news release N99-56, 2 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/1999/n99-056.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
 A large section of the outer wall of one of the Lockheed Martin X-33 rocket plane’s two liquid hydrogen fuel tanks separated 2 hours after completing pressure and structural tests at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center. Lockheed intended the X-33 prototype to lead to the development of its VentureStar TM Reusable Launch Vehicle (RLV), and NASA planned to replace its fleet of Space Shuttles with a fleet of Lockheed’s VentureStarTM RLVs after 2012. The latest problem potentially delayed the X-33’s first test flight at least an additional six months, essentially guaranteeing that Lockheed Martin would be unable to produce an operational VentureStarTM vehicle by 2004. NASA had “placed a huge wager” on the VentureStar TM, committing US$941 million to the X-33 program, which had been threatened by technical problems and cost overruns for more than a year. U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) examiners had criticized the project for its rising costs, warning that “delays in the prototype would harm NASA’s plans for a full-scale reusable vehicle.”(Jeff Leeds, “Test Mishap Delays Development of Lockheed’s X-33 Rocket Plane,” Los Angeles Times, 6 November 1999.)
 GAO reported that NASA had “inadvertently exported radiation-hardened, microcircuit, optical coupler parts to Russia,” relying on the manufacturer’s statement that the so-called rad-hard parts were not on the U.S. Department of State’s Munitions List and that, therefore, NASA was not required to obtain an export license. GAO also reported that NASA was “preparing to export sensitive encryption technology to Japan and Europe,” technology transfers related to building the International Space Station (ISS). Under international agreements related to the space station, NASA was obligated to deliver, disclose, or transfer certain technology, data, and commodities to other nations involved in building the ISS. GAO had investigated NASA’s export-control procedures after members of Congress expressed concern about safeguards to protect technology and information exported to support the ISS. GAO evaluators’ conclusions were similar to those of NASA’s Inspector General, who had reported earlier that NASA’s export-control procedures were likely inadequate for the technology exchanges necessary under the ISS program.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Export Controls: International Space Station Technology Transfers” (report no. NSIAD-00-14, Washington, DC, 3 November 1999), http://www.gao.gov/archive/2000/ns00014.pdf (accessed 21 March 2008); Aerospace Daily, “NASA Illegally Exported Technology for Space Station, GAO reports,” 22 November 1999.)
 NASA announced that its scientists had developed a new Digital Tectonic Activity Map (DTAM) of the Earth, pinpointing geologically and volcanically active features of the planet over the last 1 million years. Whereas most global geological maps were “plate maps,” emphasizing the definition of plate boundaries of the planet’s crust and current seismic or volcanic activity, the new tectonic map portrayed the broad architecture of Earth’s crust, identifying all current and past geological activity. NASA had primarily generated the DTAM using publicly available data and commercial software, but had also used spacecraft data, including Landsat images, hand-held astronaut photography, and radar altimetry of sea-surface measurements gathered by NASA spacecraft.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “New Global Digital Tectonic Activity Map of the Earth Produced,” news release 99-116, 5 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-116.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
 Engineers discovered that exposure to 11 months of cold temperatures in outer space could cause the descent engine on Mars Polar Lander to malfunction. NASA had scheduled Mars Polar Lander to land on Mars on 3 December. Lander’s companion craft, Mars Climate Orbiter had burned up as it entered its Martian orbit on 23 September. The investigative panel studying the cause of Orbiter’s loss had uncovered the potential problem with Lander’s engines. Because of the discovery, scientists at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) altered their plans, deciding to turn on the craft’s descent engine heaters earlier than originally scheduled, to warm the engines to 46.4°F (8°C) before Lander’s descent.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Finds Flaw in Mars Lander Engine Turning On Descent Heaters Earlier Should Prevent Failure of Mission,” Florida Today, 9 November 1999; Mark Carreau, “Mars Probe To Get Brake Check: NASA Engineers To Warm Descent Rockets of Polar Lander,” Houston Chronicle, 9 November 1999.)
 The Mars Climate Orbiter Mission Failure Investigation Board released its first report, identifying eight contributing factors that had led to the 23 September loss of Orbiter as it entered its Martian orbit. Arthur Stephenson, chairperson of the board investigating the failure, agreed with NASA on the causes of the mission’s failure. The board reported that “the failed translation of English units into metric units in a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission software” was the primary cause of the loss, but that other significant factors had set the stage for the mission’s failure. Moreover, the team had failed to identify and correct multiple mistakes, leading to “a major error in our understanding of the spacecraft’s path as it approached Mars.” The failure board faulted the Mars Climate Orbiter team with “inadequate consideration of the entire mission and its postlaunch operation as a total system, inconsistent communications and training within the project, and lack of complete end-to-end verification of navigation software.” Although engineers working with Lockheed Martin Astronautics’ mission operations team had failed to convert English units into metric for entering data into ground-based navigation software, the investigating board focused most of its attention on the navigation team at NASA’s JPL, which had overall management authority for the mission. The board remarked that, because it had navigated interplanetary spacecraft successfully for 30 years, JPL had developed a “widespread perception that ‘Orbiting Mars is routine’,” leading it to pay inadequate attention to the risk of faulty navigation.(NASA, “Mars Climate Orbiter Failure Board Releases Report, Numerous NASA Actions Underway in Response,” news release 99-134, 10 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-134.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Earl Lane, “Report Details NASA Failings: Assigns Blame for Orbiter’s Loss,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 11 November 1999.)
 NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected Ball Aerospace of Boulder, Colorado, and Aerojet General Corporation of Azusa, California, to study the next-generation, spaceborne, microwave, atmospheric instrument for weather-forecasting and climate-change research, awarding each company a one-year, US$4 million, fixed-price contract through Goddard Space Flight Center. The new instrument, the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), was one-third the size and weight of existing microwave-sounding instruments on board the Polar- Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and the Earth Observing System-PM spacecraft. The application of new technologies, particularly in microwave electronics, had made the significantly smaller size of the ATMS possible. NASA intended to fly the first ATMS unit on the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environment Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project (NPP) mission, a joint effort between NASA and the NPOESS Program Office. NPOESS, a tri-agency program consisting of parts of NASA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the U.S. Air Force, merged civilian and military polar-orbiting weather satellite systems into a single system.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Ball and Aerojet—General Picked To Study New Weather Sensor,” news release 99-117, 12 November 1999, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/1999/99-117.htm (accessed 24 March 2008).)
 The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) entered safe mode when the fourth of six gyroscopes failed, halting its astronomical observations. Requiring a minimum of three operating gyroscopes to conduct observations, HST would remain in safe mode with a reduced power load, until Space Shuttle astronauts arrived with six new gyroscopes, another data recorder, a radio transmitter, and an improved computer. The telescope was not at risk. NASA had divided the servicing mission, originally scheduled for June 2000, into two missions, when the third gyroscope failed in February. NASA had scheduled the first part of the mission, Servicing Mission-3A, for the fall but rescheduled it for 6 December, because the Shuttle had wiring problems and needed its engine replaced. NASA had scheduled Servicing Mission-3B for mid-2001.(NASA, “Hubble Telescope Placed into Safe Hold as Gyroscope Fails,” news release 99-136, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-136.txt (accessed 12 March 2008); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Hubble Trouble,” 15 November 1999.)
 NASA announced the winner of an essay contest to name the Deep Space 2 microprobes, which the Mars Polar Lander spacecraft was carrying to Mars. NASA had scheduled the two probes to crash into Mars’s south pole on 3 December. Paul Withers, a graduate student at the University of Arizona in Tucson, studying the thin upper atmosphere of Mars, had suggested naming the pair Amundsen and Scott, in honor of Roald Amundsen and Robert F. Scott, the first explorers to reach Earth’s South Pole. In his winning essay, Withers recalled that one century ago, Antarctica was Earth’s only unexplored continent. Withers wrote, “Scott perished in Antarctica. His memorial’s inscription reads: ‘To strive, to seek, to find, not to yield.’ These are the aims of the Deep Space 2.” NASA had designed the two probes with a dual purpose: to test advanced technology for future planetary-surface microlanders and to search for water ice 3 feet (0.9 meters) below the Martian surface. Deep Space 2 Project Manager Sarah A. Gavit remarked that the names of the Antarctic explorers were appropriate for the probes, because “like Amundsen and Scott, Deep Space 2 will have to survive great odds, including not only braving the elements but also crashing into the terrain with unbelievable force.”(NASA, “Mars Penetrator Probes Named for Pioneering Polar Explorers,” news release 99-135, 15 November 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-135.txt (accessed 12 March 2008).)
 The main engine of Japan’s H-2 rocket malfunctioned 4 minutes after launching from Tanegashima Space Center, failing to put the Mtsat satellite into orbit. Fearing they could lose control of its trajectory, officials ordered the rocket’s destruction 8 minutes into its flight, marking the first time the National Space Development Agency of Japan had destroyed a rocket in flight. It was the second launch failure for the H-2 rocket during 1999; another H-2 had failed to place its payload in orbit in February. However, before the February malfunction, Japan had launched five H-2 rockets successfully. The Mtsat satellite, intended to replace the Himawari 5 satellite, would have observed weather patterns and monitored aircraft.(Associated Press, “Japan Destroys Rocket in Midair as It Lifted $95 Million Satellite,” New York Times, 16 November 1999; Dow Jones Newswire, “Japan Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit, Rocket Destroyed,” 15 November 1999.)
 Officials at NASA’s Langley Research Center (LARC) officially opened the Center’s new Experimental Test Range (ETR), described as an “electromagnetic wind tunnel.” LARC engineers had designed the ETR to determine how low-frequency electromagnetic radiation affects aircraft, to help the military improve stealth technology. The ETR also would assist in testing technologies to enable airline passengers to watch television signals from satellites or to help Internet users make wireless connections. The first military customer that had signed up to use the ETR, the U.S. Army’s National Ground Intelligence Center, planned to use models of enemy targets in the test chamber, to see how they appeared on radar screens.(Jeff Long for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Hampton, Va., NASA Research Center Tests Plane Design with Wind Tunnel,” 17 November 1999.)
 NASA announced that new analysis of data from the Galileo spacecraft suggested that Jupiter is possibly much older and colder than previously thought. Upon reaching the planet on 7 December 1995, Galileo had dropped a probe carrying a mass spectrometer into Jupiter’s atmosphere to measure its chemical composition. The spectrometer had “detected surprisingly high concentrations of argon, krypton, and xenon,” raising questions about the noble gases’ provenance. Because Jupiter would have trapped the gases through condensation or freezing, scientists did not believe Jupiter’s atmosphere had trapped the gases at its present site. As positioned at present, Jupiter is too close to the Sun and too warm to have trapped the gases. Tobias Owen, an astronomy professor at the Institute for Astronomy of the University of Hawaii and a member of the Galileo probe Neutral Mass Spectrometer team, suggested three hypotheses to explain how the gases had been trapped within the Jovian atmosphere: 1) Jupiter had formed in the area around the Kuiper Belt829 and was dragged inward to its present location; 2) the solar nebula, the cloud of gas and dust that formed the solar system, had been much colder than scientists had previously believed; and 3) the solid materials that had brought the gases to Jupiter had begun to form in the original interstellar cloud of gas and dust, before the cloud had collapsed to form the solar nebula. Owen remarked further that, if either of the last two hypotheses were correct, then giant planets might be able to form closer to their stars than current theories had predicted. Such a finding could help explain “the new observations of planetary systems around other stars, in which such close-in giant planets are relatively common.”(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Probe Results Suggest Jupiter Had an Ancient, Chilly Past,” news release 99-096, 17 November 1999, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/glprobeargon.html (accessed 12 March 2008); Tobias Owen et al., “A Low-Temperature Origin for the Planetesimals that Formed Jupiter,” Nature 402, no. 6759 (18 November 1999): 269–270.)
 Interfax news agency reported that Russia had agreed to pay Kazakhstan US$400,000 in damages following the 27 October crash of a Proton rocket during its launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome. After reaching an agreement on compensation, Kazakhstan had lifted its launch ban for all Russian launches except the Proton rocket.(Associated Press, “Russia-Kazakstan-Rockets,” 19 November 1999.)
 NASA announced that new data and images, which the Galileo spacecraft had collected on its closest-ever flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on 11 October 1999, revealed that Io, the most volcanic body in the solar system, was “even more active than previously suspected, with more than 100 erupting volcanoes.” Data results from the flyby, which brought the spacecraft within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of the moon’s surface, had focused on Pele, Loki, and Prometheus, three of Io’s most active volcanoes. A close-up image of Pele showed part of the volcano glowing in the dark, with Pele’s hot lava behaving similarly to active lava lakes in Hawaii. Galileo’s Photopolarimeter Radiometer and Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer had provided detailed temperature maps of Loki, indicating the presence of an enormous caldera repeatedly flooded by lava. New data had clarified the location of lava from Prometheus, erupting, advancing, and producing plumes. NASA’s 1979 Voyager mission had observed a plume, and early Galileo images had shown a new lava flow and plume, erupting from a location 60 miles (97 kilometers) west of the area observed during Voyager’s mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Jupiter’s Moon Io: A Flashback to Earth’s Volcanic Past,” news release 99- 138, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/99/ioishot.html (accessed 12 March 2008).)
 The People’s Republic of China announced it had launched into orbit its first piloted spacecraft, a non-reusable capsule named Shenzhou, which carried a mannequin for test purposes but was capable of carrying a crew of four. Xinhua news agency reported that the capsule, launched from Jiuquan satellite launch center aboard the new model Long March 2F, had spent 21 hours in space, orbiting Earth 14 times. China had built a new land- and sea-based, space-monitoring-and- control network for the launch. China heralded the launch as a breakthrough in the Chinese government’s effort to “join the United States and Russia in the elite club of manned space flight.” The Chinese had abandoned the pursuit of human spaceflight in the late 1960s, because Premier Zhou Enlai thought it was too costly, but in 1992, President Jiang Zemin had decided to renew Chinese efforts, with the goal of putting a human in space by the end of the century. The head of China’s Manned Spaceflight Program told Xinhua news agency that the successful test flight of the Shenzhou capsule demonstrated that the Chinese spacecraft and the new Long March rocket performed superbly. During the mission, the Chinese had conducted experiments in remote sensing, environmental monitoring, space materials, astronomy, and physics. Shenzhou had landed in Inner Mongolia using a parachute.(Michael Laris, “Chinese Test Craft for Manned Orbits: Space Launch Boosts National Pride,” Washington Post, 22 November 1999; Washington Times, “Chinese Successfully Launch First Spacecraft,” 22 November 1999; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 553, 1 December 1999, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx553.html (accessed 6 August 2008).)
 Lockheed Martin launched a Navy communications satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket, a badly needed success in a year of launch failures, delays, investigations, and diminishing business. The company had failed to put three satellites in orbit in April, sustaining a total loss of US$1.5 billion. Investigations into the launch failure of a rocket using similar parts had delayed Lockheed International Launch Services’ maiden flight of the Atlas IIIA, causing its first customer, Space Systems/Loral, to launch its Telstar 7 satellite on a European Ariane booster, instead. NASA had lost contact with its US$125 million Lockheed Martin–built Mars Climate Orbiter in September and, in the subsequent investigation, had discovered that Lockheed had used English units of measurement instead of metric, resulting in miscalculations in navigational data. Although for many years Lockheed Martin had supplied satellites to the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), the U.S. government agency responsible for spy satellites, in September the NRO had awarded a major contract to the Boeing Company to develop the next generation of imaging-reconnaissance satellites. Lockheed Martin also faced increased competition from Russia’s new Dnepr rocket, Europe’s Eurockot, and the U.S.-based Orbital Sciences Corporation’s Pegasus.(United Press International, “Lockheed Martin Struggles Through Year,” 23 November 1999.)
 A Russian Soyuz rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome carrying four Globalstar satellites into orbit. The launch was Russia’s first from the space center in Kazakhstan, since a Proton rocket exploded after launch on 27 October, prompting the Kazakhstan government to reimpose its launch ban. Kazakhstan had lifted the ban partially after Russia agreed to pay US$400,000 in compensation. Media reports indicated that Russia had earned US$70 million from commercial launches such as that conducted for Globalstar Inc., an important income source for the Russian space program.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches First Rocket Since October Explosion,” 22 November 1999.)
 Oleksandr Serdiuk, head of the International Relations Department of Ukraine’s Space Agency, announced that Ukraine and Brazil had signed an agreement the previous week, allowing Ukraine to use Brazil’s Alcântara space complex to launch a new generation of Cyclone-4 booster rockets, medium-weight rockets capable of putting 4 tons (3,600 kilograms or 3.6 tonnes) of payload into a geostationary orbit. In 1992, when the USSR dissolved, Ukraine had retained part of the former Soviet Union’s space program, using several former Soviet factories to build rockets and selling rocket space to commercial satellite companies. Before the agreement with Brazil, Ukraine had only used launchpads in other former Soviet countries. However, Ukraine wanted to take advantage of the location of the Alcântara space complex near the equator, where spacecraft reach orbit more easily and commercial launches a
 Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution I. Michael Heyman announced the appointment of General John R. Dailey, U.S. Marine Corps (Retired), Associate Deputy Administrator of NASA, as Director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, effective January 2000. Dailey succeeded Vice Admiral Donald D. Engen, U.S. Navy (Retired), who had died suddenly in a glider accident in July after serving as the museum’s director for three years. Dailey had begun work at NASA in 1992, after retiring from 36 years of highly decorated service in the U.S. Marine Corps. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin remarked that Dailey’s leadership at NASA had been unparalleled, and that he had “shaped and strengthened the [A]gency, and was responsible for developing an infrastructure that [would] carry NASA into the new millennium.” Secretary Heyman commented on Dailey’s selection from a strong field of candidates, describing him as “a most impressive individual,” who had earned confidence and admiration throughout the air and space community and would continue the strong, dedicated leadership expected at the museum. In addition to managing 260 employees and a US$25 million budget, Dailey’s appointment placed him in charge of construction of the museum’s new 710,000-square-foot (66,000-square-meter), hangar-style facility, expected to open at Dulles International Airport in December 2003. The Smithsonian had conceived the idea of the new facility to display its vast aeronautics and space holdings; the original National Air and Space Museum building was too small to house the additional collection of more than 180 aircraft and 100 spacecraft.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “New Director of the National Air and Space Museum To Take Office in January,” news release, 24 November 1999, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm? releaseID=97 (accessed 19 March 2008); Peter Carlson, “New Air & Space Chief: General Succeeds Director Killed in Crash,” Washington Post, 24 November 1999.)
 NASA’s Galileo spacecraft was unable to record its closest encounter with Jupiter’s moon Io, as it passed within 186 miles (299 kilometers) of the volcanic moon’s surface. Although radiation shut down the craft’s instruments, NASA was able to restart the instruments 4 minutes later, permitting Galileo to complete more than half of its planned observations. The craft had encountered a similar problem when it had flown within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Io in October. NASA had added the close flybys of Io, located deep within the Jovian system’s radiation belts, to the end of Galileo’s two-year extended mission. The spacecraft had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis on 18 October 1989, had begun orbiting Jupiter in December 1995, and had completed its primary mission in December 1997, thereafter, continuing an extended mission focused on Jupiter’s moon Europa, with flybys of the planet’s moons Callisto and Io, as well.(John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo’s Moon Shots Impeded by Radiation,” Washington Times, 27 November 1999; John Antozak for the Associated Press, “Galileo Spacecraft Faces Huge Doses of Radiation,” USA Today, 26 November 1999.)
 NASA officials and Mars Polar Lander Mission scientists were unable to communicate with Lander following its scheduled landing. The team had expected the first signal to arrive from the spacecraft at a tracking station in the Mojave Desert in California, approximately 30 minutes after the scheduled touchdown at 3:01 p.m. (EST). A second attempt to communicate with the craft had produced nothing. Before the craft’s landing, tracking data indicated that Lander had veered slightly off course. Flight controllers had fired its thrusters briefly to alter its approach angle slightly. Flight Operations Manager Sam Thurman had expressed his satisfaction with the new tracking data, which showed the craft heading for a point within a mile of its target.(John Noble Wilford, “Probe to Mars Becomes Silent, Its Fate Unclear,” New York Times, 4 December 1999.)
 Mission controllers indicated that chances of ever contacting the US$165 million Mars Polar Lander were “remote at best,” after they failed to detect a signal during their “last best chance” of communicating with the probe. NASA officials announced that the loss of Lander meant that NASA would need to drop the timetable for future Mars missions and rethink the entire Mars exploration program, including the scheduled launch of the next lander in 2001. NASA had already spent US$193 million on the planned 2001 launch. Edward J. Weiler, head of NASA’s Office of Space Science, indicated that NASA would convene a panel of experts to diagnose the Mars Polar Lander failure and to suggest a “new architecture” for its Mars program. Although they had set no dates, members of Congress said that they planned to hold hearings about NASA’s procedures and budget.(Down Jones Newswire, “NASA Fails To Detect Signal from Mars Polar Lander,” 7 December 1999; Peter Kendall and Vincent J. Schodolski for the Chicago Tribune News Service, “Mars Exploration Put on Hold: NASA Scraps Its Timetable, and the Launch of a $193 Million Lander Set for 2001 Is Uncertain,” Oregonian (Portland), 8 December 1999.)
 The National Research Council (NRC) published a NASA-funded study, which found that NASA needed more safeguards to protect astronauts from potentially cancer-causing radiation during spacewalks they would make while building the International Space Station (ISS). The study recommended that NASA change flight rules, improve space-weather forecasting, and install a radiation-monitoring device outside the ISS. The NRC recommended the extra precautions because the station’s assembly schedule, consisting of more than three dozen flights and 1,500 hours of spacewalks over four years, would coincide with the most active part of the 11-year solar cycle. Moreover, the report estimated a nearly 100 percent chance that at least two assembly missions would overlap with a serious solar storm and a 50 percent chance that five flights would overlap with such a storm. Additionally, the NRC predicted that a change in the station’s planned orbit, which the Russian Space Agency had requested to accommodate Russian launches to help build and resupply the station, would increase the level of radiation exposure. George L. Siscoe, a Boston University physics professor and chairperson of the study, remarked that, although the radiation levels were not life threatening, they exceeded the 30-day and 60-day limits set to protect the skin and eyes. To safeguard crew from exposure to the increased risk of developing cancer later in life, countries participating in the ISS program would have to pay careful attention to flight schedules and crew rotation. Furthermore, the amount of radiation exposure sustained during ISS missions might affect an astronaut’s chances of assignment to additional spacewalks and their selection for future missions.(Michael Cabbage for Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Study Urges NASA To Increase Radiation Safeguards,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 10 December 1999.)
 Europe’s new 746-ton (677,000-kilogram or 677-tonne) Ariane 5 rocket launched smoothly on its first mission, carrying the European Space Agency’s 3.7-ton (3,400-kilogram or 3.4-tonne) X- ray Multi-Mirror (XMM) scientific satellite into orbit. In what France called an industry milestone and “hailed as proof of Europe’s superiority in the commercial launch market,” the powerful rocket lifted off at the opening of its launch window from Europe’s facility in Kourou, French Guiana, depositing the satellite in orbit exactly on schedule, 29 minutes later. Jean-Marie Luton, chairperson of Arianespace, the France-based commercial space company that dominated the world’s commercial satellite-launching market, remarked that, although the United States remained its most serious competitor and China was catching up quickly, “Europeans were still one step ahead.” Arianespace intended the Ariane 5, twice as heavy and twice as powerful as the Ariane 4, to carry 10- to 12-ton (9,100- to 10,900-kilogram or 9.1- to 10.9-tonne) payloads by 2005, transporting space-exploration modules and serving the ISS. The XMM satellite was the largest scientific satellite ever built in Europe, equipped with three powerful telescopes, with 58 mirrors each, and “capable of observing everything from supernovas to the remains of exploded stars.”(Jean-Marie Godard for Associated Press, “Mission Accomplished for Powerful New European Launcher,” 10 December 1998.)
 A six-member team of Brown University scientists used data from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor to examine six categories of evidence supporting the hypothesis that oceans once existed on Mars. The team, led by planetary geologist James W. Head III, published their findings in the journal Science. Primarily using altimetry data and images captured by Surveyor, the researchers had found that the border between two geologically dissimilar areas was nearly level in elevation, suggesting an ancient coastline. Furthermore, they found that the topography below the possible coastline was consistent with the effects of sedimentation and the volume of the hypothetical sea was within range of previous estimates of Martian water. A series of terraces running parallel to the supposed shoreline gave credence to the idea of receding water; low areas contained the appearance of possible mud cracks; and scars from impact craters suggested groundwater or ice near the surface.(James W. Head III et al., “Possible Ancient Oceans on Mars: Evidence from Mars Orbiter Laser Altimeter Data,” Science 286, no. 5447 (10 December 1999): 2134–2137; William J. Broad, “Tantalizing Signs of Ancient Martian Ocean,” New York Times, 10 December 1999.)
 At a scheduled 13 December ribbon-cutting ceremony, NASA announced the opening of FutureFlight Central (FFC) at Ames Research Center’s Moffett Field in Mountain View, California. NASA had designed the two-story facility⎯the world’s first full-scale, virtual, airport control tower⎯to test methods of solving, under realistic conditions and configurations, potential air and ground traffic problems at commercial airports. NASA and the Federal Aviation Administration had jointly funded the US$10 million project. The design of FFC permitted “integration of tomorrow’s technologies in a risk-free simulation of any airport, airfield, and tower-cab environment.”(NASA, “NASA Opens New, Virtual Airport Control Tower at Ames,” news release 99-143, 10 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-143.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
 The U.S. Air Force successfully launched a Titan II rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base carrying the first of a new generation of military weather satellites, a Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Block 5D-3 spacecraft. Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space had built the DMSP Block 5D-3 craft under contract with the U.S. Air Force, and Lockheed Martin Astronautics had supplied the launch vehicle. U.S. Air Force Space and Missile Systems Center at Los Angeles Air Force Base managed the DMSP and Titan programs. The first launch of a Titan II since 19 June 1999, it was the ninth consecutive successful launch of the space launch vehicle. The Titan II, a type of booster previously used as an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) and a fundamental element of the United States’ strategic deterrent for two decades, was one of 14 two-stage, liquid-fueled former ICBMs that Lockheed Martin Astronautics had refurbished for Air Force space launches. NASA had also used Titan II rockets during its Gemini program in the 1960s, launching 10 piloted and 2 unpiloted missions. The DMSP Block 5D-3 series accommodated larger sensor payloads than previous models, featuring a larger power supply; a more powerful on-board computer with increased memory, giving the craft greater autonomy; and increased battery power, intended to extend the mission’s duration. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration operated DMSP, a program for strategic and tactical weather prediction to aid the U.S. military in planning sea, land, and air operations.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Companies Launch Military Weather Satellite,” news release, 12 December 1999, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/1999/LOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPANIESLAUNCH MILITA.html (accessed 13 March 2008).)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin selected NASA Chief Engineer Daniel R. Mulville to replace General John R. Dailey as Associate Deputy Administrator, effective 1 January 2000. Dailey was leaving to become Director of the National Air and Space Museum. NASA had appointed Mulville as Chief Engineer in 1995, responsible for overall review of technical readiness and for execution of all NASA programs. From 1990 to 1995, Mulville had been Director of the Engineering and Quality Management Division in NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance, and, from 1986 to 1990, he was Deputy Director of the Materials and Structures Division in NASA’s Office of Aeronautics and Space Technology. Before that appointment, Mulville had served as the Structures Technology Manager at the Naval Air Systems Command since 1979, where he led the development of structural design, testing, and certification methods, as Program Manager for the Development of Composites for the AV-8B and F/A-18 aircraft, and advanced aircraft and missile programs. Mulville had received NASA’s Distinguished Service Medal, NASA’s Outstanding Leadership Medal, and NASA’s Exceptional Service Medal, among other awards. Goldin expressed his pleasure at Mulville’s acceptance of the position, remarking that, as Associate Deputy Administrator, Mulville would be his most senior advisor on NASA operations and commenting on Mulville’s outstanding work as NASA’s Chief Engineer.(NASA, “Mulville Named Associate Deputy Administrator,” news release 99-146, 14 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-146.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin named A. Thomas Young to chair the Mars Program Independent Assessment Team, charged with reviewing NASA’s approach to robotic exploration of Mars following the recent loss of the Mars Polar Lander Mission. Among the review team’s tasks were the evaluation of several recent NASA missions to deep space, including Mars Pathfinder, Mars Global Surveyor, Mars Climate Orbiter, Mars Polar Lander, Deep Space 1, and Deep Space 2. The team would analyze the projects’ budgets, content, schedule, management structure, and scientific organization, assessing how roles and responsibilities of those missions related to the missions’ safety, reliability, and success.(NASA, “Young To Lead Mars Program Assessment Team,” news release 99-147, 17 December 1999, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-147.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
 At the American Geophysical Union’s fall meeting in San Francisco, NASA presented images from the Galileo spacecraft’s close flyby of Jupiter’s moon Io on 25 November, showing “a curtain of lava erupting within a giant volcanic crater.” Because of the intense heat and height of the lava fountains, NASA’s Infrared Telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii, was also able to observe them. NASA scientists hoped to determine the temperature of the extremely hot lava on Io, by combining data from the telescope and from Galileo observations. Galileo scientist Alfred McEwen of the University of Arizona in Tucson remarked that capturing images of the fountains was a 1-in-500-chance observation. NASA announced that engineers at Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s (JPL’s) Measurement Technology Center had been able to repair images damaged by radiation during Galileo’s 10 October flyby using LabVIEW software from National Instruments. JPL’s Torrence V. Johnson compared the work to unscrambling a television cable signal: “JPL engineers had to break the code that was inadvertently introduced by the radiation near Io.”(NASA, “Galileo Sees Dazzling Lava Fountain on Io,” news release 99-148, 17 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/1999/99-148.txt (accessed 13 March 2008).)
 NASA launched its Terra satellite, carrying instruments made in the United States, Japan, and Canada, from Vandenberg Air Force Base atop a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIAS rocket. NASA had originally scheduled the mission to launch on 14 December, but a computer had aborted the launch moments before ignition. Terra carried five sophisticated instruments for observing the interactions among Earth’s landmasses, atmosphere, ocean, and biosphere. NASA considered the craft the flagship of its Earth Observing System because of its instruments’ measurement capabilities and accuracy. The five instruments were 1) the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), designed to capture high-resolution images of Earth in visible, near-infrared, shortwave-infrared, and thermal-infrared areas of the spectrum; 2) the Clouds and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES), a set of two broadband scanning radiometers for measuring Earth’s radiation; 3) the Multi-Angle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), an instrument using nine cameras to measure the amount of sunlight scattered in different directions; 4) the Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), designed to view the entire surface of the Earth every one to two days and to make observations in 36 spectral bands; and 5) the Measurement of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT), designed to observe the interaction of the lower atmosphere with the land and oceans.(Associated Press, “NASA Launched Earth Observing Satellite on $1.3 Billion Mission,” 20 December 1999. 849 NASA, “Mission Archives STS-103, Third Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-103.html (accessed 29 October 2008).)
 After an unprecedented nine delays, Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. During Mission STS-103, the crew planned to restore the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) to working order and to upgrade its systems. Discovery’s crew comprised Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr., Pilot Scott J. Kelly, and Mission Specialists Steven L. Smith, C. Michael Foale, John M. Grunsfield, Claude Nicollier, and Jean-François Clervoy.
 A Taurus rocket launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying satellites for NASA and the Korean Aerospace Institute, as well as 36 capsules holding 7 ounces of cremated remains for Celestis Inc., a Houston-based company that arranged to send human remains to space. NASA’s 253-pound (114.8-kilogram) Active Cavity Radiometer Irradiance Monitor (EOS ACRIM III), expected to return data for a minimum of five years, was deployed to measure sunlight reaching Earth’s atmosphere, oceans, and land, data needed for scientists to study whether slight changes in solar output affected global warming and cooling. ACRIM III was the third in a series of long- term, solar-monitoring tolls that NASA’s JPL had built. ACRIM III’s data would expand the database begun with the ACRIM I mission in 1980, aboard the Solar Maximum Mission spacecraft, and continued with the ACRIM II mission in 1991, aboard the Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. ACRIM I was the first instrument to demonstrate clearly that the total radiant energy from the Sun is not a constant. The Korean satellite, built by TRW Inc. for a three-year mission, carried three instruments for creating digital elevation maps of Korea, studying the biology of the ocean, and performing physics experiments on the effects of radiation on electronics. The Celestis mission carried 36 capsules of human remains, which would orbit for 45 years before burning up in Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Item 1⎯ACRIMSAT Launch⎯HQ,” NASA Daily News Summary, 21 December 1999, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/media/1999/m99-262.txt (accessed 13 March 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Satellite, Korea Probe Rocket into Space,” 21 December 1999.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts captured the HST using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Discovery had to alter its approach to the space telescope, because the telescope’s failed gyroscopes had “left the telescope a little shaky,” but Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and his crew had prepared for such a scenario. A fully operational HST would have had its aft pointed at the center of Earth; Brown would have carried out a straightforward approach, rising up from below until the robotic arm simply locked on. Without its gyroscopes functioning, the HST slowly rotated at one revolution per hour. Therefore, controllers activated backup gyroscopes to eliminate the rotation as much as possible, permitting Brown to fly around the HST and properly position the Shuttle’s robotic arm. As both spacecraft traveled around the Earth at 17,500 miles (28,000 kilometers) per hour with Brown at the controls, Discovery moved closer to the HST until French astronaut Jean-François Clervoy had removed the 43-foot (13-meter), 25,000-pound (11,300-kilogram) telescope from orbit and anchored it in the Shuttle cargo bay.(Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Capture Hubble Telescope for Repairs,” Washington Times, 22 December 1999; William Harwood, “Discovery Catches Up with Hubble for a Service Call in Space,” Washington Post, 22 December 1999.)
 Robert S. Ruggeri, a retired NASA engineer and pioneer in de-icing research, died at the age of 75. Ruggeri had begun working for NASA’s predecessor agency in 1944, retiring from NASA in 1980. NASA had applied his findings from studying ice buildup on airplane wings in the 1940s and 1950s, to the development of rockets and Space Shuttles. When the United States sought to speed up its space program following the Soviet Union’s launch of Sputnik, Ruggeri had also researched the effects of cavitation⎯partial vacuums in flowing liquids⎯on cryogenic rocket pumps, looking for ways to make the pumps more efficient for rockets. Later in his career at NASA, Ruggeri’s work had focused on the design of compressors for advanced aircraft engines, as he sought ways to increase fuel efficiency, reduce air pollution, and minimize the noise of jet engines.(“Robert Ruggeri, NASA Engineer Was a Pioneer in Aircraft De-Icing,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 26 December 1999.)
 In the second-longest spacewalk in NASA’s history, lasting 8 hours and 15 minutes, Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld successfully replaced all six of HST’s gyroscopes and had “just enough time to equip each of the telescope’s six batteries with a voltage regulator to prevent overheating.” NASA believed corroded wires had caused the gyroscope failures. To avoid repeating the failure, engineers used pressurized nitrogen rather than air to force fluid into the new gyroscopes. Smith and Grunsfeld alternated working inside the tight space housing the gyroscopes. Because of his long arms, NASA assigned the 6-foot-3.5-inch-tall (1.9-meter-tall) Smith, who had worked on HST during its last service call in 1997, the task of replacing the two sets of gyroscopes on the sides, which were more difficult to reach. The spacewalk lasted 2 hours longer than scheduled. Although Smith and Grunsfeld went to work an hour early and quickly organizing their tools in the cargo bay, the pair needed extra time to open coolant-line valves on a disabled infrared camera and encountered difficulty latching the doors of the cargo bay holding the equipment.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Hubble Gets a Transplant: Initial Check Says New Parts Are Working,” Los Angeles Times, 23 December 1999, Associated Press, “Crew Replaces All 6 Hubble Gyroscopes,” Washington Times, 23 December 1999.)
 British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale and Swiss astronaut Claude Nicollier installed a new central computer on HST, 20 times faster than the telescope’s previous one, and a refurbished, 550-pound (250-kilogram), fine guidance sensor. At 8 hours and 10 minutes, the pair’s spacewalk was the third longest in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-103,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 103.html (accessed 25 March 2008).)
 Astronauts Steven L. Smith and John M. Grunsfeld completed the HST servicing mission, replacing a nonfunctioning radio transmitter and an outdated tape recorder. The spacewalk again exceeded 8 hours and, for the third time, ran behind schedule. As the pair prepared to begin their spacewalk, Grunsfeld encountered a mechanical problem with his suit and had to exchange it before exiting Discovery’s airlock. Grunsfeld also faced the most difficult task, replacing the transmitter, which was not easy to service in space. The job required him to disconnect and reconnect a series of thin coaxial cables while wearing bulky pressurized gloves. NASA had designed a special tool for the job, but even so, the task required more than an hour, and Grunsfeld needed to stop to rest his hands. The eight-day repair flight had accomplished all of the mission’s major objectives, although NASA cancelled a fourth spacewalk, preventing the astronauts from installing all six steel sunshades that protect HST from solar damage.(Michael Cabbage, “Good Job: Hubble Looks Fit as Fiddle at the End of a Happy Day in Space, the Astronauts Sent Holiday Greetings to Earth,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 25 December 1999; Reuters, “Astronauts Wrap Up Work on Hubble: Christmas Eve Mission Replaces Bad Transmitter,” Washington Times, 25 December 1999; Associated Press, “Repairs Done, Shuttle Crew Makes Plans for Landing,” New York Times, 27 December 1999.)
 Discovery astronauts placed the HST back in orbit using the Shuttle’s robotic arm. Astronaut Jean-François Clervoy operated the arm, grabbing a handle on the telescope’s side. After releasing the latches securing the observatory inside the Shuttle’s bay, the robotic arm lifted the telescope above the spacecraft, and ground controllers opened the door covering HST’s telescopic eye. Once ground controllers gave the command, Discovery’s robotic arm released the telescope. Commander Curtis L. Brown Jr. and Pilot Scott J. Kelly fired the Shuttle’s thrusters to move away from the telescope slowly.(Robyn Suriano, “Hubble Set Free: Discovery’s Crew Ready for Monday Landing at KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 December 1999.)
 Although crosswinds caused a late touchdown, Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely after its eight-day servicing mission to HST. NASA managers had instructed Discovery to fly an extra orbit before landing, while Mission Control monitored the weather on the ground. NASA had shortened the mission to eight days from the scheduled 10 because of numerous launch delays, and because Discovery must return to Earth before New Year’s Eve to avoid potential Y2K computer problems.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Back on Earth after Hubble Repairs,” 28 December 1999; Robyn Suriano, “‘Welcome Back to Earth’, Discovery: Shuttle Astronauts Come in for Late but Safe Landing,” USA Today, 28 December 1999.)
