 After detailing only a few computer glitches, which had occurred during the dreaded Y2K transition, Federal Computer Week reported that NASA had narrowly avoided a Y2K data flaw that might have redirected the orbit of its Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite. According to NASA’s Chief Information Officer, the software that transmitted the commands directing satellite orbits had automatically reverted to 1 January 1999 commands, when it should have used 1 January 2000 commands. Attentive operators caught the potential problem before the software had sent the faulty data to any satellites. Although the episode accentuated the seriousness of the Y2K computer transition, it was notable that, in spite of the risks, very few computer crashes actually occurred during the changeover.(Paula Shaki Trimble, “NASA Discovered Last-Minute Y2K Glitch,” Federal Computer Week, 4 January 2000. 859 NASA, “Mars Program Independent Assessment Team Begins Work,” news release 00-6, 7 January 2000.)
 In the wake of the failure of the Mars Polar Lander Mission, an independent assessment team appointed by NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin assembled for the first time to begin a review of NASA’s approach to the exploration of Mars. The 16-member team included aeronautics experts from NASA, aerospace industries, the U.S. Air Force, and academia. Although NASA officials held out hope that Lander would eventually respond to signals from Earth, Goldin tasked the team with evaluating NASA’s successful and unsuccessful missions to Mars. The independent investigation continued NASA’s pattern of scrutinizing all failures to improve its proficiency in the exploration of space.
 NASA released recently obtained images that further supported the possibility that Jupiter’s moon Europa might be home to a liquid ocean. The Galileo spacecraft had captured the images when passing Europa’s north pole. Using a magnetometer instrument, Galileo had recorded changing currents in the moon’s magnetic field⎯a finding consistent with the presence of a conducting material such as a watery liquid.(NASA, “Galileo Findings Boost Idea of Other-Worldly Ocean,” news release 00-7, 10 January 2000.)
 The U.S. Department of Justice filed a lawsuit against Rockwell International Inc., Boeing North American Inc., and United Space Alliance for concealing millions of dollars in fraud committed by a subcontractor. According to the suit, the subcontractor had used funds from the Shuttle program to purchase homes, jewelry, and vacations. The subcontractor accused of the fraud had pled guilty to all charges five years earlier, and the culpability of the major aerospace companies in concealing the theft was the last significant legal matter to come to trial. The three companies claimed that they had cooperated with government investigations into the 180 felony fraud violations and were not liable for the actions of the rogue subcontractor.(Associated Press, “Government Sues Three Companies, Including Boeing North American, over Space Shuttle Program Fraud,” 12 January 2000.)
 Using NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer (FUSE) spacecraft, astronomers found significant proof that thousands of exploding stars had generated the halo of gas around Earth’s Milky Way, possibly originating as the galaxy evolved. The findings were among the first generated from the FUSE project, and scientists hoped that they represented the first of many significant discoveries. The halo surrounding the Milky Way had intrigued scientists for decades, but researchers had been unable to shed light on how or why the gas formed as it did. A team of astronomers presented the findings at the American Astronomical Society conference, proclaiming the FUSE observatory “open for business.” H. Warren Moos of Johns Hopkins University, Principal Investigator of the FUSE project, stated that the “debugging period” had concluded, and that project managers had moved from fine-tuning the instrument to performing space observations. The FUSE spectrograph had more than 100 times the power of previous instruments, and many researchers hoped that it would allow more extensive investigation of the formation and collapse of stars⎯a research agenda that might eventually uncover the sequence of events that resulted in the formation of the Earth(NASA, “FUSE Spacecraft Observes Interstellar Lifeblood of Galaxies,” news release 00-5, 12 January 2000; John Noble Wilford, “Scientists Are Gaining a New Understanding of the Dynamics of Galaxies,” New York Times, 12 January 2000; Reuters, “USA: Milky Way’s Halo Caused by Exploding Stars⎯NASA,” 12 January 2000.)
 A National Research Council panel made up of climate and environment experts announced that it had found significant evidence to support the theory of global warming. The panel found that the Earth’s surface had warmed at a rate substantially greater than average for the past millennium. Panel Chairperson John M. Wallace of the University of Washington’s Environment Program clarified the group’s findings: “The surface of the temperature is rising and has risen substantially in the past 20 years.” Wallace also carefully pointed out that the group had not addressed the issue of causation: “We are not saying that the rise is due to greenhouse gases nor are we saying that it is going to continue.” The findings added to the ongoing debate over global warming. Not surprisingly, environmental advocates praised the panel’s conclusions, and global- warming critics dismissed them.(Robert Lee Hotz, “Global Warming Real, Says National Panel of Climate Experts,” Los Angeles Times, 13 January 2000; Associated Press, “Scientists Report Warmer Earth, Cause Uncertain,” 12 January 2000; Arthur B. Robinson, “Global Warming Is 300-Year-Old News,” Wall Street Journal, 18 January 2000.)
 The Russian Space Agency announced another delay in the launch of the crew compartment for the International Space Station (ISS), after two Proton rockets exploded when metal and mineral particles contaminated their engines. The Russian Space Agency had planned to use a Proton rocket to launch the ISS module. The S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, which built the boosters, promised to replace the Proton rocket’s faulty parts. Funding problems had previously slowed construction of the crew compartment, disrupting the timeline for the international project.(Associated Press, “Russia Again Delays Launch of Space Station Unit,” 12 January 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Launch Delayed,” 12 January 2000.)
 As a part of its “Celebrate the Century” program, the U.S. Postal Service unveiled a stamp commemorating the Space Shuttle Program. The stamp with the Shuttle’s image joined 12 other stamps with images recalling significant American memories of the past century, such as video games, the fall of the Berlin Wall, personal computers, and Cabbage Patch Dolls. The Space Shuttle stamp was part of the celebration of the 1980s portion of the millennium. Kennedy Space Center Director Roy D. Bridges Jr. issued a statement thanking the Postal Service for the honor.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Joins American Icons in Commemorative Stamp Collection,” news release 00- 12, 12 January 2000.)
 Astronomers using images from the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) discovered what they believed to be the first examples of “isolated stellar-mass black holes adrift among the stars of our galaxy.” They announced their discovery at a convention of the American Astronomical Society. The findings supported a long-standing theory that black holes could form with the collapse of just one massive star, although an opposing theory had concluded that multiple stars must collapse in tandem. Moreover, the researchers’ contribution was the latest in a string of recent findings illuminating the relatively commonplace nature of black holes.(NASA, “Lone Black Holes Discovered Adrift in the Galaxy,” news release 00-4, 13 January 2000.)
 Science and business leaders from the United States and Singapore signed an agreement to collaborate on biotechnology research conducted in space. The pact, focused on improving drugs and crops, outlined experiments planned for a 2001 Shuttle Columbia mission. U.S. Senator Christopher Bond (R-MO) called the agreement an “important step toward increasing scientific knowledge.”(Associated Press, “Singapore, U.S. Scientists Sign Accord on Outer Space Research,” 14 January 2000.)
 NASA declared an end to its attempts to contact Mars Polar Lander, which had descended to the Red Planet’s surface on 3 December 1999. The planned 90-day mission had derailed when mission controllers at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) were unable to communicate with the probe after it landed. Investigators had methodically tried different commands to reach Lander. Meanwhile, scientists and amateur space enthusiasts alike had offered a wide range of hypotheses concerning the cause of Lander’s silence, speculating that Lander had exploded before actually reaching Mars’s surface or that it had simply sunk in the Martian dust. After exhausting all means of contacting the probe, NASA had declared the US$165 million mission concluded, indicating that future missions would attempt to make up for the loss of Polar Lander. Project Manager Richard A. Cook expressed his sense of closure about the decision to stop investigating the matter: “we feel somewhat complete in the sense that we did go through the things we thought were reasonable . . . we gave it a good shot.”(Usha Lee McFarling, “NASA Gives Up Hope of Finding Mars Probe,” Los Angeles Times, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “JPL To End Search Today for Mars Polar Lander,” 17 January 2000; USA Today, “NASA Quits Trying To Contact Missing Mars Polar Lander,” USA Today, 18 January 2000; Associated Press, “Report: Mars Lander May Have Touched Down in Steep Canyon,” 6 January 2000.)
 NASA released the first HST images taken after the Shuttle’s Mission STS-103, in which the crew of Discovery realigned and refurbished the telescope. The stunning clarity of the new images suggested that the mission specialists had succeeded in their sensitive work. According to Steven Beckwith, Director of the Space Telescope Science Institute, the work returned HST to “a condition that was better than it was even before the fourth gyroscope failed.” Astronomers had focused on targets more than 5,000 light-years away to test the upgraded telescope. During the servicing mission, astronauts had also installed a Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 and a Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph, new instruments that would contribute to the already formidable strength of the HST.(NASA, “Hubble Reopens Eye on the Universe,” news release 00-16, 24 January 2000.)
 NASA announced that the Food and Drug Administration had cleared for diagnostic use a new technology to fight breast cancer, originally developed at JPL. OmniCorder Technologies, Inc. had built the device, called the BioScan System, using a sensor developed by JPL researcher Sarath D. Gunapala. Gunapala had originally developed the sensor, named the Quantum Well Infrared Photodetector, to locate hot spots in fires and volcanoes. When researchers had learned that the increased blood flow surrounding cancerous tissues often raises skin temperatures slightly, medical scientists realized that doctors could use the technology to conduct noninvasive screenings, helping to detect breast cancer. The new device had charted temperature changes as slight as 0.027°F (-18°C) from one area of the body to another, making it a promising tool for doctors and cancer researchers.(NASA, “Breast Cancer Screening Aid Cleared for Diagnostic Use,” news release 00-17, 28 January 2000.)
 NASA released the research results of astronaut John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic 1998 voyage aboard Shuttle Discovery. The report detailed the 88 experiments conducted on Mission STS-95, the most of any Shuttle mission. NASA responded to some critics, who called the mission a publicity-driven flight with little scientific value, disclosing that Glenn himself had participated in 10 experiments during the mission. After becoming the first American to orbit the Earth in 1962, Glenn had returned to space 36 years later to achieve another record⎯the oldest man to fly in space.(Associated Press, “Scientific Results of Glenn’s Mission Released by NASA,” 28 January 2000.)
 The publication Florida Today announced that astronaut Janice E. Voss would carry aboard the next scheduled Endeavour flight a commemorative stuffed bear, manufactured to raise money for victims of the shooting at the Columbine High School in Colorado. Voss had agreed to the plan when students from Columbine, visiting Kennedy Space Center as NASA’s special guests, explained their fund-raising goals. NASA had invited the Columbine students to Cape Canaveral, Florida, to watch a Space Shuttle launch. NASA also announced that at the conclusion of Voss’s mission, it would donate to the still-recovering high school an official Endeavour flight kit. Of the class’s trip to NASA to watch Endeavour’s launch, a parent of one of the Columbine students said simply that it was “a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.”(Billy Cox, “Endeavour To Launch with Columbine Bear,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 February 2000.)
 In another escalation of the increasingly tense debate over how to handle Russia’s repeated delays in building and launching the service module of the International Space Station (ISS), NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that, if Russia did not meet a July 2000 deadline, the United States would provide a substitute module. Russia was already more than two years behind schedule, affecting the ISS’s timeline and hampering the cooperative international effort. Goldin’s decision followed Russia’s announcement of its plan to direct more resources to the failing Mir space station. Some space experts perceived Russia’s designation of scarce financial funds to Mir, rather than to the ISS, as a signal of Russia’s reluctance to participate fully in the international space consortium. In his strongest criticism to date, Goldin said of Russia’s ISS involvement: “To say we are frustrated and disappointed is an understatement . . . We want the Russians to be there, but we felt we had to be responsible custodians to keep the program on track.”(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Dictates Date for Russia on Station Port,” New York Times, 4 February 2000; Associated Press, “NASA: We’ll Launch if Russia Fails,” 4 February 2000.)
 President William J. Clinton’s proposed budget for NASA was unveiled at NASA Headquarters in Washington, DC. The proposal contained none of the cutbacks that had driven the Clinton administration’s previous NASA budgets, instead calling for steady increases in funding for space exploration over a period of five years. The key caveat, however, was that most of the increases were scheduled to be implemented after Clinton left office. Most noteworthy, the proposal set aside US$6 billion to begin research into designing a replacement for the Space Shuttle fleet. Officials hoped that NASA’s plan to build a reusable launch vehicle to replace the aging Shuttles would come to fruition around the year 2005.(Joseph C. Anselmo, “NASA Funds Research for Shuttle Successor,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 152, no. 7 (14 February 2000): 11−12.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would merge the Office of the Chief Technologist and the Office of Aero-Space Technology, to better facilitate NASA’s technological advancements. According to Goldin, placing a range of issues, from IT operation to technology-based research, under the domain of a single leader would promote IT compatibility. Goldin appointed Chief Technologist Samuel L. Venneri to head the new Office, giving Venneri the responsibility of developing a long-term strategy to keep NASA at the forefront of technological development. Goldin also tasked Venneri with forging new relationships with companies using technologies similar to the type that NASA developed and used. Venneri had been NASA’s Chief Technologist since 1996.(NASA, “Goldin Names Venneri To Head Merged Technology, Aero-Space Office; New Chief Engineer Appointed,” news release 00-21, 7 February 2000.)
 The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft set an astronomical record by facilitating the discovery of 102 comets. The spacecraft featured a Large Angle and Spectrometric Coronagraph (LASCO) instrument that allowed astronomers to observe comets that previously would have been invisible. Douglas A. Biesecker, an astronomer at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center, was responsible for making 45 discoveries on his own. According to the researchers working on the project, SOHO had revealed far more suicidal comets (those plunging into the Sun’s atmosphere) and sungrazers (those that pass by the Sun) than scientists had previously expected to find. The findings had practical implications as well. By observing the patterns of comets as they circled, collided, and split, scientists hoped that they might be better prepared to predict the behavior of a comet headed for Earth.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Bags 102 Comets,” news release 00-23, 8 February 2000.)
 Russia successfully launched a Soyuz test rocket equipped with a Fregat accelerator unit able to carry payloads into high orbit, but lost the Fregat unit upon its reentry to Earth. The rocket took off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying only a dummy payload into space, in a test that was part of Russia’s ongoing research into developing vehicles and technologies that would eventually serve the orbiting ISS.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russia Tests, Then Loses Rocket with Union for Higher Orbit,” 9 February 2000. 878 Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Thousands Walk Out on Boeing in Seattle,” 10 February 2000.)
 More than 10,000 white-collar workers walked off the job at the Boeing Company, in protest over failed contract negotiations. Most of the strikers came from the aerospace giant’s work site in Seattle, Washington.
 In a much-anticipated launch, the Astro-E satellite lifted off aboard an M-5 rocket from the Kagoshima Space Center on the Japanese island of Kyushu. However, soon after launch, Astro-E was lost when the rocket suffered a “control system breakdown,” propelling the satellite into a lower orbit than planned. U.S. officials monitoring the launch determined that the satellite had most likely burned up in Earth’s atmosphere. Astro-E, the product of a joint venture between the United States and Japan, carried new x-ray–sensing equipment, which scientists had hoped would further illuminate the material surrounding black holes. Scientists had designed the new equipment to sense minute changes in the heat of single protons. The specialists overseeing the launch and mission had hoped that Astro-E would orbit and gather data for five years. The satellite had cost more than US$100 million to develop.(NASA, “Japanese-U.S. Satellite Ushers in Golden Era of X-ray Astronomy,” news release 00-18, 2 February 2000; Associated Press, “Japan Suffers Another Setback When Satellite Fails To Reach Orbit,” 10 February 2000; Justin Ray, “Astro-E Believed Lost Following Botched Launch,” Space Flight Now, 10 February 2000.)
 Shuttle Endeavour lifted off in Mission STS-99, planning to use new radar technology to map Earth’s terrain. Crew included astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Dominic L. P. Gorie, Janet L. Kavandi, Janice E. Voss, Mamoru Mohri, and Gerhard P. J. Thiele. The astronauts planned to extend the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission antenna from Endeavour’s cargo bay. The 197- foot (60-meter) antenna would gather mapping data necessary to create the most comprehensive map of Earth ever drawn. NASA collaborated with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency in planning the mission and hoped to cover more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface during the 11-day mission.(Associated Press, “Endeavour on Mission To Get Best Map of Earth,” 12 February 2000.)
 The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft successfully orbited the asteroid Eros, 160 million miles (258 million kilometers) from Earth, gathering close-up images of the craggy rock, in the first successful orbit of a spacecraft around an asteroid. The unique images revealed large boulders and craters on Eros. Scientists noted with amusement that on the Valentine’s Day encounter, NEAR obtained images of a heart-shaped chasm on Eros. NASA planned for NEAR to orbit Eros for about one year.(NASA, “NEAR Begins Looking Closely at Eros,” news release 00-28, 17 February 2000; Peter Kendall, “Cameras Get Close-Up View of Asteroid,” Chicago Tribune, 15 February 2000; Dow Jones Newswire, “Robot Spacecraft Successfully Orbits Asteroid Eros,” 14 February 2000.)
 NASA announced that a team of astronomers had discovered what they believed to be the earliest known structure ever to form in the universe. The researchers had used the Hale Telescope at Palomar Observatory in California and the National Science Foundation’s Mayall Telescope in Kitt Peake, Arizona, to find an ancient quasar. By measuring the quasar’s redshift to determine how fast the quasar was moving away from the galaxy, scientists had been able to calculate the cosmic distance separating Earth and the quasar. The odds of discovering such a distant and relatively fast-moving quasar were remote, especially since scientists could monitor only a fraction of the sky at any one time. The discovery had the broader value of providing a reference point by which to assess those bodies between Earth and the quasar. Daniel Stern of NASA described the finding’s utility: “Finding a quasar at this distance is like turning on a flashlight at the edge of the universe.”(NASA, “Newfound Quasar Wins Title ‘Most Distant in the Universe’,” news release 00-30, 18 February 2000.)
 At a ceremony at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, Colorado, U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart succeeded General Richard B. Myers as the nation’s top military space official, overseeing the U.S. Space Command, the U.S. Air Force Space Command, and the North American Aerospace Defense Command, in addition to thousands of troops and more than 100 satellites. Eberhart took over the U.S. space operations post after having led the Air Force’s Air Combat Command at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia.(Tom Breen, “U.S. Gets New Military Space Chief,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 February 2000.)
 The American Museum of Natural History’s new Hayden Planetarium, which had used information gathered from NASA and the European Space Agency to compile a database containing billions of stars, opened to the public. From 1935 to 1997, the New York City museum had hosted thousands of visitors annually with a less elaborate planetarium. The new planetarium was only one part of the sparkling US$210 million Rose Center for Earth and Space, which museum curator Michael M. Shara hoped would inspire future scientists. The facility, resembling a spacecraft on the outside, featured informative programming hosted by celebrities, such as actors Tom Hanks and Jodie Foster. As they walked through the new facility, visitors could observe displays demonstrating how scientists believed the universe had evolved over a period of 13 billion years.(Associated Press, “Museum Unveils Planetarium for the 21 Century,” 2 February 2000.)
 By conserving fuel throughout their mission, the astronauts aboard Shuttle Endeavour were able to prolong their time in space by one extra day, allowing the crew to map the Earth’s terrain, covering several million square miles more than they had originally estimated possible. The extra 9 hours and 10 minutes of mapping allowed the radar flown from Endeavour to survey Australia in detail, making up for time lost when a Shuttle thruster had failed.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Squeezes in Extra Mapping Day,” 21 February 2000.)
 Shuttle Endeavour returned safely to Earth after a successful 11-day voyage. The scientific community and the public greeted the Shuttle’s return with even more fanfare than usual, because the crew had obtained stunning images of Earth. Endeavour’s six-person crew had worked nearly around the clock, keeping radar antennas running to compile the data for three- dimensional digital maps of Earth’s surface. The crew had gathered more than 300 digital tapes of radar data during the mission, which NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin called “one of the most challenging, difficult missions we ever undertook.” The mission had successfully mapped 43.5 million square miles (113 million square kilometers) of Earth’s terrain. NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency expected that transferring the data into readable maps would take between one and two years. NASA had obtained the images primarily for the U.S. Department of Defense, to improve the accuracy of missiles and to assist in navigation for military planes and troops.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Returns with Dazzling Images of the Home Planet,” 22 February 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Astronauts End Earth-Mapping Work,” 22 February 2000; Chicago Tribune, “Mission: Map the Earth,” 22 February 2000.)
 NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross reported that the Boeing Company would have to forfeit most of its profit from the ISS contract because of its nearly US$1 billion in cost overruns. NASA’s incentive-laden contract with Boeing allowed for significant bonuses for meeting timeline and cost limits. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had ordered an audit of the NASA-Boeing contract in 1999, because projected cost overages had continued to rise. Nonetheless, as Boeing neared completion of the construction of its portion of the ISS, both NASA and the aerospace giant were optimistic that cost overruns had stabilized, and that the space station hardware would perform well in space.(Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Overruns on Space Station Near $1Billion,” Los Angeles Times, 23 February 2000.)
 NASA’s Glenn Research Center (GRC) in Cleveland, Ohio, opened a new laboratory dedicated to the study of ballistics. The laboratory, housed in the complex’s Building 49, featured a 40-foot (12-meter) gas gun that could shoot projectiles at speeds of up to 1,500 feet (457.2 meters) per second. A camera with the ability to capture 2.5 million images per second allowed researchers to observe the behavior of the projectiles and chart the results of their impact on aviation equipment. “The whole idea,” Team Leader Dale A. Hopkins explained, “is to watch the impact and see how materials struck by the projectiles behave . . . not just whether they survive, but how they deform and fail.” GRC had designed the new facility to test materials used for aircraft engine housings and for flywheel containment. Researchers hoped that the new tools would help engineer aircraft that could withstand the pressures of high-speed and high-altitude flight better than those already available could. GRC had been testing ballistic materials since 1980.(NASA, “New Lab Ready To Test Sudden Impact,” news release 00-34, 3 March 2000.)
 Chester M. Lee, who had served as Mission Director for six Apollo Missions to the Moon, including Apollo 13, died from complications of open-heart surgery. Lee had begun his 23-year career with NASA in 1965 after retiring from the U.S. Navy, specializing primarily on the Apollo Missions. He had also served as Program Director for the 1973–1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, the first joint venture between the United States and the former Soviet Union.(Associated Press, “Chet Lee, Former NASA Worker, Dies at 80,” 7 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Obituaries Chester Lee; Navy Captain, Apollo Mission Director,” 9 March 2000.)
 A National Academy of Sciences task force issued a report supporting the development and deployment of the Triana research satellite proposed by Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. Congress had authorized the task force in 1999, to investigate the feasibility of Gore’s plan, which called for a satellite to orbit Earth continuously, capturing live pictures of the planet. Gore believed that obtaining the images and making them available on the Internet would increase public awareness of environmental issues. The proposal had sparked a political controversy between Gore and the Republican Congress, prompting Congress to demand that a task force investigate the value of the project. The task force reported that the satellite had scientific merit. White House science advisor Neal Lane praised the study’s results, urging House members to act with “bipartisan Congressional support.” The process of investigation and approval of the project had drawn public attention to the political debate about space exploration.(Warren E. Leary, “Science Panel Supports Gore Satellite Plan,” New York Times, 9 March 2000; Associated Press, “Panel Finds Merit in Space Mission Proposed by Gore,” 8 March 2000.)
 An independent study, commissioned by NASA in the wake of the highly public failures of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, found that cost-cutting measures had created significant risks for NASA’s Shuttle program. Although the report maintained that the overall safety of NASA’s operations remained within an acceptable range, the investigators warned that the use of contractors and the lack of oversight compromised the quality of NASA’s missions. NASA’s chief of the Office of Space Flight accepted the report’s recommendations to improve NASA’s operations, also noting, however, that NASA had already investigated and dealt with many of the weaknesses highlighted in the report. With budgetary matters always a pressing concern, NASA had made various necessary reductions in personnel, relying on companies such as Boeing and Lockheed Martin more than ever. NASA had initiated the investigation to understand more fully the impact of the changes on NASA’s highest priority⎯the safety of its astronauts.(Associated Press, “NASA Says Shuttle Cuts Have Led to Higher Risk,” 10 March 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Study Raises Concerns About Shuttle Safety,” 13 March 2000.)
 In an article in the journal Science, a team of researchers led by Maria T. Zuber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology reported that they had found compelling evidence that Mars once had a wet climate. According to Zuber, “Evidence is building of more water on the surface of Mars at one time.” The researchers had used the laser measurements taken by Mars Global Surveyor to reach their conclusions. Although Zuber indicated that scientists did not yet have enough evidence to determine whether Mars once had a surface ocean, the study did find large, buried channels beneath the planet’s crust, suggesting that an enormous flow of water once deluged the landscape. The researchers had also found further evidence of two distinct “crustal provinces” on Mars, similar to those on Earth. The team estimated that Mars’s crust was 50 miles (80 kilometers) thick beneath the planet’s southern highlands, but only 22 miles (35 kilometers) thick beneath the northernmost areas of the planet. By using Surveyor’s data to analyze thoroughly the topography of the planet, the research team had also drawn the conclusion that Mars had once been home to more water than ice. The variety of landmasses suggested that, for a period, the planet’s core had released heat, turning ice trapped beneath Mars’s surface into water. As one newspaper described the formative events estimated to have taken place approximately 4 billion years ago, “It steamed and streamed.”(Marie T. Zuber et al., “Internal Structure and Early Thermal Evolution of Mars from Mars Global Surveyor Topography and Gravity,” Science 287, no. 5459 (10 March 2000): 1788−1893; NASA, “View Inside Mars Reveals Rapid Cooling and Buried Channels,” news release 00-36, 9 March 2000; Dan Vergano, “Northern Mars Once Was Drenched,” USA Today, 13 March 2000.)
 The Sea Launch Company suffered a setback in its bid to become a major participant in the satellite launch industry, when one of its Russian-Ukrainian Zenit 3SL rockets carrying a British communications satellite crashed into the Pacific Ocean. The launch was only the third undertaken by the international company, which had planned to use a converted ocean oil rig known as Odyssey as its permanent launchpad. The Sea Launch Company comprised the Boeing Company, together with companies from Russia, Ukraine, and Norway. The company had designed its innovative Sea Launch System to use Earth’s rotation and the faster movement of Earth’s surface at the equator to make it easier to launch rockets with heavy payloads. The failed satellite had cost London-based ICO Global Communications more than US$100 million to develop.(Associated Press, “Sea Launch Satellite Falls into Ocean; Boeing-Led Venture Out $100 million,” 13 March 2000.)
 NASA announced that it had renamed the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft, already orbiting asteroid 433 (Eros), after Eugene M. Shoemaker, an expert in the study of asteroid craters and their origins who died in 1997. Shoemaker’s work on Meteor Crater in Arizona, during the 1960s, had set the standard for crater investigation. Shoemaker had worked for NASA teaching astronauts about meteors and craters. He died in the Australian outback while researching asteroid-impact craters.(NASA, “NASA Renames NEAR Spacecraft for Planetary Science Pioneer Gene Shoemaker,” news release 14, March 2000.)
 NASA dedicated a new aerospace laboratory at Anne Beers Elementary School in Washington, DC, featuring a simulated Shuttle cockpit and Mission Control Center. NASA had named the facility, designed to encourage student interest in space exploration, for U.S. Representative Louis Stokes (D-OH), who had proposed legislation to fund the endeavor in 1998. NASA’s GRC and Goddard Space Flight Center had worked with the Orchard Glenn School of Cleveland, Ohio, and the University of the District of Columbia to construct the innovative facility.(NASA, “Aerospace Laboratory Encourages Students To Reach for the Stars with NASA Help,” news release m00-051, 15 March 2000.)
 The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report stating that the Russian components for the International Space Station (ISS) did not meet NASA’s standard safety requirements. GAO’s findings were the latest in a long series of controversies, particularly between the United States and Russia, in the international effort to build the space station. Most significant of its safety deficits, the Russian crew module did not have adequate shielding to protect the ISS crew from orbiting space debris. At the time of the report, the Russians were already more than two years behind in delivering the crew module.(Patty Reinhert, “Space Station Safety at Center of Debate,” Houston Chronicle, 17 March 2000; Associated Press, “General Accounting Office Slams Russian Modules,” 17 March 2000.)
 During routine testing in preparation for a July 2000 launch, excessive vibration damaged NASA’s High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Images (HESSI) spacecraft. The vibration test device was accidentally set at a level 10 times higher than appropriate, causing structural damage and cracks in two of the satellite’s four solar arrays. Officials estimated that the damage would delay the planned launch by at least six months. NASA had designated about US$75 million for the project. The faulty test, occurring at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, revealed the high degree of precision required of engineers when creating and testing a space-bound craft. Although the satellite had vibrated at the incorrect setting for only about 200 milliseconds, it still sustained damage. However, the project engineers were optimistic that the mission would resume eventually.(Associated Press, “NASA Engineers Damage Satellite During Shake Test,” 24 March 2000; NASA, “HESSI Sustains Damage During Vibration Testing,” news release 00-45, 24 March 2000.)
 Planet sleuths Geoffrey W. Marcy of the University of California at Berkeley and Steven S. Vogt of the University of California at Santa Cruz announced the discovery of two very small planets outside Earth’s solar system. Smaller in mass than Saturn, the planets resided approximately 100 light-years from Earth. Although Marcy and Vogt had concluded that the planets were very hot, and that neither planet was capable of supporting life, their discovery reinforced the long- standing theory that planets form by “snowball effect,” growing from smaller to larger, as well as suggesting that many other stars in the galaxy might harbor small planets. To make their discovery, the astronomers had used the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii in one phase of a multiyear project to observe stars within 300 light-years of Earth.(NASA, “Planet Hunters on Trail of Worlds Smaller than Saturn,” news release 00-47, 29 March 2000; John Noble Wilford, “2 Relatively Small Planets Are Found,” New York Times, 30 March 2000; Dan Vergano, “Other Worldly Discovery,” USA Today, 30 March 2000.)
 Engineers at NASA’s Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) successfully tested a prototype for the “flying lifeboat” that would transport astronauts to and from the ISS. DFRC officials launched a robotic X-38 from under the wing of a B-52 flying at 39,000 feet (12,000 meters). It free fell for more than 40 seconds before deploying a 5,500-square-foot (511-square-meter) parachute, which provided a soft landing for the spacecraft. The test was a significant step in evaluating the technology planned for the crew return vehicle, a low-cost ISS initiative.(Associated Press, “Space Station ‘Lifeboat’ Prototype Successfully Tested,” 30 March 2000.)
 The National Partnership for Reinventing Government (NPR) released the results of a survey indicating that NASA employees had the highest level of job satisfaction among federal government employees. NASA employees rated very favorably in the categories of employee job satisfaction, customer orientation, making reinvention a priority, management communication, and employee participation in cross-functional teams. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the survey’s findings, stating, “I am incredibly proud of these results. They represent a strong statement of the top-to-bottom excellence of the NASA team.” NPR and the Office of Personnel Management administered the survey to understand employees’ perspectives on “reinvention and workplace issues.” When informed of NASA’s outstanding score, Keith Cowing, the editor of Nasawatch.com remarked, “I’m not at all surprised. I used to work there. I loved my job.”(NASA, “Survey Shows NASA Employees Among Most Satisfied Federal Workers,” news release 00-52, 31 March 2000.)
 Russian cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri launched from Earth aboard Soyuz TM-30, headed for the Mir space station. In their planned two-month mission, more than seven months after the last crew members had left the high-maintenance spacecraft, the men aimed to restore Mir to working order. Many experts had assumed that Mir’s days as an active space research center were finished when the previous crew of cosmonauts left the station. Although unable to pay to keep cosmonauts aboard Mir, Russia was still hoping to obtain funding to keep the space station in operation and had not taken it out of orbit. When the Netherlands-based MirCorp had agreed to pay US$20 million to lease the Russian-owned station, Russia had scrambled to put together a crew for a repair mission. The departure of Soyuz caused some concern in the international space community, once again raising speculation regarding Russia’s commitment to the International Space Station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Cosmonauts Head to Mir Today,” 4 April 2000; Des Moines Register (IA), 5 April 2000.)
 NASA awarded its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year awards. Inventors Anne K. St. Clair, Terry L. St. Clair, and William P. Winfree, working as a research team at NASA’s Langley Research Center, won the award for inventing a material that they had named Colorless and Low Dielectric Polyimide Thin Film. Commercial manufacturers could apply the thermoplastic material to many types of surfaces to protect against ultraviolet radiation and high temperatures. The researchers also suggested adding the material to liquids, such as paints and cosmetics, to provide ultraviolet protection. Douglas B. Leviton received the Government Inventor of the Year award for his Ultra-High Sensitivity, Incremental, and Absolute Optical Position Encoder. The encoder allowed scientists to calibrate space-bound instruments more accurately than they had done previously. Both awards recognized inventions completed during 1999. NASA honored the recipients at a ceremony, presenting them with plaques and cash awards.(NASA, “NASA Selected Its Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 00-53, 5 April 2000.)
 NASA released a comprehensive new study, which found that the levels of ozone in the Arctic stratosphere were declining rapidly. In some parts of the stratosphere, the atmosphere had lost 60 percent of its ozone over the course of one year. The report, compiled by hundreds of European and American scientists, also demonstrated that changes in the global climate (primarily global warming) threatened to delay the recovery of the ozone layer. The scientists were optimistic that the ozone layer would recover eventually, but perhaps not until the mid-21st century. The study had cost NASA more than US$20 million, and the European scientists contributed US$10 million. The researchers had gathered data using satellites, airplanes, and hundreds of weather balloons.(Knight-Ridder News Service, “Thinning Ozone over Arctic Raises Concerns,” 6 April 2000; William K. Stevens, “New Survey Shows Growing Loss of Arctic Atmosphere’s Ozone,” New York Times, 6 April 2000.)
 Soyuz successfully docked with the unoccupied Mir space station. At the last minute, cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri docked Soyuz manually, because Russian space officials feared the autopilot was about to malfunction. The cosmonauts planned to concentrate on plugging a small air leak and conducting several scientific experiments during a spacewalk.(Associated Press, “Latest Space Crew Docks Flawlessly with Mir Space Station,” 6 April 2000.)
 In two Nature articles, research teams announced that through independent research they had discovered the same result: the Ulysses spacecraft had passed through the longest comet tail ever discovered. Although the Ulysses vehicle had made its unintended discovery in 1996, when it passed through the tail of Comet Hyakutake, scientists had taken four years to confirm the discovery. The scientists concluded that Ulysses had discovered a comet tail approximately 300 million miles (483 million kilometers) long. “The discovery was made quite by accident, a bit like finding a needle in a haystack when you weren’t even looking for it in the first place,” was how one project member described the fortunate discovery. Ulysses, a joint mission of NASA and the European Space Agency, had launched in 1990 to study solar winds and rays, not comets. However, the spacecraft had picked up some unusual readings during its mission, which turned out to be signs of Hyakutake’s tail, extending much farther than previously estimated.(Geraint H Jones et al., “Identification of Comet Hyakutake’s Extremely Long Ion Tail from Magnetic Field Signatures,” Nature 404, no. 6778 (6 April 2000): 574; G. Gloeckler et al., “Interception of Comet Hyakutake’s Ion Tail at a Distance of 500 Million Kilometers,” Nature 404, no. 6778 (6 April 2000): 576; NASA, “Strangers in the Night: Ulysses Spacecraft Meets a Comet,” news release 00-55, 5 April 2000; Associated Press, “Solar Probe Finds Longest Comet Tail Ever Recorded,” 10 April 2000.)
 NASA announced that follow-up studies had determined that the distant mass known as TMR- 1C, discovered in 1997, was probably not a protoplanet⎯a young, still-forming precursor of one of the giant planets. In 1998 astronomer Susan Terebey of the Extrasolar Research Corporation had published findings suggesting that the body was a protoplanet several times larger than Jupiter. Terebey’s research had received widespread attention. However, although NASA had released the images of TMR-1C captured by the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), NASA had urged scientists to obtain further verification before identifying the body as a protoplanet. After observing the body over several months, astronomers had concluded that TMR-1C was a bright star, rather than a planet. Reflective dust had likely increased the brightness of the star, located approximately 135 billion miles (217 billion kilometers) from Earth, making it appear to be a planet. After her initial high-profile announcement, Terebey had continued to study the star using the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii and had amended her own hypothesis, reporting, “the new data do not lend weight to the protoplanet interpretation and the results remain consistent with the explanation that TMR-1C may be a background star.” Most newspapers gave as much coverage to the news of the changing assessment as they had given to the original discovery.(James Glanz, “Scientists Retract Claim of Planet Discovery,” New York Times, 7 April 2000; Associated Press, “Presumed Protoplanet May Be a Background Star,” 7 April 2000; NASA, “Suspected Protoplanet May Really Be a Distant Star,” news release 00-58, 6 April 2000.)
 Princeton University graduate student Xiaohui Fan discovered a distant quasar that scientists believed to be the oldest object ever observed by a human being. Fan had worked as part of a team using the 32-foot (10-meter) W. M. Keck Telescope. Estimating that the quasar was (Associated Press, “Shuttle Crew Lands After Success with 2 Satellites, 2 Space Walks,” 21 January 1996. 13 NASA, “Galileo Probe Suggests Planetary Science Reappraisal,” news release 96-10, 22 January 1996.)
 billion years old, astronomers expressed their excitement that the benchmark discovery would enable them to observe the universe in its formative stages.(Associated Press, “Quasar Discovered by Student May Be Most Distant Ever Seen,” 15 April 2000; Kevin Coughlin, “Young Princeton Expert Finds Piece of a Fledgling Universe,” Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 14 April 2000; Washington Post, “Most Distant Object Observed,” 17 April 2000.)
 The United States and Brazil signed a treaty giving U.S. aerospace firms access to Brazil’s Alcântara launch site, located just 3° south of the equator. The treaty was the first accord signed by the United States that allowed U.S. satellites to launch from foreign soil. The launch site’s location near the center of the globe would save money for aerospace companies, because satellites could take a shorter path to equatorial orbit, requiring less fuel. Brazil benefited from the boost to its embryonic space program and the possibility of capturing a portion of the lucrative commercial-satellite business. At the time of the agreement, U.S. firms controlled two- thirds of the annual US$66 billion commercial satellite industry.(Reuters, “Brazil: Joins Space Race with U.S. Satellite Treaty,” 17 April 2000; Peter Fritsch, “Brazil To Sign U.S. Accord To Enter Satellite Business,” Wall Street Journal, 18 April 2000.)
 After completing four months of on-orbit checkout and verification, Terra, the newest in NASA’s series of Earth Observing System Satellites, became functional. NASA had developed and launched Terra to monitor Earth’s atmosphere on a daily basis. Researchers hoped that gathering frequent data would allow a more comprehensive assessment of Earth’s climate change. According to Yoram J. Kaufman, Project Scientist for Terra at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), “Terra is measuring and documenting the Earth’s vital signs, many of them for the first time.” In the midst of public and scholarly discussions of global warming and climate change, the new research satellite was a step toward understanding the causes of the changes. “The data will help us understand our planet, aid in our distinguishing between natural and human-induced changes, and show us how the Earth’s climate affects the quality of our lives,” Kaufman clarified. The satellite’s first transmitted images thrilled scientists. The satellite surveyed North America, creating images in many different layers, to reveal how different levels of population and types of vegetation affected the climate. NASA officials planned to make the images obtained by Terra available to business, scientists, and the public.(NASA, “Terra Spacecraft Open for Business,” news release 00-62, 19 April 2000; NASA, “New Views of Earth from Terra Satellite Wednesday,” news release N00-16, 18 April 2000.)
 NASA revealed what it called “the first detailed images of the early universe,” captured by the Balloon Observations of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics (BOOMERANG) experiment. For the BOOMERANG experiment, scientists had suspended a powerful telescope from a research balloon circumnavigating the Antarctic. Andrew E. Lange of California Institute of Technology called the experiment and the resulting images “an incredible triumph of modern cosmology.” For the most part, the data, obtained by closely measuring variations in the microwave background radiation, confirmed scientists’ existing theory that, in its earliest days, the universe was flatter than it is today. According to this theory, confirmed by other evidence besides these images, the universe is flat and forever expanding. In summarizing the significance of the experiment, one Massachusetts Institute of Technology researcher stated, “it’s confirmation of the prediction of our best theory of what caused the structure of the universe.”(Associated Press, “Scientists Reveal First Detailed Images of Early Universe,” 27 April 2000; NASA, “The Universe in Its Infancy: New Findings Unveiled at News Briefing,” news release N00-17, 20 April 2000.)
 NASA and the science community celebrated the 10-year anniversary of the deployment of the HST. During its decade in space, the HST had enabled astronomers to make hundreds of discoveries. According to NASA, the HST’s “rapid-fire rate of discoveries and cosmic images has profoundly changed the science of astronomy, and astounded and inspired people around the world.” The U.S. Postal Service and NASA unveiled a series of five stamps designed to commemorate the HST’s decade of contributions. The images on the stamps would not have been possible without the HST’s power, which enabled it to capture images of the Eagle Nebula, Ring Nebula, Lagoon Nebula, Egg Nebula, and Galaxy NGC 1316. NASA held a series of events to celebrate the anniversary. Hubble’s 10 years in space had not begun smoothly, as many critics of the program had been quick to point out. As the Baltimore Sun remembered, the HST was “once the butt of late-night talk-show jokes,” because a flawed mirror initially had prevented the telescope from focusing. However, after a series of costly repairs, the HST had produced a litany of awe-inspiring images. The HST made more than 271,000 observations in its first 10 years, with another decade of usefulness anticipated. HST Project Scientist David S. Leckrone of NASA’s GSFC summarized the HST’s impact, “Not since Galileo aimed a small, 30-power telescope into the night sky in 1609 has humanity’s vision of the universe been so revolutionized in such a short time span by a single instrument.”(NASA, “April 24 Marks a Triumphant Ten Years in Space for Hubble Telescope,” news release 00-59, 11 April 2000; NASA, “NASA, U.S. Postal Service To Celebrate Hubble Space Telescope 10th Anniversary with Stamp Unveiling and Other Events,” news release N00-14, 4 April 2000; Frank D. Roylance, “Hubble Goes from Flop to Star; Once the Butt of Jokes, Telescope Now Thrills with Space Images,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 21 April 2000.)
 NASA announced that a team of scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to solve one of astronomy’s fundamental problems⎯determining the distance from Earth to a cosmic object. Peter Predehl, the lead researcher on the project, had found that by scattering x-rays between Earth and a given object, the dust grains and scattered materials between the two points could serve as measuring posts to determine the distance covered by the x-ray. Because of the Chandra Observatory’s superior resolution and strength, particles that scientists could not otherwise have observed would serve as points of context. Researchers were confident that they could use the new approach to help determine the size of nearby galaxies. Furthermore, the newly devised means of measuring the distance between objects and Earth had implications for understanding the universe and its age.(NASA, “Chandra Shows New Way To Measure Cosmic Distances,” news release 00-66, 25 April 2000.)
 In delivering the Louisiana State University Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that “in no less than 10 and no more than 20 years,” U.S. astronauts would land on Mars. Proclaiming that Mars was NASA’s next frontier, Goldin stated that the Red Planet held special promise for researchers. The possible presence of water and other signs of life on Mars intrigued scientists, making a Mars landing a priority for NASA. In addition, because scientists have estimated that the two planets are roughly the same age, the exploration of Mars could lead to new information about Earth. Goldin made his remarks in the aftermath of the high-profile crash of Mars Polar Lander.(Associated Press, “Red Planet Is Next Frontier,” 2 May 2000.)
 NASA announced the creation of a new office dedicated to improving heath and safety for its workforce. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian as Chief Health and Medical Officer, giving him the responsibility for developing programs to research and implement the best medical procedures for astronauts and other NASA personnel. “On the ground and in space, rapid advances in medical knowledge and tools need to be adapted and incorporated into our planning and practices,” Goldin said when announcing the new position. Nicogossian faced the task of establishing NASA’s Health Council, in keeping with NASA’s commitment to making heath and safety its number-one priority.(NASA, “NASA Creates New Office To Foster Heath and Safety,” news release 00-69, 1 May 2000. 915 Associated Press, “Glenn Honored for Test Pilot’s Role as Armstrong Watches,” 3 May 2000.)
 The Carrier Test Pilot Hall of Honor, aboard the USS Yorktown, inducted U.S. Senator John H. Glenn Jr., honoring him for his distinguished aviation career before becoming an astronaut. Before Glenn became the first man to orbit Earth, he had already achieved a long record of flight exploits. Glenn’s fellow test pilot Neil A. Armstrong, the first astronaut to walk on the Moon, attended the induction. Upon receiving the award, Glenn expressed his gratitude at joining the distinguished ranks of the Hall of Honor and spoke of his lifetime of flight experiences.
 The “Love Bug” computer virus infected the computer system of NASA, along with those of the Pentagon, the CIA, Microsoft Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and other major business and government offices. Considered one of the most damaging and costly computer viruses in history, “Love Bug” spread primarily through e-mail messages, corrupting files on millions of computers. Four of NASA’s 10 space centers suffered from the attack, causing both Johnson Space Center (JSC) and Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to shut down e-mail and other communication between computers.(Los Angeles Times, “Fast Moving Virus Hits Computers Worldwide,” 5 May 2000.)
 News reached the United States that space debris had crashed to the ground near Johannesburg, South Africa, prompting NASA to respond. Several metal balls had fallen from the sky, leaving 8-inch (20-centimeter) dents in the ground. NASA scientists clarified that the debris probably came from a Delta rocket launched in 1996. Chief Scientist for Orbital Debris Nicholas L. Johnson explained that manufactured objects sent into space plummet back to Earth nearly every day, landing mostly in the ocean. Johnson also stated that NASA would compensate anyone hurt by the falling debris, remarking that no such injuries had occurred in more than 40 years.(Associated Press, “Hail of Metal Balls Puzzles Farmers, Until NASA Steps In,” 3 May 2000.)
 NASA successfully launched the GOES-L satellite aboard an Atlas 2A rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The new weather satellite would provide the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with detailed readings on severe weather systems affecting the United States. NASA deemed the GOES-L satellite a top priority because of the declining returns of the aging GOES-8 satellite. NASA had delayed the US$220 million satellite project because of engine problems, causing anxiety to weather forecasters who depended on the satellites to track the powerful hurricanes that affected the United States in 1999. As Director of the National Weather Service’s Southern Region, William Proenza explained, “It is vitally important that we have continuity of data or we may be finding ourselves impaired in our ability of forecasting.” NASA had kept the May 2000 launch of the GOES-L on track, despite some calls to postpone it so that NASA could launch Shuttle Atlantis on an urgent repair mission to the International Space Station (ISS). However, NASA officials had determined that the risk of inadequate weather forecasting was too great to take a chance on delaying the launch.(Associated Press, “NASA Launches Hurricane-Tracking Satellite,” 3 May 2000; Knight-Ridder Tribune Business News, “Weather Satellite Has Successful Launch, Heads for Orbit,” 3 May 2000.)
 Nature published a letter from physicist Leonard Reiffel revealing that, during the Cold War in the 1950s, the United States had funded a research program focused on detonating a nuclear bomb on the Moon, part of a plan to demonstrate the strength of the U.S. military. The Armour Research Foundation⎯now a part of Illinois Institute of Technology⎯had directed the project, known as A Study of Lunar Research Flights. Astronomer Carl Sagan, then a young graduate student, had worked on the project. As Reiffel explained, Cold War politics had dramatically affected science agendas during the period: “There was lots of talk on the part of the Air Force about the [M]oon being ‘military high ground’.” The scenario had called for the U.S. Air Force to launch a small nuclear device from an undisclosed location and detonate it on the Moon. Those planning the detonation had selected an atomic bomb, because a hydrogen explosive would have been too heavy for a rocket to carry 238,000 miles (383,000 kilometers) to the lunar landing spot. Military leaders eventually called off the plan because of concern that, during the building and launch of the bomb, a nuclear accident could occur on Earth.(Leonard Reiffel, “Sagan Breached Security by Revealing U.S. Work on a Lunar Bomb Project,” Nature 405, no. 6782 (4 May 2000): 13−14; Associated Press, “Physicist Says U.S. Contemplated Detonating an Atom Bomb on the Moon,” 18 May 2000.)
 Astronomers using the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico captured the first- ever images of the so-called Metal Dog Bone asteroid, officially named 216 Kleopatra. Scientists had categorized the asteroid as a main-belt asteroid, theorizing that the New Jersey–sized rock was the result of an ancient, violent collision. Steven Ostro of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory called the find “one of the most unusual asteroids we’ve seen in the [s]olar [s]ystem.” Scientists made the discovery by bouncing radar signals off the asteroid and cataloging the signals’ echoes. By gathering a comprehensive collection of echoes, the research team had been able to assemble a computer model of the asteroid’s shape. The use of radar signals with a moderately powered telescope had made the long-distance discovery possible. Ostro marveled at the technology, describing the find as akin to “using a Los Angeles telescope the size of the human eye’s lens to image a car in New York.” Many of the astronomers working on the project spoke of their amazement at the size, shape, and metallic complexion of the asteroid. They also clarified that the asteroid posed no danger to Earth.(NASA, “Astronomers Catch Images of Giant Metal Dog Bone Asteroid,” news release 00-74, 4 May 2000. 921 Birmingham Post (AL), “Serious Bone Loss for Cosmonauts Not Mir Speculation,” 5 May 2000.)
 Laurence Vico released a study on astronauts’ loss of bone density because of time spent in space. Vico and his team of researchers had examined the bone-mineral density of 15 cosmonauts who had spent from one to six months aboard the Mir space station. They had found a “striking” loss of bone density, in some cases as serious as that experienced by paraplegic patients. The team of doctors suggested that physicians should examine astronauts more closely for susceptibility to bone-weakening conditions such as osteoporosis, before they traveled into space, and that postflight recovery periods should be much longer than previous standards dictated. The sample study found that astronauts experienced an average bone-density loss of more than 5 percent, and that the lost bone did not immediately regenerate after postflight recovery periods. Scientists had long been aware of the physical challenges posed by the lack of gravity in the space environment. Therefore, NASA and the space agencies of other countries had carefully dictated diet and exercise programs for astronauts. The study had special relevance, however, because the international space community was continuing work on the ISS and anticipating even longer stays in space.
 The board appointed to investigate the mishap that had damaged the High Energy Solar Spectroscopic Imager (HESSI) spacecraft in preflight testing announced its findings. The investigators had discovered that the computer controlling the vibration device had sensed an abnormally high level of static friction and had responded by delivering approximately 10 times the exertion of gravity suitable for the test. A slight misalignment of the shaker mechanism had proved just enough to throw off the preflight testing. The board had determined that the accident had been avoidable. Routine maintenance and a pretest of the testing device itself would have caught the problem before any damage had occurred. NASA planned for the HESSI satellite to undergo repairs at the University of California at Berkeley.(NASA, “Board Finds Cause of HESSI Mishap,” news release 00-80, 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Identifies Causes of Test Accident that Broke Spacecraft,” 12 May 2000.)
 Cosmonauts Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri conducted a 5-hour spacewalk to repair tiny cracks weakening the hull of the Mir space station. The cracks, the result of the June 1997 collision of a cargo craft with the station, had caused the module to lose air pressure steadily. The spacewalk was not the first attempt to solve the problem, but previous teams had been unable to locate the cracks. Zalyotin and Kaleri tested a new “cosmic version of super glue,” designed to seal the fractures even in the harsh environment of space. The Russian Space Agency clarified that the cracks were not crippling to the space station, and that the crew could maintain acceptable levels of air pressure by manipulating oxygen outflow inside Mir. However, the agency hoped to solve the problem permanently, because Russia planned to use the aging space station for commercial purposes. The Netherlands-based MirCorp, which had committed nearly US$20 million to leasing Mir, observed the cosmonauts’ activities, calling the mission the first privately funded spacewalk in history.(Reuters, “Russia: Russian Cosmonauts Leave Mir and Start Spacewalk,” 12 May 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Experiment with Space Glue To Seal Cracks,” 12 May 2000.)
 Shuttle Atlantis lifted off from KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-101 bound for the ISS. The seven-astronaut crew comprised Americans⎯James D. Halsell Jr., Scott J. Horowitz, Susan J. Helms, James S. Voss, Mary Ellen Weber, and Jeffrey N. Williams⎯and Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev. The crew planned to make repairs to the space station, focusing primarily on replacing four malfunctioning solar-powered batteries. The crew also planned to use the thrusters of the Shuttle to realign the ISS’s orbit. Having been unoccupied and underpowered for nearly a year, the station had fallen below the optimal orbiting altitude. The station had gradually descended at a rate of about 1.5 miles (2.4 kilometers) per week. The Shuttle mission plan also called for Atlantis’s crew to repair a damaged radio antenna and stabilize a shaky construction crane mounted on the outside of the ISS. Because of volatile weather in April 2000 and a full docket of rocket launches, NASA had delayed Atlantis’s launch three times, pushing the Shuttle’s liftoff into mid-May. Russian cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, a veteran of two tenures aboard Mir, had spent more time in space than the rest of Atlantis’s crew combined.(Tom Breen, “NASA Goes for 4th Launch Try in a Month,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 19 May 2000; Reuters, “USA: Update 1⎯Shuttle Atlantis Lifts Off from Florida,” 19 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Off on Fourth Try,” 18 May 2000; Associated Press, “Six Americans, One Russian Bound for Space Station,” 19 May 2000.)
 Astronauts Jeffrey N. Williams and James S. Voss conducted a 6-hour spacewalk to make repairs to the ISS. The pair successfully repaired the station’s construction crane, replaced a failed antenna, and began installing a much larger, Russian-built crane, designed to aid workers in adding the final modules to the ISS. NASA officials highlighted the exercise as a precursor of the maintenance schedule to come: “This spacewalk was a good example of what future spacewalks are going to look like, where we will need to perform maintenance on the space station.” The spacewalk occurred after Atlantis had docked at the space station, but while the hatch doors between the two spacecraft remained shut.(Washington Post, “Spacewalkers Begin Repairs on Orbiting Station; Wobbly Crane Is Secured; Another Awaits Completion,” 22 May 2000; Associated Press, “Outside Repairs Finished, Astronauts Ready To Head Inside Space Station,” 22 May 2000.)
 Shuttle Atlantis, commanded by James D. Halsell Jr., began boosting the ISS into a higher orbit. By firing its steering jets 27 times during a 1-hour push, Shuttle Atlantis raised the space station about 9 miles (14 kilometers) farther from Earth than it had been. The effort was the first of three planned realignment maneuvers. NASA officials wanted to allow Atlantis’s thrusters to have a day to cool down before continuing with the project. In addition to changing the ISS’s orbit, Atlantis’s astronauts serviced the exterior of the space station and replaced four of its failing batteries. The crew hoped that the latter procedure would stop the gradual drop in elevation that the ISS had been experiencing during the months before Atlantis’s visit.(Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Gives Space Station a Boost,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Atlantis Lifts Space Station to Right Orbit,” 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “Space Station Gets Fresh Batteries,” 24 May 2000.)
 NASA controllers began sending signals to the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory to perform a series of maneuvers that would ultimately end in the satellite crashing into the Pacific Ocean. The endgame commands marked the conclusion of a successful nine-year mission, which had recorded data on more than 2,500 gamma-ray bursts. The US$670 million satellite, launched on 5 April 1991 aboard Mission STS-37, had provided researchers with never-before-seen images of explosions throughout the universe. “It will be like losing a member of the family,” remarked one NASA scientist who had worked on the program since 1979. NASA officials had decided to end the satellite’s space tenure because of the possibility that the aging satellite might become unresponsive and plummet out of control to Earth. By initiating the satellite’s demise, NASA could control the landing area of the 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) spacecraft. Some critics charged NASA with being too conservative, because it had based its decision on the 1-in- 1,000 odds that an uncontrolled descent of the satellite to Earth would result in injuries.(James Orberg, “Plan To Scrap Satellite Sacrifices Science,” USA Today, 24 May 2000; Associated Press, “NASA To Destroy Compton Satellite After Nine Years,” 28 May 2000.)
 Atlantis touched down at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, only the 14th time that a NASA Shuttle had landed in darkness. NASA controllers used infrared cameras to monitor the Shuttle’s final descent. The return of the Shuttle ended the crucial mission to repair the ISS and reset the space station’s orbit to an optimal altitude. NASA’s Mission Control, congratulating the crew on a “super mission,” began almost immediately to anticipate the flurry of missions that would finally complete construction on the ISS. Atlantis had sustained minor damage during the trip, mainly dents and scratches on its wings caused by ice. Three members of the returning crew, astronauts Susan J. Helms and James S. Voss and cosmonaut Yury V. Usachev, had a special interest in monitoring the ISS’s completion, because they had been selected for the second research crew to the ISS and would make a long-term stay aboard the research station.(William Harwood, “Shuttle Ends Repair Trip to Station,” Washington Post, 30 May 2000; USA Today, “Shuttle Crew Returns from Space Station Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000; Associated Press, “Nighttime Landing Ends Shuttle Repair Mission,” 30 May 2000.)
 NASA announced a partnership with Dreamtime Holdings Inc., a start-up company backed by Lockheed Martin to provide the International Space Station (ISS) with high-definition television and to create digital archives for NASA. The agreement was NASA’s first involving a commercial partner that would provide support for the ISS. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the partnership at NASA’s Ames Research Center, located in the high-technology hub of California’s Silicon Valley, predicting that the partnership would move NASA to the forefront of the information age and terming it “innovative government at its best.” Dreamtime planned to spend US$100 million on the project, which would give civilians access to neverbefore-seen images of the Space Shuttles and of NASA missions. The pact resulted from the Commercial Space Act of 1998, enacted to increase commercial involvement in and funding for the ISS.(NASA, “NASA, Dreamtime Partnership Propels Space Information Age to New Heights,” news release 00-87, 2 June 2000; Frank Morring Jr., “Startup To Spend $100 Million Digitizing Station, NASA Archives,” Aerospace Daily, 2 June 2000.)
 NASA de-orbited the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, after nine years in orbit, in a controlled reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. Director of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center Alphonse V. Diaz called the event “a bittersweet day for NASA.” The spacecraft, NASA’s “gamma-ray equivalent” of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), launched in 1991 with four instruments designed to observe gamma rays. During the course of its impressive tenure, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory had yielded valuable data regarding the previously little- known gamma-ray sky. The 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne), US$670 million research craft had orbited Earth for long after its predicted lifespan. Some critics had opposed bringing the craft crashing to Earth while it was still providing useful data. In 1999, however, NASA engineers had detected problems with one of the satellite’s control gyroscopes. After considering sending maintenance missions to repair the craft or training the Shuttle crew to capture the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory and bring it back to Earth for service, NASA officials had determined that the prudent response was controlled de-orbit and preemptive destruction of the satellite. NASA engineers used a series of engine burns to guide the satellite in its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere and to direct the pieces of debris from the craft to crash into the Pacific Ocean. Like NASA’s efforts to control the reentry of Skylab in 1979, this maneuver was one of the first times that NASA had intentionally destroyed one of its own craft by guiding its reentry into Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “Status Report # 2: Second Deorbit Burn for Observatory Successful; Time Change for Last Two Burns,” news release, 1 July 2000; NASA, “Final Status Report: Compton Gamma Ray Observatory Safely Returns to Earth,” news release, 4 June 2000; Michael E. Ruane, “A Satellite’s Bittersweet Splashdown; Scientists Nostalgic, Angry About Demise of Md.-Based Project,” Washington Post, 2 June 2000.)
 At the American Astronomical Society convention, scientists Karl Gebhardt and Douglas O. Richstone announced that an extensive survey of more than 30 galaxies had revealed that black holes reach their large size through gradual growth. Previously, some research had suggested the opposite⎯that black holes were simply “born” big. Using the HST, Gebhardt and Richstone had led a team of astronomers in determining the size of black holes in different galaxies. They found that, although small galaxies tend to have smaller black holes, the largest known galaxies have mammoth black holes. The astronomers suspected that the black holes had “grown up” along with the galaxies where they resided, feeding on gas and stars to acquire increasing mass. Although further research must determine the precise correlation between black hole and galaxy size, the scientific community greeted news of the discovery with great interest. The HST had not only made the discovery possible but had provided the opportunity for scientists to continue “black hole hunting,” to tabulate more exact answers.(NASA, “Black Holes Shed Light on Galaxy Formation,” news release 00-88, 5 June 2000. 267)
 Scientists at the American Astronomical Society convention also unveiled the first detailed map of the region of the universe inhabited by Earth. Using an Australian robotic telescope, which measured distances between more than 100,000 galaxies, researchers had charted the locations of galaxies, dark regions, and cosmic clusters. Perhaps most significantly, the new map supported a long-standing theory regarding the size limits of cosmic structures. Because of the relatively small scope of previous mapping surveys, scientists had questioned whether the known standards of cosmic size were representative. The newest map, however, did not reveal any cosmic structure outside of previous standards. Therefore, scientists could support with greater conviction the idea that size limits existed as the universe evolved. The researchers termed the limits the “end of greatness.”(James Glanz, “Robotic Telescope Affirms Assumption on Universe’s Birth,” New York Times, 7 June 2000. 933 Mark Carreau, “Rocket Gives Space Station a Life,” Houston Chronicle, 7 June 2000.)
 After two earlier unsuccessful trials, Russia launched, without incident, a modified Proton rocket carrying a large Gorizont communications satellite. Propulsion-system flaws had triggered explosions of the Proton rocket in previous trials. The United States viewed the successful test launch as a positive sign of Russia’s commitment to the ISS project, a boost for the strained relationship between the two countries. After the failed tests, a joint NASA-Russian Space Agency research crew had determined that production flaws in the turbomachinery of the rocket’s second and third stages, including the presence of contaminants such as asbestos cloth and metal fragments, had caused the problems. Russia planned to test the Proton rocket again before scheduling the much-delayed delivery of its crew module to the ISS.
 NASA announced that its Chandra X-ray Observatory had revealed a “luminous spike of x-rays,” known as a hot spot, located approximately 800,000 light-years away from its black-hole source. Scientists commented that the images captured x-ray behavior that astronomers had not predicted. Andrew S. Wilson of the University of Maryland explained, “the brightness and the spectrum of the x-rays are very different from what theory projects.” A possible explanation offered for the brilliant hot spot of x-rays was that a series of shock waves had catapulted across the galaxy electrons with energies as high as 50 thousand billion times the energy of light.(NASA, “Spectacular X-ray Jet Points Toward Cosmic Energy Booster,” news release 00-89, 6 June 2000.)
 Having restored Liberty Bell 7, which had spent 38 years at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean, NASA placed the space capsule on display at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). Liberty Bell 7 had carried astronaut Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom into space on 21 July 1961, in NASA’s second piloted spaceflight. After its pathbreaking, 15-minute, suborbital flight, the capsule had descended to the ocean. The hatch of Liberty Bell 7 had blown off just after landing, causing the capsule to fill with water and almost drowning Grissom. A helicopter present at the landing had tried to pull the Liberty Bell 7 out of the water, but the waterlogged capsule had become too heavy, and the crew had to cut it loose, leaving it to sink. Regarding the hatch’s failure, astronaut Grissom had maintained until his death in the 1967 Apollo launchpad fire, that he had followed proper protocol. Nearly 40 years after the ocean landing, the Discovery Channel had funded a recovery mission that had brought the historic spacecraft out of the ocean. Although divers had not found the hatch, previous NASA investigations had supported Grissom’s claim that human error had not caused the hatch failure. NASA had restored the capsule, placing it in a clear plastic display case so that visitors to KSC could peer inside the spacecraft.(Associated Press, “Grissom’s Capsule Back at Space Center,” 14 June 2000.)
 After spending more than two months aboard the Mir space station, Russian cosmonauts returned to Earth. According to MirCorp, the mission had been the first privately funded crewed mission to Mir. Sergei V. Zalyotin and Alexander Y. Kaleri landed safely in Kazakhstan, having spent most of their time aboard the Russian spacecraft conducting crucial repairs. To keep the station running, MirCorp had signed a lease agreement for Mir and paid for the mission. However, with the return of Zalyotin and Kaleri, Russia placed on hold the prospect of continuing Mir, even if supported with private funds. “If there is no money, Mir will not fly,” Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev stated at the end of the mission. Russian officials indicated that the Russian Space Agency would leave the space station unpiloted once again, until private investors could fund another mission. The continuing focus on Mir, while the building of Russia’s ISS module ran far behind schedule, agitated some NASA officials and international space leaders.(Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; Associated Press, “Mir Cosmonauts Prepare To Return to Earth,” 15 June 2000; CNN.com, “First Privately Funded Manned Space Mission Blasts Off for Mir, 4 April 2000, http://archives.cnn.com/2000/TECH/space/04/04/russia.mir.01 (accessed 15 July 2008).)
 NASA and the Boeing Company announced an agreement to use Boeing’s Delta Launch Services Inc. for a variety of NASA missions. The contract, estimated to be worth at least US$168 million, included options to extend the agreement. NASA also awarded both Boeing and Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services Inc. indefinite delivery–indefinite quantity contracts for 10 years. The agreements solidified NASA’s partnerships with the two major aerospace companies. A NASA spokesperson clarified the reasons for the extension of the relationships, saying that Boeing and Lockheed “were selected based on their ability to meet NASA’s highly critical future mission requirements and their proven track records for providing a quality product.” At the time of the agreement with Boeing, the company had flown 82 missions for NASA with a success rate of 98 percent.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Delta Rockets To Launch Next-Generation NASA Space Craft,” news release, 16 June 2000; NASA, “NASA Awards Launch Services Contracts,” news release c00-e, 16 June 2000; Seattle Post- Intelligencer (WA), “Boeing Wins $168 Million NASA Order for 3 More Delta II Launches, Options,” 19 June 2000.)
 NASA celebrated the 20th anniversary of its Summer High School Apprenticeship Research Program (SHARP), created to encourage promising high school students, especially minorities, to pursue careers in math, science, and engineering. During the first 20 years of the program, nearly 3,000 students participated, and 3,300 NASA employees served as SHARP mentors. Most SHARP student participants had served as interns at one of NASA’s research centers during the summer months. NASA had begun the program and had continued to fund it as part of its educational mission.(NASA, “NASA’s SHARP Program Celebrates 20 Years of Excellence,” news release 00-96, 19 June 2000.)
 NASA reported to the public that Mars Global Surveyor had captured images depicting erosion and soil deposits consistent with the presence of flowing water on the planet in the past. Researchers had long postulated that, billions of years ago, Mars’s surface held abundant water, which had dried up as the planet’s atmosphere thinned. Because scientists had suggested that the one-time presence of water on Mars might indicate the one-time presence of life on the planet, the new evidence created significant excitement in the scientific community. In announcing the find, NASA reported that it “could turn out to be a landmark discovery,” but cautioned against drawing conclusions from the images without further analysis. Furthermore, the images suggested that water might have been present on the planet more recently than previously thought. Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler explained, “For two decades scientists have debated whether liquid water might have existed on the surface of Mars just a few billion years ago. With today’s discovery, we’re no longer talking about a distant time. The debate has moved to present-day Mars.”(Kathy Sawyer, “Mars Craft Finds Evidence of Water,” Washington Post, 22 June 2000; William F. Nicholson, “Reports: NASA Finds Evidence of Water on Mars,” USA Today, 21 June 2000; NASA, “New Images Suggest Present-Day Sources of Liquid Water on Mars,” news release 00-99, 22 June 2000.)
 After a lengthy legislative battle, the U.S. House of Representatives approved a US$60 million increase for NASA in its FY 2001 budget. Although the amount was less than the Clinton administration had requested for NASA, the spending proposal marked the end of several years of cost cutting for NASA. Even during a period of budget surpluses, NASA had not achieved the victory without a fight. Some members of Congress, concerned over the delay in the completion of the ISS, had introduced a floor amendment to delete all funding for the ISS. However, the House had roundly defeated the budget-slashing amendment, as it had in previous years, with a vote of 325 to 98. Noting that the ISS was nearly complete, Representative Robert E. Cramer (D- AL) spoke for NASA proponents when he said, “This is not the time to pull the rug out from under this program.”(Tamara Lytle, “House OKs Giving NASA $13.7 Billion in 2001 Fiscal Year,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 22 June 2000; Gannett News Service, “House Votes Down Measure To Cut Space Station,” 22 June 2000.)
 NASA launched the most advanced communications satellite it had ever developed, the Tracking and Data Relay Satellite-H (TDRS-H) created to provide communication between the Space Shuttles, ISS, HST, and NASA control centers. Intended to replace a communications satellite that had been in place since 1983 and had surpassed its mission-designed lifetime, the new TDRS-H was the first of three communications satellites planned to link NASA’s space-bound vehicles. NASA had designated nearly US$500 million for the design, building, and launch of the three new satellites. The TDRS-H launched aboard a Lockheed Martin Atlas IIA rocket, separating from it after about 30 minutes of flight. Once the satellite reached 171° longitude, it became operational.(Lockheed Martin Inc., “International Launch Services and Lockheed Martin Provide Mission Success for NASA Satellite Launch,” news release, 30 June 2000; NASA, “Advanced Communications Satellite Ready To Serve New Millennium Space Projects,” news release 00-98, 21 June 2000.)
 Russia launched a new defense and spy satellite aboard a Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome. More concerned with the launch vehicle than with the military satellite, U.S. space officials praised the successful operation of the Proton-K rocket, a rocket similar in type to those that had been involved in several launch accidents during 1999. The United States had a particular interest in the launch, because Russia planned to carry a module built for the International Space Station (ISS) aboard a Proton rocket. Russia had built the Zvezda module to provide living space for the ISS crew. A spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency stated that the rocket’s successful launch confirmed Russia’s ability to transport its Zvezda module: “This launch is important in estimating the readiness of the Proton-K booster rocket for a more important mission July 12 when the same kind of booster will carry the Russian-built Zvezda service module to the ISS.” The Russian Space Agency had overcome significant financial shortfalls to complete production on both the Proton-K rocket and the Zvezda module.(Reuters, “Russia: Russia Launches Proton Rocket Ahead of Space Lab,” 5 July 2000.)
 Engineers completed a weeklong series of tests on the U.S.-built Destiny laboratory, planned to launch to the ISS in 2001, ensuring that the module had no leaks and would provide a safe, vacuum-sealed environment in which the ISS astronauts could conduct research. NASA and the Boeing Company had worked together to test the 32,000-pound (14,500-kilogram) research laboratory. Placing Destiny in a pressurized chamber, engineers had monitored gas levels inside the module over the course of the week. Tip Talone, Director of the ISS Payload Process at Kennedy Space Center (KSC), characterized the results as “a large step in meeting the lab’s ‘Destiny’,” stating that the laboratory had “exceeded expectations.”(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space State Laboratory Exceeds Expectations in Vacuum Chamber Test,” 7 July 2000.)
 After nearly two years of delays and many questions regarding the Russian Space Agency’s commitment to the ISS, Russia successfully launched the Zvezda module aboard a Proton rocket. Building the 22-ton (20,000-kilogram or 20-tonne), US$320 million module, to provide living quarters for researchers aboard the ISS, had severely taxed the Russian space program. To bring the project to fruition, Russia had relied on the resourcefulness of its scientists and engineers, as well as resorting to creative financing arrangements, such as selling the U.S.-based Pizza Hut Company an advertisement for display on the side of the Proton launch rocket. Russia had insured Zvezda’s launch for more than US$1 billion. Hundreds of spectators, representing aerospace companies from Russia and Western countries, witnessed the launch from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. Watching the launch with Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin praised the successful completion of the long-awaited module: “The Russians have gone through all sorts of difficulty with their economy, the political changes, and a whole variety of other problems, and they came through and did what they said they were going to do.” Koptev made clear the high stakes for future Russian space projects, based on the successful launch and linkup of Zvezda: “This is 10 years of work and the success of this launch will determine to a large extent whether the Russian space programme continues or not.” The international space community greeted news of the launch as a sign that the much-postponed ISS was nearing completion. Although Russia had plans to contribute further portals to the ISS, none of its subsequent contributions had as much potential to delay the international effort.(Associated Press, “Russian Launching Clears Way for Space Station,” 13 July 2000; USA Today, “Russia Sends Module of Space Station into Orbit,” 12 July 2000; Newsday (Long Island, NY), “Launch of Key Module for Space Station Is Set,” 11 July 2000; Reuters, “Russia Space Station Launch Insured for over $1 Bln,” 12 July 2000; Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Update 2-Russia Launches Key Module for ISS,” 12 July 2000.)
 Astronaut Eileen M. Collins, speaking for NASA, publicly responded to the report of the Commission for the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering, and Technology Development. The Commission had reported that a severe shortage of high-tech workers threatened economic growth in the United States, highlighting the need to increase funding from both private and governmental sources, to improve education in science and engineering. The report had emphasized that improved education in these fields was necessary if the United States hoped to continue training engineers and researchers qualified to bring NASA’s exploratory mission to fruition. Citing the example of her own educational and career path, Collins called for further support for research and education in mathematics, science, engineering, and technology. Both the Commission’s report and Collins’s response continued an ongoing debate over how to change the trend among students to choose paths of study outside of the fields of science and technology. In 1999 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had also testified before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology regarding the challenge of drawing young people to careers as scientists and engineers.(NASA, “NASA Supports High-Tech Workforce Reflecting Diversity of America,” news release 00-106, 13 July 2000.)
 NASA released to the Internet a database of 1.9 million celestial images, the largest collection of images of stars and other celestial bodies ever made freely available for public use. The rapid improvement of technology had made possible the release, which brought to home computers information that could have filled 6,000 CD-ROMs. The Two-Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS), which used two 51-inch (130-centimeter) telescopes to survey the sky, had collected the images. The University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory had collaborated on 2MASS, creating a database of great value to scholars and the public alike.(NASA, “Twin-Telescope Sky Survey ‘Gives You the Stars’,” news release 00-108, 14 July 2000.)
 William G. Fastie, known for helping establish the prestigious Johns Hopkins University space program and for inventing the spectrometer, died in Baltimore at the age of 83. Fastie, often called the father of the Hopkins space program, was one of the United States’ preeminent astrophysicists. His spectrometer, which measured the spectrum of light, helping scientists gather data about other planets, was not only innovative but also rugged enough to travel into space.(Alice Lukens, “William G. Fastie, 83, Hopkins Astrophysicist Designed Spectrometer,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 17 July 2000.)
 As Russia’s Zvezda module, its major contribution to the ISS, continued its journey toward the ISS, NASA celebrated the 25th anniversary of one of the first international, collaborative missions. The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project had launched on 15 July 1975, when American astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton lifted off aboard an Apollo spacecraft atop a Saturn 1B rocket. During the course of their nine-day mission, the NASA crew had docked the United States’ Apollo with Russia’s Soyuz 19 spacecraft, successfully and without incident. The Cold War–era mission, testing the ability of NASA spacecraft to link with Russian ones, had represented a significant step toward the development of international collaboration in future space exploration(NASA, “Anniversary of Apollo Soyuz Test Project Observed,” news release, N00-30, 11 July 2000; Reuters, “US, Russia Mark Space Jubilee as New Era Beckons,” 11 July 2000.)
 The National Aviation Hall of Fame inducted four new members at a black-tie dinner and formal enshrinement ceremony at the Dayton Convention Center in Dayton, Ohio. Apollo astronaut Edwin E. “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. joined fellow Apollo 11 astronaut Neil A. Armstrong in the Hall of Fame. Aviators previously inducted to the Hall of Fame included Eugene A. Cernan, the last Apollo astronaut to walk on the Moon; Laurence C. “Bill” Craigie, the first U.S. military aviator to fly a jet aircraft; and Thomas B. McGuire Jr., the second-leading fighter ace in U.S. Air Force history. The National Aviation Hall of Fame’s Class of 2000 joined 166 award-winning aviators already chosen for the honor.(Dayton Daily News (OH), “Astronaut Meets a Fan; Aviation Hall of Fame Enshrines 4 More,” 16 July 2000.)
 The first of two Cluster spacecraft launches took place from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. NASA and the European Space Agency had formed a partnership to develop and build the exploration craft, designed to travel around the Earth in a tetrahedral formation, collecting data on solar wind. Space officials planned to launch two additional Cluster craft one month after the first two had entered their orbiting pattern. With four satellites launched and flying in formation, scientists expected to harvest data about the “turbulent battle” raging between Earth’s magnetic field and the solar winds blowing at an estimated rate of 1–2 million miles (1.6–3.2 million kilometers) per hour. Researchers also hoped the new information would help scientists understand other interactions between the Earth and the Sun. Each of the four Cluster spacecraft carried instruments to measure the patterns of electrons and the presence of protons and helium, as well as instruments to monitor the characteristics of electronic fields, solar wind, and plasma waves.(NASA, “New Cluster Mission To Provide Unprecedented Detail about Space Weather,” news release 00-105, 13 July 2000.)
 NASA announced that SPX Services Solutions had obtained a license to use NASA-patented technology to monitor more carefully levels of exhaust produced by the United States’ millions of motor vehicles. NASA had developed its atmospheric, remote-sensing technology to track greenhouse gases and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. Combining government and private forces, researchers intended to focus on the pollution output of motor vehicles, particularly that of individual automobiles. SPX Services planned to design a device that would enable a driver to test his or her own vehicle to determine its compliance with U.S. Clean Air Act standards, rather than requiring the driver to take it to an auto mechanic for an emissions test. The goal of self- monitoring suited the increasingly popular idea of encouraging individuals to accept personal responsibility for protecting Earth from noxious pollutants.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Technology To Monitor Motor Vehicle Pollution,” news release 18 July 2000.)
 The 20 July 2000 edition of Astrophysical Journal Letters published research of Gibor Basri chronicling the first sighting of a flare from a failed star, or brown dwarf. Using the Chandra X- ray Observatory, a team of scientists from the University of California at Berkeley had spotted the brown dwarf and its bright x-ray flare. Scientists believed that examining the x-ray flare would help them better understand dying stars and the explosive activity and magnetic fields of low-mass stars. Early analyses indicated that the brown dwarf’s x-ray flare was approximately 1 billion times more powerful than the x-ray flares emitted from the planet Jupiter. Scientists reacted to news of the discovery with excitement and surprise. Robert E. Rutledge of California Institute of Technology stated that he and his colleagues were “shocked,” clarifying: “we did not expect to see flaring from such a lightweight object. This is really the mouse that roared.” The task of spotting an x-ray flare had been difficult, because the brown dwarf emitted the flares only periodically. However, the intermittent flares made the successful capture of an image all the more significant. The observation of the brown dwarf’s occasional release of x-ray flares confirmed the theory that brown dwarfs only release energy when they heat to temperatures above 4,500°F (2,500°C).(Gibor Basri et al., “An Effective Temperature Scale for Late M and L Dwarfs, from Resonance Absorption Lines of Cs I and Rb I,” Astrophysical Journal Letters 538, no. 1 (20 July 2000): 363−385; NASA, “Chandra Captures Flare from Brown Dwarf,” news release 00-103, 11 July 2000.)
 Cape Canaveral, Florida, celebrated 50 years as a launch site. Long before NASA had begun to use the site, the U. S. Army had launched test rockets from the swampy land. The “li’l Bumper” was among the first, according to Dick Jones, a retired U.S. Army master sergeant who had helped with the 1950 launches. During its first 50 years, the Army had launched about 3,200 rockets and missiles from the site, which would eventually become KSC.(Eliot Kleinberg, “50 Years at the Cape: Opening the Door to Space,” Palm Beach Post (FL), 24 July 2000; Associated Press, “Cape Canaveral: A Half-Century of Launches Begin with Bumper,” 19 July 2000.)
 The Zvezda service module successfully docked at the ISS, immediately increasing the size of the space station by 50 percent. Through a series of rocket firings, Zvezda had drawn steadily closer to the ISS during its two-week journey to its new home 220 miles (354 kilometers) from Earth. Experts had deemed the successful launch and docking of the Russian component of the ISS vital to the long-term success of the collaborative venture. The Russian-built Zvezda, nearly identical to a core section of the Russian Mir space station, was to provide living quarters for researchers on the station, as well as vital electronic, computer, and communications systems. Anticipating significant interest in the historic linkup, NASA provided information on its Web site explaining how to view the space station as it traveled over Earth.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Is Connected to Module from Russia,” New York Times, 26 July 2000; NASA, “No Telescopes Needed: NASA Web Sites Let Stargazers Track Impending Space Station ‘Nuptuals’,” news release)
 Nearly one year after the highly publicized failure of a probe to reach the surface of Mars, NASA announced plans for at least one, possibly two, robotic rovers to explore Mars by 2003. The new design plan, the outcome of an overhaul of NASA’s Mars Program in the aftermath of the unsuccessful mission, called for a rover larger than Mars Sojourner, which had successfully navigated the Martian surface in 1997. NASA planned for the new probe to continue the search for water on the surface of the Red Planet.(Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Moves To Send Robot Rovers To Explore Mars Surface,” Washington Post, 28 July 2000; Peter N. Spotts, “New Rover To Look for Signs of Water on Mars,” Christian Science Monitor, 31 July 2000; Tribune News Services, “NASA Unveils Plans for 2003 Mission to Mars,” 28 July 2000.)
 Mitsuyuki Ueda of the Aeronautics and Space Development Division of Japan’s Science and Technology Agency announced that Japan had decided to freeze the development of an unpiloted space shuttle, which was four years behind schedule, because of problems in Japan’s shuttle program, as well as in its H-2 rocket program. Japan had originally conceived its planned 20-ton (18,000-kilogram or 18.1-tonne) shuttle in the 1980s, modeling it after the U.S. Space Shuttle, and designing it to conduct scientific experiments and to carry into space payloads of up to 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes). Technical and financial setbacks within Japan’s shuttle program contributed to the freeze. In addition, because the original plan had called for Japan to launch the space shuttle aboard a Japanese-designed H-2 rocket, a launch failure of an H-2 rocket had influenced the decision to halt Japan’s shuttle program. In the failed launch of November 1999, officials had to destroy the rocket in midair, leading an advisory panel to suggest that Japan’s planned shuttle should launch from a reusable high-speed jet plane, rather than atop a rocket.(Associated Press, “Japan Freezes Plans To Make Unmanned Space Shuttle,” 2 August 2000.)
 Space Media Inc. and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia (RSC Energia), prime contractor of the Russian service module of the International Space Station (ISS), announced a new multimedia partnership called Enermedia LLC. Under the new partnership, Space Media Inc. would use the Russian Space Program archives to develop and provide multimedia, which the Russian service module would broadcast on television and the Internet.(SPACEHAB, “Space Media Inc and RSC Energia Join Forces Forming New Multimedia Partnership,” news release, 2 August 2000, http://www.spacehab.com/news/2000/00_08_02.htm (accessed 8 May 2008).)
 New Skies Satellites N.V. selected Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems (LMCSS) to build a second geosynchronous satellite to provide high-speed Internet access and other multimedia communications to a large coverage area, extending from the eastern Mediterranean and southern Africa to Australia, Japan, and Korea. New Skies selected the LMCSS A
 00-114, 20 July 2000; NASA, “First Opportunity Tonight for Zvezda To Dock with International Space Station,” news release N00-36, 25 July 2000. satellite because it was able to meet challenging demands for bandwidth, power, and in-orbit flexibility.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded Contract To Build First Interactive Broadband Multimedia Spacecraft for New Skies Satellites,” news release, 4 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_ releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedContractBuildF.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 A Russian Progress cargo spacecraft launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying fuel to the uninhabited ISS for use in adjusting the station’s orbit. The craft also carried scientific instruments, linens, and personal-hygiene supplies in preparation for the October arrival of the station’s first permanent crew.(Orlando Sentinel (FL), “Ship with Supplies for Space Station Launches,” 7 August 2000.)
 NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had located a “small armada of ‘mini- comets’,” the fragmented remains of the nucleus of the comet LINEAR. When it had disappeared behind the Sun on 27 July 2000, astronomers initially thought that LINEAR had disintegrated entirely. Upon losing sight of the comet’s core, ground-based observers had suggested that the nucleus had disintegrated into a “pile of dust,” and, consequently, astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute had reprogrammed the HST to search for the nucleus. The exceptional resolution and sensitivity of the HST had revealed the nuclei of a half-dozen mini-comets at a level of detail never before observed in a disintegrating comet. Some astronomers had suggested that the fragments the HST revealed were the “primordial building blocks of the original nucleus.” If so, studying them could help scientists understand how the comet had originally formed.(NASA, “Hubble Discovers Missing Pieces of Comet Linear,” news release 00-122, 7 August 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-122.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin began an official visit to Morocco to discuss space cooperation. He planned to meet with several Moroccan officials, particularly in the fields of scientific research and advanced technology, and to visit facilities in Morocco capable of launching Space Shuttles.(BBC, “Morocco: NASA Official Visits for Talks on Space Cooperation,” RTM TV (Rabat, Morocco), 9 August 2000.)
 A Starsem Soyuz-Fregat rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit for the European Space Agency (ESA) the final pair of Cluster II scientific satellites, Rumba and Tango. The launch was the 10th consecutive success for the French-Russian Starsem consortium. The first pair of Cluster II satellites, named Salsa and Samba, had launched on 16 July 2000. Designed to determine the physical process of the interaction between the solar wind and Earth’s magnetosphere, the mission’s main objective was to increase understanding of space weather, viewed as “an increasingly significant obstacle to satellite activity,” thereby improving scientists’ forecasting abilities. Each of the four spacecraft contained a collection of instruments for detecting plasma fields, waves, and particles. The Cluster II mission, designed to last for two years following an initial three-month period of instrument and system commissioning, was an international effort of more than 200 scientists from Canada, China, the Czech Republic, ESA member states, Hungary, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, and the United States. The original Cluster mission had ended during its inaugural launch in 1996, when a malfunction had caused the explosion of Arianespace Inc.’s Ariane 5 rocket.(European Space Agency, “Lift Off for Second Pair of Cluster II Spacecraft,” news release 52-2000, http://www. esa.int/esaCP/Pr_52_2000_p_EN.html (accessed 8 May 2008); Space Business News, “Soyuz Launches Second Pair of Cluster Probes Igniting Science Mission; Tenth Successful Launch in 18 Months,” 16 August 2000.)
 NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler announced that NASA had decided to send two large scientific rovers to Mars in 2003, rather than a single craft. The new plan called for the two craft to launch within weeks of each other, reaching Mars in January 2004 after their respective seven and one-half-month-long journeys. The two 300-pound (136- kilogram) rovers, exact duplicates of each other and similar to the highly successful Sojourner rover of 1997, would head to different locations on Mars. Mars Program Director G. Scott Hubbard explained that NASA had undertaken an extensive study of the two-rover option, weighing the excellent launch opportunity in 2003 against resource requirements and schedule constraints. The study teams concluded that it would be possible to successfully develop and launch identical packages, and that the new plan would not only double NASA’s scientific return but also add resiliency and robustness to the Mars exploration program. Although NASA had yet to select the two landing sites, Mars Program Scientist James B. Garvin suggested that possible locations included those with evidence of the existence of water in the past. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell University, Principal Investigator for the rovers’ Athena science package, explained that the goal of each rover would be to learn about ancient water and climate conditions on Mars. Each craft would operate as a robotic field geologist, reading the geological record at its landing site to discover what conditions had formed the local rocks and soils.(NASA, “NASA Plans To Send Rover Twins to Mars in 2003,” news release 00-124, 10 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-124.txt (accessed 7 May 2008).)
 The Southern African Regional Science Initiative (SAFARI 2000) officially commenced in South Africa’s Northern Province, with the gathering of scientists from 14 nations and six South African universities. NASA, alongside the University of Witwatersrand, led SAFARI 2000, their goal to “determine how the region’s natural ecosystems and human land use affect air quality and atmospheric conditions.” The initiative would use specially equipped planes to make four scientific flights each week, over a six-week period, through September 2000. A modern ER-2 version of the U-2 spy plane would fly directly under the Terra satellite as it passed over various regions of southern Africa, to verify the satellite’s data. Three other aircraft would also fly with the ER-2 “like a stack of pancakes,” with the ER-2 flying at about 65,000 feet (19,800 meters) to conduct remote sensing, a Convair 580 aircraft collecting air and gas samples just below the ER- 2, and two Aerocommander 690A aircraft conducting similar tests at between 5,000 and 12,000 feet (1,500 and 3,700 meters).(Justin Arenstein for Africa News Service, “Africa’s Biggest Science Experiment Kicks Off,” 14 August 2000; Africa News Service, “NASA Project Off to a Flying Start,” 14 August 2000.)
 Emergency rescue personnel from Canada, Russia, and the United States participated in training exercises near St. Petersburg in Russia, where they practiced maneuvers for rescuing astronauts returning to Earth from the ISS. The rescuers practiced searching in water and on land for a module carrying three astronauts, as well as practicing first-aid techniques.(Associated Press, “Russian, U.S. Rescuers Practice Space Rescue,” 16 August 2000.)
 NASA announced that its Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite (SWAS) had detected water vapor throughout interstellar space. However, in the very coldest areas, where temperatures are only 30° above absolute zero, the satellite had detected far less water vapor than most theories had predicted. In those areas, SWAS measurements had indicated water vapor concentrations of only a few parts per billion. Ronald L. Snell of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst remarked that the finding presented a “real puzzle to our understanding of the chemistry of interstellar clouds.” In warmer regions, such as those within star-producing gas clouds, SWAS had measured water concentrations as much as 10,000 times greater than in the coldest regions. The new results were the product of 18 months of observations using the compact radio observatory, launched in 1998 on a mission to “study the composition of interstellar gas clouds and their collapse to form new stars.”(NASA, “Cosmic Gas Clouds Yield Puzzling Concentrations of Water,” news release 00-126, 16 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-126.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 Robert R. Gilruth, “an aerospace scientist, engineer, and a pioneer of the American space program during the glory days of Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo,” died at the age of 86. Gilruth had specialized in flight research, and in 1945 he had organized an engineering team to study experimental, rocket-powered aircraft, leading to the establishment of the Pilotless Aircraft Research Division and the creation of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics’s Wallops Island launching range. In 1952 Gilruth had become Assistant Director of the Langley Laboratory, investigating high-temperature structures and dynamics loads, and conducting hypersonic aerodynamics research at Wallops Island. His focus shifted to spacecraft in 1957, after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik. When NASA began in 1958, Gilruth had become Director of the Space Task Group at Langley, ultimately devising all the basic principles of Project Mercury. In 1961 Gilruth had become Director of the Manned Spacecraft Center, later Johnson Space Center (JSC), where he directed 25 human spaceflights over the course of 10 years. George M. Low, Director of the Apollo Lunar Landing Program, once remarked in an interview that the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs would never have existed without Robert Gilruth. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin commented, “his courage to explore the unknown, his insistence on following strict scientific procedures, and his technical expertise directly contributed to the ultimate success of the American manned space program and the landing of a man on the moon.”(NASA, “Dr. Robert Gilruth, an Architect of Manned Space Flight, Dies,” news release 00-127, 17 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-127.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 Russian space officials announced a decision to alter plans for the Enterprise module of the ISS, which the company RSC Energia was building in conjunction with the U.S. company SPACEHAB. In the original plans, the module had been noncommercial, providing docking and cargo space, but in an effort to increase revenue, RSC Energia had revised the plans to allow the module to hold multimedia equipment for various business projects.(Associated Press, “Russia Seeks Space Station Revenue,” 23 August 2000.)
 Lockheed Martin Systems Integration announced that the U.S. Navy had selected the company to build seven SH-60R Multi-Mission Helicopters, under the first SH-60R low-rate initial production (LRIP) contract, moving Lockheed Martin from development and testing to the production phase of the SH-60R program. The contract required Lockheed Martin to integrate the flight avionics systems, mission avionics systems, and stores and defense systems.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Awarded First SH-60R Avionics Production Contract,” news release, 23 August 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinAwardedFirstSH60R Avio.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 NASA announced the results of the most complete HST census of brown dwarfs, finding that the “odd and elusive objects also tend to be loners.” Joan Najita of the National Optical Astronomy Observatory in Arizona explained that the properties of brown dwarfs “reveal new and unique insights into how stars and planets form,” because they “bridge the gap between stars and planets.” The stellar objects are too low in mass to burn hydrogen, yet are more massive than planets; despite being 15 to 80 times more massive than Jupiter, brown dwarfs are difficult to detect because the light they emit is very faint. The HST census had found more low-mass than high-mass brown dwarfs, as is the case with stars, and the isolated brown dwarfs appeared to represent the low-mass counterparts of the more massive classes of stars. In carrying out the census, scientists had used the HST’s infrared vision to measure the brightness and temperature of stars in the cluster IC 348 in the constellation Perseus. Najita and colleagues had used the telescope’s NICMOS camera, developing a new technique to distinguish brown dwarfs from “the clutter of background stars.” The new procedure had measured the “strength of an infrared water-absorption band in the atmospheres of the stars,” a sensitive measure of each star’s temperature, solving several problems simultaneously. The procedure had enabled the scientists to distinguish the brown dwarfs from background stars and to measure the masses of the brown dwarfs without needing to assume their ages, thereby greatly improving estimates of mass.(NASA, “Hubble Gets Head Count of Elusive Brown Dwarf Stars,” news release 00-130, 23 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-130.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 NASA awarded four small businesses 90-day contracts to develop concepts and requirements for providing access to the ISS on emerging launch systems. The contracts’ purpose was to identify potential backup capability and to augment the station’s primary resupply vehicles: the U.S. Space Shuttle, the Russian Progress, the ESA’s Automated Transfer Vehicle, and the Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicle. NASA awarded Andrews Space and Technology US$195,000; Microcosm, US$198,000; HMX Ltd., US$245,000; and Kistler Aerospace Corporation, US$264,000, to develop concepts, determine requirements of launch services, and provide suggestions on specific development risk-reduction activities, which NASA would need to perform. NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center would manage the study contracts under the Alternate Access Project of the Space Launch Initiative.(NASA, “Small Companies To Study Potential Use of Emerging Launch Services for Alternative Access to Space Station,” news release C00-g, 24 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-g.txt (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 Margaret G. Kivelson and four coauthors from the University of California at Los Angeles published in the journal Science the strongest evidence to date that Jupiter’s moon Europa contains a salty, liquid ocean beneath its surface. The team had used data from the Galileo probe’s magnetometer to study Europa’s magnetic compass, finding that “the presence of a layer of electrically conducting liquid, such as saltwater” best explained the behavior of the moon’s magnetic compass. Kivelson explained that the team had inferred that the conductor must be a liquid ocean, since ice is not a good conductor of electricity. However, Torrence V. Johnson of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) remarked that the magnetometer data by itself was insufficient to conclude the presence of a liquid ocean. Johnson explained that scientists needed several further steps of inference, such as precise measurements of gravity and altitude, indicating the effects of tides.(NASA, “Galileo Evidence Points to Possible Water World Under Europa’s Icy Crust,” news release 00-131, 25 August 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-131.txt (accessed 6 May 2008); Margaret Kivelson et al., “Galileo Magnetometer Measurements: A Stronger Case for a Subsurface Ocean at Europa,” Science 289, no. 5483 (25 August 2000): 1340–1343.)
 In the second on-orbit failure of Hughes Electronic Corporation’s HS601-model satellite, the Spacecraft Control Processor (SCP) of Mexico’s Solidaridad I communications satellite malfunctioned, disrupting television, radio, and pager services. The first incident had occurred on the Galaxy IV satellite, causing similar communications disruptions in the United States during 1998. In the current malfunction, operators in Iztapalapa and Hermosillo received a series of alarms indicating that the only functioning SCP on board the Satmex-owned craft had turned itself off. The satellite had two SCPs on board and needed only one to carry out its communications relay properly, but Solidaridad I already was running on its backup SCP, having lost its first processor a year ago. Engineers suspected that the cause of the incident was the growth of a tiny crystalline structure that leads to electrical shorts. Hughes investigators had identified this type of malfunction in their satellites containing tin-plated relay switches and, therefore, had begun to use nickel-plated switches in new satellites to prevent future occurrences of such electrical shorts. However, Solidaridad I, designed for 14 years of service in space, had launched in 1993 before the conversion to nickel-plated switches. The Solidaridad series, comprising two satellites, provided service to all of Mexico, also extending to the southwestern United States, the Caribbean, and Central and South America. The malfunction led to the loss of educational television programming in 12,000 schools in Mexico, mostly in remote rural areas where some students rely entirely on televised courses. Satmex was transferring Solidaridad I users to the three other satellites in its fleet.(Justin Ray, “Satellite Failure Causes Communications Blackout,” Spaceflight Now, 29 August 2000. 280)
 A Russian Proton-K rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the Russian Ministry of Defense’s Raduga-1-5 spacecraft, a military communications satellite with the alternate names Globus-1 and Cosmos 2372. Although the Globus-1 was a classified program, news sources reported that the craft would use a geostationary orbit to serve as a relay link for Russian military forces. At the time of the launch, many Raduga craft remained in orbit, but only five were operational.(Justin Ray, “Proton Rocket Lofts Russian Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2000; Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 562, 1 September 2000, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx562.html (accessed 6 August 2008). 975 NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Duxbury Named Project Manager of Stardust Mission,” news release 2000- 084, 30 August 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/duxbury.html (accessed 6 May 2008).)
 NASA’s JPL named Thomas C. Duxbury Project Manager for JPL’s Stardust Mission, launched in February 1999 to collect a sample from Comet Wild-2 and return it to Earth. Duxbury, who had served as the Mission’s Acting Project Manager for the past year, replaced Kenneth Atkins, who had been heading a program to develop leadership for JPL’s projects. Duxbury had joined the Stardust project in 1996 as Mission Manager, responsible for navigation, mission design, the ground-data system, science-data management, and mission operations. Before working on the Stardust project, Duxbury had served on planetary mission teams, including several Mariner missions, the Mars Viking mission, Pioneer 10 and 11 to Jupiter and Saturn, Voyager 1 and 2 to the outer planets, the Soviet Phobos Mission to Mars, the Mars Observer Mission, and the Clementine Mission to study the Moon. Concurrent with his position as Stardust Project Manager, Duxbury planned to continue to serve as a member of the science teams for Mars Global Surveyor’s laser altimeter and for the ESA’s Mars Express orbiter and lander, as well as continuing as lead scientist for geodesy and cartography in the Mars Exploration Office.
 The U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report discussing workforce and safety issues of NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. The report assessed the impact of workforce reductions on the Shuttle program; the challenges that NASA would face as it addressed its workforce issues; and the status of planned safety and supportability upgrades to the Space Shuttle. GAO identified 26 technical skills needed at JSC in Houston, Texas, as well as at other facilities in Florida, Alabama, and Mississippi. In addition, GAO found that the decrease from 3,000 to 1,800 federal employees in the Shuttle program workforce since 1995 had placed NASA at a “critical juncture.” The Shuttle launch rate had dropped from eight launches in 1997 to three in 1999, a trend on the cusp of reversing itself in the aftermath of the July 1999 launch of Russia’s Zvezda module. Moreover, GAO reported signs of overwork and stress among NASA staff. Worker demographics⎯twice as many workers over age 60 as under age 30⎯had compounded the problem of a declining workforce. NASA officials welcomed the report, although the results reflected “a much harsher assessment of [S]huttle safety issues [than the assessment] prepared by NASA itself in response to an electrical short that accompanied the July 1999 launching of the [S]huttle Columbia.” GAO also reported that NASA had terminated downsizing plans in December 1999 and had initiated efforts to begin hiring new staff. Although it was developing safety and supportability upgrades, which it would implement over the next five years, NASA still faced programmatic and technical challenges, such as a demanding schedule and undefined design and workforce requirements.(U. S. General Accounting Office, “Space Shuttle: Human Capital and Safety Upgrade Challenges Require Continued Attention” (report no. GAO/NSIAD/GGD-00-186, Washington, DC, August 2000), http://www.gao.gov/ archive/2000/n200186.pdf (accessed 9 May 2008); Mark Carreau, “Undersized Work Force Puts NASA at ‘Critical Juncture’,” Houston Chronicle, 31 August 2000.)
 A Sirius-2 communications satellite launched aboard a Russian Proton-K rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The launch marked the second success for the Sirius Company, which planned to broadcast digital radio to the United States. Sirius had placed its first satellite in orbit on 1 July 2000, scheduling a third launch for November 2000.(Reuters, “Kazakhstan: Russia Launches U.S. Satellite from Kazakhstan,” 5 September 2000.)
 Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) selected Space Systems and Applications Inc. of Lanham, Maryland, to provide engineering, science, and technology support for NASA’s Space and Earth Science Directorates. The value of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was US$204.5 million over a period of five years. Under the contract, NASA required Space Systems and Applications to provide research and information technology services including scientific data analysis, modeling and simulation of physical processes, development of flight-project data systems and large-scale data management, archival and delivery systems, and systems analysis and programming. These services would support a broad range of scientific disciplines⎯astronomy and astrophysics, climatology and atmospheric science, geodynamics, land processes, oceanography, planetary studies, solar and space plasma physics, and solid earth geographics.(NASA, “Contract for Goddard Space Center Support Awarded,” news release C00-j, 6 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-j.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA announced that, on 3 September 2000, the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) aboard NASA’s Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer Earth Probe (TOMS-EP) satellite had detected an 11 million-square-mile (28.5 million-square-kilometer) ozone-depletion area⎯surpassing the ozone hole’s record of 10.5 million square miles (27.2 million square kilometers) set on 19 September 1998. Scientists investigating the extent of the ozone-depletion area expressed their surprise, suggesting that early-spring conditions and an “extremely intense Antarctic vortex”⎯an upper-altitude stratospheric air current that moves around the continent⎯might partly explain the record-setting size. Jack A. Kaye of the Office of Earth Sciences, Research Director at NASA Headquarters, remarked that, although scientists expect variations in the size of the ozone hole from one year to the next, they plan to observe the evolution of the ozone-depletion area in the coming months, to compare it with previous years. Manager of NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Program Michael J. Kurylo suggested that the new data reinforced concerns about the fragile nature of the ozone layer, indicating that, although international agreements had curbed the production of ozone-destroying gases, concentrations of those gases in the stratosphere were just reaching their peak levels. Therefore, he warned that it would be decades before the depletion area in the ozone layer would no longer occur annually. Associate Administrator for Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar commented that such discoveries demonstrated the value of long-term observations.(NASA, “Largest-Ever Ozone Hole Observed over Antarctica,” news release 00-137, 7 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-137.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 Space Shuttle Atlantis Mission STS-106 launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, to prepare the International Space Station (ISS) for the arrival of its first crew. The mission’s crew comprised Commander Terrence W. Wilcutt, Pilot Scott D. Altman, and Mission Specialists Daniel C. Burbank, Edward T. Lu, Yuri I. Malenchenko, Richard A. Mastracchio, and Boris V. Morukov. The purpose of STS-106, also known as ISS Flight 2A.2b, was to connect power, data, and communications cables to the Zvezda service module, as well as to deliver supplies and to perform maintenance. Although NASA officials had expressed concern that STS-106 might encounter a weather delay, the approaching storm had stalled offshore, so the Shuttle program experienced its first punctual launch since John H. Glenn Jr.’s historic flight in October 1998.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Atlantis Thunders into Orbit on Space Station Mission,” 8 September 2000; NASA, “Mission Archives STS-106, International Space Station Flight 2A.2b,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 30 October 2008).)
 Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko conducted a spacewalk outside the ISS, connecting nine power, data, and communications cables between the Russian-built Zvezda and Zarya modules. Lu and Malenchenko also assembled and installed a 6-foot-long (1.8-meter- long) magnetometer boom on the Zvezda module, to serve as a compass showing the relation of the ISS to Earth.(NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts- 106.html (accessed 30 April 2008); NASA, “STS-106 Extravehicular Activities,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/shuttle/ archives/sts-106/eva/index.html (accessed 2 May 2008).)
 NASA announced that scientists using the Chandra X-ray Observatory had confirmed the existence of “middleweight” black holes. Several groups of scientists used Chandra to focus on a mid-mass black hole located 600 light-years from the center of galaxy M82. Previous x-ray data from the German-U.S. ROSAT (Röntgensatellite) and the Japan-U.S. ASCA (Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics) had suggested the existence of a mid-mass black hole in M82. Scientists compared Chandra’s new high-resolution images with optical radio and infrared maps to determine that a single, bright source was emitting most of the x-rays. The scientists continued to observe M82 over an eight-month period, noting that the intensity of the x-rays rose and fell every 600 seconds. Philip Kaaret of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics explained that this behavior was similar to black holes swallowing gas from a nearby star or cloud. Martin Ward of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom remarked that the findings opened “a whole new field of research.”(NASA, “Chandra Clinches Case for Unexpected Black Hole Discovery,” news release 00-140, 12 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-140.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 Astronaut Edward T. Lu and cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko installed three new batteries in the Russian service module Zvezda, which had launched with only five of its eight batteries to reduce its launch weight. Meanwhile, astronaut Daniel C. Burbank and cosmonaut Boris V. Morukov installed one of six batteries on the Russian-built control module Zarya. Burbank and Morukov needed a hammer and chisel to remove four small nut plates, which were obstructing a pair of bolts; the astronauts needed to loosen the bolts so that they could replace a voltage converter.(NASA, “STS-106”; C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Astronauts Installing Fresh Batteries in Space Station,” 13 September 2000.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and H. Fisk Johnson, President of the Wisconsin-based private venture-capital company Fisk Ventures Inc. (FVI), signed an agreement to “explore a new frontier in biotechnology.” Johnson had approached NASA regarding its efforts to commercialize space activities, suggesting a partnership. NASA and FVI agreed to use NASA’s bioreactor to develop commercial medical products. The bioreactor technology creates a near- weightless environment enabling cells to grow three-dimensionally. When raised in a traditional Petri dish, growing cells are flat. FVI had formed a joint venture with In Vitro Technologies Inc., called StelSys LLC, to focus on commercializing microgravity research in areas related to biological systems. StelSys paid NASA a US$100,000 licensing fee and a royalty of 5 percent of the company’s profits, capped at US$2 million, for the rights to 13 patents for the bioreactor technology for five years. NASA planned to use the bioreactor on the ISS, and StelSys intended to use it to research infectious diseases and to develop a liver-assist device for patients in need of transplant surgery. Goldin remarked that the agreement was “a symbol of the success that can be achieved when government, private industry, and academia work together on the exploration of new frontiers for scientific, technological, and economic growth.”(NASA, “Landmark Commercial Agreement Gives Biotechnology Research a New Dimension,” news release 00- 143, 14 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-143.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Laura Heinauer, “NASA Signs First Major Contract for Private Biotech Development,” Wall Street Journal, 14 September 2000.)
 A GE-7 satellite, built by Lockheed Martin Commercial Space Systems for GE American Communications (GE Americom), launched from Korou, French Guiana, aboard an Ariane 5 rocket. The C-band satellite supplemented GE Americom’s fleet of 12 satellites servicing the Americas, replacing the GE SATCOM C1 craft. A member of the A2100 family of satellites, the GE-7 joined four others⎯the GE-1, GE-2, GE-3, and GE-4⎯to provide distribution of cable, broadcast television and radio, business television, and broadband data distribution across the contiguous United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America. The GE-7 would provide “service to regional and national customers, in-orbit protection for many current cable and radio customers, plus critical telecommunications services delivered by AT&T Alascom.”(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin-Built GE-7 Satellite Successfully Launched from Kourou, French Guiana Launch Site,” news release, 14 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/Lock heedMartinBuiltGE7SatelliteSucc.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science Edward J. Weiler appeared before the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics to address the future of NASA’s space science programs. Weiler discussed NASA’s problems in the previous year, such as the loss of Mars Climate Orbiter and Mars Polar Lander, explaining that, although NASA was developing a response to those losses, it would need more funding if it were to prevent similar failures in the future. House Subcommittee Chairperson Dana Rohrabacher (R-CA) indicated that President William J. Clinton had proposed increasing the space science budget by US$200 million over each of the following four years. NASA’s budget reauthorization bill for FY 2001 added an additional US$19 million in funding for space science programs.(Space Business News, “Money, Management Are Key To Avoiding NASA Failures, House Panel Hears,” 27 September 2000.)
 Space Shuttle Atlantis landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida before dawn, the 15th nighttime landing in the Shuttle program’s history. Among the tasks that the crew had completed during the mission were delivering 3 tons (2,700 kilograms or 2.7 tonnes) of supplies for the first permanent crew⎯including toiletries, Russian and American meals, medical kits, and camera equipment⎯and installing the station’s toilet, an oxygen generator, a treadmill, and power and television cables. NASA officials had decided to extend the mission an extra day to allow the crew more time to accomplish its work inside the space station. N. Wayne Hale, STS-106 Flight Director, explained that the mission had begun with 52 items on its list of tasks to accomplish, but the number had increased to 74 different tasks, large and small, on board the ISS. The only malfunction during the mission had been that of a newly installed battery, which Russian Mission Control had ordered disconnected when it failed to charge properly.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Touches Down Successfully,” 20 September 2000.)
 NASA selected 28 of 119 grant proposals, totaling US$10 million over four years, to conduct microgravity combustion research. NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications, which was sponsoring the grants would provide the researchers with access to its microgravity research facilities, including drop tubes, drop towers, aircraft-flying parabolic trajectories, and sounding rockets. Twenty-six of the grants were for ground-based research, and two were for flight-definition efforts; four grants continued NASA-funded work, but the remaining 24 entailed new research efforts.(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Combustion Science,” news release 00-144, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-144.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 Russian police announced that cosmonaut German S. Titov, the Soviet Union’s second man in space and the first person to spend more than one day in orbit, had been found dead at home at the age of 65. Although the police had not reported an official cause of death, the media speculated that the cause was either carbon monoxide poisoning or a heart attack. Titov had spent 25 hours and 18 minutes aboard the tiny Soviet Vostok-2 spacecraft on 6 and 7 August 1961. Fellow Soviet Yuri Gagarin had made the first flight on Vostok-1 on 12 April, flying for less than 2 hours, and U.S. astronaut Alan B. Shepard Jr. had followed Gagarin’s mission with a 15-minute, suborbital flight on 5 May 1961. Titov worked on the Buran program during the 1980s, attempting to create a Russian space shuttle, but the Soviet Union abandoned the project after the Russian shuttle had made one unpiloted flight. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Titov had entered politics, representing the Communist Party on the defense committee of the State Duma lower house.(Reuters, “Russia’s 2nd Cosmonaut, German Titov, Dies in Sauna,” 21 September 2000. 285)
 Following a 24-hour delay caused by a computer anomaly, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) successfully launched the Lockheed Martin–built, NOAAL spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base, aboard a Titan II rocket. Ground controllers confirmed that the craft had deployed its solar array and verified a power-positive condition. NASA and NOAA had designed the satellite, the second in a series of five polar-orbiting spacecraft, to collect meteorological data and to transmit the information to users worldwide. NOAA’s National Weather Service planned to use the craft’s data for long-range weather and climate forecasts. Although NASA had managed the project of building and launching the satellite, it intended to transfer operational control to NOAA 10 days following the launch.(NOAA, “NOAA-L Weather Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release 2000-069, 21 September 2000, http://www.publicaffairs.noaa.gov/releases2000/sep00/noaa00069.html (accessed 29 April 2008); Associated Press, “Weather Satellite Launched After Delay,” 21 September 2000.)
 NASA released time-lapse movies created from images produced by the Hubble Space Telescope, showing “spectacular outbursts from young stars,” changing “dramatically over a period of just weeks or months.” NASA had combined individual images of young star systems XZ Tauri and HH 30 in the Taurus-Auriga molecular cloud, captured over several years, to create the time-lapse movies. Documenting the activity of the early stages of stars’ lives, the movies demonstrated that images “taken of the universe today won’t necessarily look the same as those snapped a few months from now.”(NASA, “Hubble Movies Show the Changing Faces of Young Stars,” news release N00-044, 21 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/note2edt/2000/n00-044.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 Administrator Daniel S. Goldin presented awards to three minority contractors at NASA’s annual Minority Business and Advocates Awards Ceremony. RS Information Services (RSIS), based in McLean, Virginia, won Minority Contractor of the Year; Rigging and Welding Specialists Inc., a Native American–owned business, won Minority Subcontractor of the Year; and Pace and Waite Inc. won Women-Owned Business of the Year. In addition, NASA recognized advocates for innovative approaches to using minority- and women-owned businesses, awarding NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal to Kenneth Martindale and Rodney J. Etchberger of Johnson Space Center and to Shantaram S. Pai of Glenn Research Center. Furthermore, NASA recognized five individuals for outstanding achievements and three NASA field centers for meeting or exceeding all socioeconomic business goals for FY 1999.(NASA, “NASA To Honor Minority Businesses,” news release 00-148, 25 September 2000, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-148.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA named award-winning broadcast journalist Bob Jacobs as Chief of News and Information at NASA Headquarters. Before joining NASA, Jacobs had served for four years as Projects Manager for the Washington-based Broadcast Technology Division of the Associated Press, where he helped to develop and implement newsroom management technology. Clients had included the British Broadcasting Corporation, ESPN, National Public Radio, and CBS News. Jacobs had won an Emmy award and other regional honors for excellence in journalism.(NASA, “News Chief Named at NASA Headquarters,” news release 00-150, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-150.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 Sally K. Ride, the first female astronaut from the United States to travel into space, resigned her position as President of Space.com to concentrate on her education career. She had worked with Space.com founder Lou Dobbs, former host of CNN’s Moneyline, since the company’s start-up in June 1999 and had been the company’s president for the past year. Ride would continue her leave of absence from the University of California at San Diego where she is a physics professor throughout the remainder of the fall academic term.(Bloomberg News, “Ride Leaves Space.com Top Post⎯For 1st U.S. Female Astronaut in Space, It’s Back to Education,” 27 September 2000.)
 NASA announced that a team of Lockheed Martin scientists using NASA’s Transition Region and Coronal Explorer (TRACE) spacecraft to observe coronal loops⎯coils of hot, electrified gas⎯believed they had located the source of the heating mechanism that makes the Sun’s corona 300 times hotter than its visible surface. A thirty-year-old theory had assumed that the coronal loops heated evenly, but the TRACE observations had indicated that most of the heating occurs at the base of the loops, near the point from which they emerge and return to the solar surface. The team had observed 41 loops extending from 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) to more than 180,000 miles (290,000 kilometers) from the solar surface and had found that, although threads within shorter loops heat more evenly, longer threads cool noticeably as they attain height. The team had calculated the loops’ energy levels and estimated that “heating typically occurs in the first 6,000 miles of a loop’s length.” Richard Fisher, head of the Laboratory for Astronomy and Solar Physics at NASA’s GSFC, remarked that understanding how the coronal loops function could shed light on coronal-mass ejections (CMEs). CMEs can disrupt or destroy satellite components orbiting Earth and prompt surges in electrical transmission lines, causing blackouts on Earth.(NASA, “Fountains of Fire Illuminate Solar Mystery,” news release 00-146, 26 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-146.txt (accessed 25 April 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “Scientists Begin To Unravel a Stubborn Solar Mystery,” Christian Science Monitor, 27 September 2000.)
 Arianespace, the France-based European satellite launch company, announced that it had won a contract to launch three more satellites for INTELSAT, the international satellite corporation based in Washington, DC. Arianespace already held a contract to launch three other satellites in the INTELSAT IX series. INTELSAT had scheduled six of the series’ seven spacecraft for launch from mid-2001 through the end of 2002, on Ariane 4 or Ariane 5 launch vehicles, from Europe’s spaceport in French Guiana. California-based Space Systems/Loral was building the 4.7-tonne (4,700-kilogram or 5.2-ton) satellites. In 1965 INTELSAT had launched the world’s first commercial communications satellite, Early Bird.(Reuters, “France: Arianespace in Deal To Launch 3 INTELSAT Satellites,” 27 September 2000.)
 Lockheed Martin announced that for the third time in four years, the Air Traffic Control Association had awarded the company its Industry Award, recognizing Lockheed’s outstanding achievement in and contribution to the science of air traffic control. The award specifically recognized Lockheed Martin Air Traffic Management for its worldwide support of air traffic– control systems. The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the German Civil Aviation Authority, and the United Kingdom’s National Air Traffic Services Ltd. Had all nominated the company for the award.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Receives Prestigious Air Traffic Control Association Award,” news release, 27 September 2000, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2000/LockheedMartinReceivesPrestigious Ai.html (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA’s Langley Research Center awarded contracts valued at US$1.8 million to two companies for operating airport-surface surveillance systems intended to prevent runway accidents, a top safety priority of the FAA and the National Transportation Safety Board. The contracts required Sensis Corporation of Dewitt, New York, and Rannoch Corporation of Alexandria, Virginia, to operate the Airport Traffic Identification System (ATIDS) and the Dynamic Runway Occupancy Measurement Systems (DROMS) at Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne International Airport, for six months, establishing and validating the systems in a “live” environment. The contracts also required Sensis to deploy and evaluate DROMS at Memphis International Airport and to interface the system with the existing Sensis-operated ATIDS at that airport.(NASA, “Contracts Awarded for Airport Surface Surveillance Systems,” news release C00-m, 28 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-m.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA announced its agreement with Lockheed Martin on a plan for the X-33 space plane program. The agreed plan included aluminum fuel tanks for hydrogen fuel, a revised payment schedule, and a target launch date in 2003, contingent on Lockheed Martin’s winning additional funding under the Space Launch Initiative for completing the project. NASA had funded the project through March 2001. The restructured plan focused on “providing milestone payments” to Lockheed Martin’s team, following the completion of tests and the delivery of hardware and software systems this year. The plan also gave greater emphasis to mission safety, quality, and mission success. Arthur G. Stephenson, Director of NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center, pointed out that, despite setbacks, the program’s successes had included the creation of technology applicable to the space program and to the commercial aircraft industry, such as a revolutionary new rocket engine; a robust, reusable, metallic thermal-protection system; and software and sensors that automatically determine and predict failures and errors before they affect the flight.(NASA, “NASA, Lockheed Martin Agree on X-33 Plan,” news release 00-157, 29 September 2000, http://www. nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-157.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 NASA announced the restructuring of the Office of Life and Microgravity Sciences and Applications (OLSMA), part of the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise (HEDS). OLSMA, renamed the Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), would become a separate enterprise focusing on scientific research, working closely with HEDS to facilitate long-term exploration of space. The OBPR would comprise five divisions: the Physical Sciences Division, the Fundamental Space Biology Division, the Biomedical and Human Support Research Division, the Division of Research Integration, and the Division of Policy and Program Integration. NASA named Kathie L. Olsen as Acting Associate Administrator, to return to her position as Chief Scientist after NASA had filled the position permanently.(NASA, “NASA Creates New Enterprise Focusing on Biology,” news release 00-158, 29 September 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-158.txt (accessed 25 April 2008).)
 New NASA research published in the 1 October issue of the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Climate warned that clouds might not help counteract climate-warming trends. Anthony D. Del Genio, of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies in New York City, had analyzed observations of low clouds over land, collected between 1994 and 1997 as part of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Atmospheric Radiation Measurement program. Del Genio had found that clouds are thinner when temperatures were higher, a phenomenon occurring in any weather condition or season and at any time of day. Some climate theories had predicted that high temperatures would cause thicker clouds because of an increase in water vapor, but Del Genio explained that during warmer temperatures, the bottoms of clouds rise and become thinner. This occurs because clouds that form over a warm, dry air mass must rise higher before becoming sufficiently saturated with water to form a cloud base. Thinner clouds are less capable of reflecting sunlight back into space and are, therefore, unable to act as a “natural sun shield.” Del Genio’s findings corroborated long-term, worldwide satellite observations, published using the NASA-funded International Satellite Cloud Climatology Project (ISCCP) database. The ISCCP, a global composite of cloud observations from international weather satellites, began showing a link between cloud thinning and temperature in 1992.(NASA, “Revised⎯NASA Scientist Predicts Less Climate Cooling from Clouds,” news release 00-151, 3 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-151.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 International Launch Services (ILS), a joint venture of Lockheed Martin, Khrunichev State Research, and S. P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation Energia, launched a Russian Proton rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Proton launch, the fourth in the year for ILS, successfully placed into orbit a United States–built GE-1A communications satellite serving customers in parts of Asia, including China, the Philippines, and India.(Jim Banke, “Proton Rocket Lifts American Satellite into Earth Orbit,” Space.com, 2 October 2000, http://www. space.com/missionlaunches/launches/proton_launch_001001.html (accessed 14 April 2008).)
 Russian space experts agreed that the Mir space station was in fine condition to continue orbiting Earth, and the Russian government extended the station’s time in space indefinitely, after the Netherlands-based MirCorp agreed to fund a new mission. Russia’s council of space engineers, known as the Council of Chief Designers, authorized plans to launch a Progress cargo spacecraft, in the middle of October, to deliver fuel and equipment to Mir.(MirCorp, “MirCorp Statement on the Mir Space Station’s Future,” news release, 3 October 2000; Associated Press, “Russian Space Experts Determine Mir Fit To Continue Orbital Flight,” 3 October 2000.)
 European Space Agency (ESA) engineers announced the discovery of a flaw in the European receiver on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, prompting an inquiry into why engineers had not identified the problem before NASA had launched the craft, and how the issue could be resolved before the craft reached its destination. Cassini’s probe data relay subsystem (PDRS) lacked sufficient bandwidth to navigate the Doppler shift with the Huygens probe as the probe parachuted toward the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. Therefore, the system would be unable to recover all of the data that Huygens’s six instruments would generate. Cassini and Huygens launched on 15 October 1997, with Huygens scheduled to separate from Cassini on 6 November 2004, break through Titan’s atmosphere on 27 November 2004, and descend to the moon’s surface using a parachute system. The mission plan called for Huygens to measure the composition and winds of Titan’s atmosphere and to collect images. The probe would send the data via the S-band PDRS to Cassini, which would then transmit the data to Earth. However, the ESA stated that the inadequate bandwidth of the PDRS meant that link margins would degrade, because the Doppler shift on the data subcarrier would be outside the bandwidth of the receiver- phase lock loop, leading to a potential loss in the link of 10dB over what engineers had assumed for the mission.(Frank Morring Jr., “ESA Sets Inquiry After Tests Reveal Flaw in Titan Probe Link,” Aerospace Daily, 6 October 2000.)
 NASA announced the selection of Sverdrup Technology Inc. to fulfill a contract providing engineering, science, and technical services at Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC). The two- year contract, with three one-year priced options valued at US$300 million over five years, would go into effect on 15 October.(NASA, “Tennessee Technology Firm Selected for $300 Million Contract,” news release c00-n, 6 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-n.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 The High Energy Transient Explorer Mission (HETE-2) launched aboard a Hybrid Pegasus expendable launch vehicle, from Kwajalein missile-range facility on the Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific Ocean. The Center for Space Research at Massachusetts Institute of Technology headed the HETE-2 mission, designed to detect and localize gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) using a set of instruments that would allow simultaneous observations of the GRBs. The craft would compute locations of GRBs and immediately transmit the coordinates to ground-based observers. HETE- 2, an international collaboration among the United States, Japan, France, and Italy, replaced the original HETE spacecraft, which was lost following a rocket malfunction in November 1996.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “The High Energy Transient Explorer Mission (HETE-2),” http://imagine. gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/sats_n_data/missions/hete2.html (accessed 14 April 2008); NASA, “HETE-2 Flies in Search of Gamma-Ray Bursts,” news release 00-160, 2 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-160.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 Space Shuttle Discovery launched from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-92, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 3.3A, to carry out an 11-day construction mission requiring four scheduled spacewalks at the International Space Station (ISS). Discovery’s crew⎯Commander Brian Duffy, Pilot Pamela A. Melroy, and Mission Specialists Koichi Wakata, Leroy Chiao, Peter J. K. Wisoff, Michael Lopez-Alegria, and William S. McArthur⎯was transporting a truss and a docking port to the station, planning to install them before the arrival of the first scheduled ISS crew at the end of October.
 Responding to a 25 January 2000 article in the New York Times, alleging that grants in the mid- 1990s had benefited the Russian civilian agency Biopreparat, NASA’s Office of Inspector General published a report stating that NASA had not followed the U.S. Department of State’s guidelines for administering biotechnology grants to Russia, thereby inadvertently funding germ- warfare laboratories. The Russian government owned 51 percent of Biopreparat, the organization that had conducted most of the Soviet Union’s biological warfare research since the 1970s. At the time of the article’s publication, Biopreparat was continuing to research pathogens that had been included in the Soviet biological warfare program. The Inspector General found that “almost three-fourths of US$1.68 million in NASA grants intended for space biotechnology work found its way to ‘institutions that had been affiliated with Russia’s biological warfare program’.” Therefore, the Inspector General asserted that NASA had not followed the Department of State’s guidelines requiring NASA to “regularly visit and participate in the research it was funding at Russian institutes that had been part of the Soviet biological warfare program.” NASA agreed with the Inspector General’s sole recommendation: to practice “invasive collaboration” in the future, when funding biotechnology research in countries with known or suspected biological weapons programs.(NASA Office of Inspector General, “NASA Oversight of Russian Biotechnology Research 1994–1997” (NASA report no. G-00-07, Washington, DC, 13 October 2000), http://oig.nasa.gov/old/inspections_assessments/g-00- 007.pdf (accessed 8 April 2008); Frank Morring Jr., “NASA Seen Funding Russian Germ-Warfare Labs Through Lax Oversight,” Aerospace Daily, 18 October 2000.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery arrived at the ISS. Shuttle Commander Brian Duffy successfully executed the rendezvous without the Shuttle’s radar, relying on a star-tracking system and on handheld lasers operated by his crew. The Ku-band antenna had failed after launch, disrupting the radar and television link. The Shuttle docking was NASA’s first conducted without radar.(Associated Press, “Bad Antenna Blacks Out Shuttle’s Television,” Charleston Gazette (SC), 13 October 2000; New York Times, “Astronauts Rendezvous with Space Station,” 14 October 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Shuttle Discovery Docks Safely with Space Station,” 14 October 2000.)
 The ESA signed a four-year contract with two industry groups⎯Sarcom, led by Spot Image of Toulouse, France, and the Emma consortium, led by Eurimage of Rome⎯granting the two groups “priority access to the Envisat radar remote-sensing satellite” scheduled for launch in 2001, as well as imagery from the ERS-2 spacecraft, already in orbit. About the new business relationship, a major policy shift for the ESA, Acting Envisat Mission Manager Günther Kohlhammer remarked that the ESA had realized that it needed to change so that it could develop new markets. The contract gave commercial orders for the satellite images priority over scientific requests, setting new limits on the type and number of users ESA would grant access to data without paying commercial prices.(Peter B. de Selding, “ESA Hands Radar Satellite Responsibility to Industry,” Space News, 30 October 2000.)
 Despite unexpected problems, astronauts aboard Space Shuttle Discovery installed a 9-ton (8,200-kilogram or 8.2-tonne) structural truss on the Unity module of the ISS, completing one of the major objectives of the mission. The Z1 truss held four mass gyroscopes and the station’s main Ku-band and S-band communications antennas. In addition, the truss provided a temporary attachment point for a set of solar arrays scheduled to arrive during a December Shuttle mission. The astronauts faced several obstacles during the installation process. A short in the Shuttle’s payload circuitry disabled the computerized camera system needed to orient the truss for attachment, causing a 21⁄2-hour delay. However, the astronauts were able to wire a backup computer into an alternate power source, restoring power to the Space Vision System, which NASA had programmed to “determine the truss’s precise location and orientation with respect to the station by measuring the locations of the targets on its surface as viewed from different payload bay cameras.” The astronauts had to delay their work again when the Space Vision System failed to generate reliable data during certain orbital lighting conditions, requiring astronaut William S. McArthur to recalibrate the system.(William Harwood, “Structural Truss Added to Spine of Space Station: Shuttle Astronauts Overcome Camera System’s Short Circuit,” Washington Post, 16 October 2000.)
 Astronauts Leroy Chiao and William S. McArthur made a spacewalk outside the ISS to link electrical cables to the station’s new truss and to deploy the main antenna. The pair routed six power- and data-cables between the truss and the station, as well as four backup cables. Tests indicated that all connections worked. The astronauts moved one of the truss’s two antennas to a temporary location out of the way of future construction work; mounted the main antenna, a 78- inch-wide (2-meter-wide) dish, to a 12-foot (3.7-meter) boom; and extended the main antenna. According to NASA’s schedule, the ISS crew would turn on the antenna during an April 2001 Shuttle mission.(Michael Cabbage, “Discovery Spacewalk Goes Off Without a Hitch: Crew Members Finished a Six-Hour Task that Included Hooking Up a Truss and an Antenna,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 October 2000.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced the appointment of Baruch S. Blumberg, 1976 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physiology and Medicine, as Senior Advisor to the Administrator, effective immediately. While continuing in his position as Director of NASA’s Astrobiology Institute, Blumberg would also provide guidance to NASA’s newly created Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR), an interdisciplinary effort combining research in biology, physics, chemistry, and engineering. Goldin also announced that NASA would begin a search, headed by Blumberg and NASA Chief Scientist Kathie L. Olsen, to fill the position of Associate Administrator for the new OBPR and other key positions. Olsen would serve as Acting Associate Administrator until NASA had filled the position.(NASA, “Nobel Prize Laureate Appointed as Senior NASA Advisor,” news release 00-164, 16 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-164.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 Three astronauts attached a new docking port to the ISS, with two of the crew spacewalking and one operating Discovery’s robotic arm from inside the Shuttle. Astronauts Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff and Michael Lopez-Alegria, assigned to work outside the ISS, had difficulty loosening the latches securing the docking port inside Discovery’s cargo bay. However, once they had freed it, Japanese astronaut Koichi Wakata lifted the 2,700-pound (1,200-kilogram) port using the Shuttle’s robotic arm and positioned it on the space station. When the port was within 1 foot (0.3 meters) of its position, the astronauts outside gave Wakata “invaluable” instructions, necessary because the crew was working without the assistance of the camera at the end of the robotic arm. The camera had been out of commission since the short circuit on 14 October.(Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Docking Port Nudged Carefully into Place,” Sun-Sentinel (Ft. Lauderdale, FL), 17 October 2000.)
 Russia launched a Progress supply spacecraft to deliver fuel to the uninhabited Mir space station, which was slipping from orbit. Increased solar flare activity had expanded the atmosphere, creating friction between Mir and the thin gases above Earth and causing the station to descend steadily, ever since its last crew had returned to Earth in June after a 73-day mission. The fuel would enable the station to achieve a higher orbit, preventing it from falling into thicker layers of the atmosphere and burning up. Some Russian politicians had called for disposal of the station, and U.S. space officials had urged the Russian government to dedicate its “scarce space funds” to the ISS. However, MirCorp, a private company based in the Netherlands, had leased time on Mir and agreed to fund the Progress launch, thereby saving the station.(Associated Press, “Russia Launches Progress Cargo Space Ship,” 17 October 2000.)
 NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin recognized members of the Space Shuttle’s ice and debris inspection team for their work on 10 October, leading to the discovery of a stray 4-inch (10- centimeter) pin near the Shuttle’s external fuel tank, hours before the scheduled launch of STS- 92. In response to the find, NASA had delayed the launch for 24 hours to allow the team to retrieve the pin, thereby preventing the damage that would have ensued if the pin had been sucked into the Shuttle’s thermal protection system or into a main engine. Goldin awarded employees Gregory N. Katnik and Jorge E. Rivera NASA’s Exceptional Achievement Medal, an honor recognizing significant contributions to the mission of NASA through substantial and significant improvements in operations, efficiency, service, financial savings, science, or technology. United Space Alliance employees Michael Barber, John B. Blue, and Thomas F. Ford received NASA’s Public Service Medal, an award given to individuals who are not government employees but make exceptional contributions to NASA’s mission.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Inspection Team Rewarded for Its ‘Eagle Eyes’,” news release 00-165, 18 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-165.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 In preparation for the December arrival of a pair of solar panels, astronauts Michael Lopez- Alegria and Peter J. K. “Jeff” Wisoff cleaned up the top of the newly installed truss on the ISS. The two men also deployed a tray on the truss, which would hold the connections between the station’s central structure and the Destiny laboratory module built by the United States and scheduled for installation in January. Next, the spacewalkers tested “mini-jetpacks,” known as Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue or SAFER. NASA intended the nitrogen-powered jetpacks for use only in emergencies, such as rescuing an injured or incapacitated spacewalker. With only limited fuel supplies in the jetpacks, each of the astronauts’ moves had to be deliberate; each test maneuver lasted approximately 3 minutes, while the astronaut traveled a distance of about 50 feet (15 meters). The astronauts remained tethered to the Shuttle’s robotic arm throughout the tests.(C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Discovery Astronauts Head Out for Final Day of Spacewalks,” 18 October 2000; Associated Press, “Discovery’s Crew Zips Around Bay on New Jetpacks,” USA Today, 19 October 2000.)
 During their only full day inside the ISS, Shuttle crew members spent their last day before heading back to Earth transferring supplies, wiping down the station’s walls with fungicide to prevent mold and mildew, and testing four gyroscopes installed earlier in the mission. The crew spun the gyroscopes briefly at 100 revolutions per minute, and the gyroscopes functioned as expected.(C. Bryson Hull for Associated Press, “Shuttle, Station To Part Ways After Weeklong Construction Mission,” 20 October 2000.)
 SkyCorp signed a commercial Space Act agreement with NASA providing that SkyCorp deploy into orbit, either from the Space Shuttle or from the ISS, a satellite containing an Internet server. NASA and SkyCorp planned to test the idea as a “proof of concept” for a Low Earth Orbit 544 satellite constellation, offering Internet access on a global scale. SkyCorp chose to launch an Apache server on a small satellite containing an Apple 500 MHz Power Mac G4. The agreement with NASA outlined SkyCorp’s novel idea of launching a partially assembled satellite aboard a Space Shuttle. Astronauts would assemble the craft in space before tossing it from a Shuttle or ISS airlock into an independent orbit. SkyCorp named its concept Gossamer. Typically, engineers assemble a satellite fully on Earth, and it must withstand the stress of launch. A satellite built according to the Gossamer concept would only need to retain structural integrity in microgravity, greatly simplifying guidance, navigation, and control requirements.(SkyCorp, “SkyCorp Announces Space Act Agreement with NASA To Fly First Internet Webserver in Space,” news release, 20 October 2000; Keith Cowing, “SkyCorp Signs Agreement with NASA To Fly the First Webserver in Space⎯and It Will Be a Mac G4,” SpaceRef.com, 23 October 2000.)
 Chairman and founder of Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc. Andrew Beal announced his decision to cease all business operations effective immediately. The company had sought to develop low-cost, reliable, commercial space launch systems and had “made significant advances in low cost hydrogen peroxide propulsion systems.” Beal expressed confidence that, despite the company’s cost overruns and schedule delays, Beal Aerospace Technologies could have successfully developed its BA-2C rocket-launch system if it had remained in operation. Beal outlined the risk factors that had been beyond the company’s control and had led to the decision to cease operations: 1) NASA’s and the U.S. government’s commitment to the subsidization of competing launch systems; 2) federal laws mandating the company’s “potential liability for pre-existing environmental contamination at the only available Cape Canaveral launchpads”; and 3) uncertainty about receiving approval from the U.S. Department of State to launch from the company’s launch facilities in Guyana. Beal remarked that government subsidization of launch systems was the primary reason that the company had to choose, either to become a government contractor, like the Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin, or to cease operations.(Beal Aerospace Technologies Inc., “Statement from Andrew Beal Regarding Cease of Operations by Beal Aerospace,” news release, 23 October 2000.)
 NASA’s Langley Research Center selected Swales and Associates Inc. to provide research and development, engineering, and support services, under a contract valued at up to US$240 million over five years. Specific work areas covered under the contract included full-spectrum aerodynamics, gas dynamics, fluid dynamics, aerothermodynamics, acoustics and aeroacoustics, metallic and nonmetallic structures and materials, and spaceborne and airborne systems.(NASA, “NASA Awards Support Services Contract to Maryland Firm,” news release C00-o, 24 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-o.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, ending the 100th mission of the Shuttle program. Poor weather conditions had prevented the Shuttle’s scheduled landing in Florida on 22 October. Edwards had opened as a backup site on 23 October, but wind and rainy weather had prevented a landing at either site until 24 October. The landing was the first Shuttle landing at Edwards since poor weather had prevented a Shuttle landing in Florida in March 1996. In the early years of the program, Shuttles had typically landed at Edwards Air Force Base, but later, both launches and landings became the functions of KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida.(Washington Times, “Shuttle Lands at Edwards for First Time since 1996: Marks 100th Mission of U.S. Program,” 25 October 2000; Matthew Fordahl for Associated Press, “Discovery Lands in California,” 25 October 2000.)
 NASA announced the findings of an investigation into the 16 June incident involving the Space Shuttle’s main engine. The team, headed by Robert L. Sackheim, Assistant Director for Space Propulsion at NASA’s MSFC, had determined that 24 square inches (155 square centimeters) of tape had fallen into the Shuttle engine’s fuel system and that nobody had noticed the tape before the engine’s test firing. The tape’s location had caused the engine’s temperature to increase rapidly, beyond normal operating limits, damaging some components of the engine’s fuel pump. According to Sackheim, the engine controller had performed according to its design, shutting down the engine 5 seconds into the planned 200-second test when it sensed a temperature exceeding safe limits. Sackheim’s team had concluded, “the handling of, accounting for, and inspecting for loose materials, used to process and rebuild engines during normal operations, were inadequate.” The test had been a “temperature margin” demonstration, undertaken as part of the developmental phase of a more robust Pratt & Whitney Advanced Technology High Pressure Fuel Turbopump. The engine had not been in flight configuration but had been a unit in a testing process aimed at validating the prototype engine’s ability to operate at higher-than- normal temperatures.(NASA, “Shuttle Main Engine Test Investigation Points to Fuel System Contamination,” news release 00-170, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-170.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 The Russian government earmarked funds to send two Progress cargo spacecraft to the Mir space station, announcing that it would wait until February 2001 to make a final decision about the station’s fate. Earlier, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya I. Klebanov had explained that the decision the Russian government had been wavering about for more than a year rested on the availability of private funds to keep the station in orbit. Executives from MirCorp had promised the Russian government that the company would raise between US$100 million and US$170 million by next year, but Russian space officials were skeptical of MirCorp’s ability to meet this commitment. MirCorp had yet to pay the US$10 million it owed Russia for the 17 October launch of a Progress cargo spacecraft delivering fuel to Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Earmarks Funds for Mir,” 26 October 2000.)
 NASA announced that it planned to implement a new Mars Exploration Program over the following two decades. NASA planned six major missions during the next 10 years, launching the Mars Odyssey orbiter mission in 2001, twin Mars Exploration Rovers in 2003, and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter⎯a powerful scientific orbiter⎯in 2005. Additional plans included the development and launch, possibly as early as 2007, of a “long-range, long-duration mobile science laboratory,” which would “pave the way for a future sample return mission.” NASA also proposed to create a new line of small missions called Scout missions, involving airborne vehicles or small landers. NASA would select designs for the Scout spacecraft from proposals submitted by the scientific community. Besides sending additional scientific orbiters, rovers, and landers to Mars during the second decade of the program, NASA announced its plans to launch its first sample-return mission in 2014, with a second mission in 2016. The new program incorporated “lessons learned from previous mission successes and failures” and built on recent scientific discoveries. Although NASA led the revamped program, the Mars missions also included international participants, particularly France and Italy, whose space agencies had agreed to conduct collaborative scientific orbital and surface investigations, as well as to contribute sample collection-and-return systems, telecommunications assets, and launch services.(NASA, “NASA Outlines Mars Exploration Program for Next Two Decades,” news release 00-171, 26 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-171.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 NASA awarded Lockheed Martin Space Systems a US$1.15 billion six-year contract to produce 35 additional super-lightweight external tanks for the Space Shuttle Program, the sixth production of tanks and the first composed entirely of super-lightweight tanks. The contract covered the manufacture, assembly, test, and delivery of the tanks, as well as the operations and maintenance of NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans and activities at MSFC and KSC. Jerry W. Smelser, Manager of MSFC’s External Tank Project Office, described the contract as designed to “assure the delivery of a quality product and to reward the contractor and employees on the basis of performance.”(NASA, “NASA Awards $1.15 Billion Contract for Shuttle External Tanks,” news release C00-p, 30 October 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-p.txt (accessed 1 April 2008).)
 President William J. Clinton signed into law H. R. 1654, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000, authorizing funding for “a robust space and aeronautics program for the Nation.” Clinton commended bipartisan efforts to pass an authorization bill funding NASA’s priorities, such as building the ISS, improving Space Shuttle safety, and using the Space Launch Initiative to reduce the cost of access to space. However, Clinton criticized the bill for limiting “NASA’s flexibility to pursue a promising commercial habitation module” for the ISS, saying that the bill included several “objectionable provisions” and only one of the 14 legislative provisions that his administration had proposed.(U.S. Newswire, “Clinton Statement on Signing of the ‘National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2000’,” 30 October 2000.)
 The first crew to inhabit the ISS launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on its four-month mission. A veteran of three U.S. Space Shuttle missions, William M. Shepherd commanded Expedition I. Crew members, with whom Shepherd had trained since 1996, were two cosmonauts, Pilot Yuri P. Gidzenko of the Russian air force and Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, a veteran of four Russian and U.S. space missions. With 484 days logged in orbit, Krikalev was one of the world’s most experienced space travelers.(John Daniszewski, “Crew of 3 Blasts Off To Make a Home of Space Station,” Los Angeles Times, 31 October 2000.)
 The first International Space Station (ISS) crew, Expedition I, arrived at the new station where they planned to live for the next four and one-half months. The crew’s Soyuz craft automatically docked at a port on the Zvezda habitation module. The Russian-built, NASA-financed Zarya propulsion-and-storage module, attached to the other end of Zvezda, was loaded with supplies and equipment delivered by recent Shuttle missions. Unless an emergency or breakdown occurred, the multi-hatch Unity module would remain off limits. A Shuttle crew had installed a structural truss on the Unity module in October, and during a mission scheduled for early December, another crew would attach a set of solar arrays to the truss. Without the solar arrays, the station did not have enough power to heat the module properly or to control the dew point, to prevent dangerous condensation. The ISS crew and their U.S. and Russian managers temporarily named the station Alpha, at least for the duration of the Expedition I mission.(William Harwood, “Crew of ‘Alpha’ Males Moves into Space Station: Docking Complete, NASA Chief Allows Name’s Use for Now,” Washington Post, 3 November 2000.)
 NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected iron-emission lines in the afterglow of a gamma-ray burst (GRB), marking the first time such lines had been “unambiguously detected” in association with GRBs, and the first time scientists had been able to measure their properties precisely in x-ray wavelengths. Luigi Piro, lead author of a paper published in the 3 November issue of the journal Science, explained that the discovery provided an important clue to understanding the origins of the bursts. The new data enabled scientists to rule out the theory that two neutron stars or black holes collide to cause a GRB, one of various theories about how the bursts originate. Instead, Piro suggested that the bursts were more likely the result of “something similar to a supernova explosion, but much more powerful.”(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Captures Telling Gamma-Ray Afterglow,” news release 00-173, 3 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-173.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); L. Piro et al., “Observation of X-ray Lines from a Gamma-Ray Burst (GRB991216): Evidence of Moving Ejecta from the Progenitor,” Science 290, no. 5493 (3 November 2000): 955–958.)
 Jason Allen Diekman of Mission Viejo, California, pled guilty to federal charges of computer crimes after negotiating a deal with prosecutors. Prosecutors had charged Diekman in September with illegal hacking and with using stolen credit card numbers to purchase US$6,000 worth of computer equipment and other items. He had confessed to investigators that he had hacked into “hundreds, maybe thousands” of computers over two years, including systems at the University of California at Los Angeles, Harvard University, Cornell University, the University of California at San Diego, and California State University at Fullerton. Diekman’s most serious confessed invasions had occurred at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where he had gained root-level access to two computer systems, and at Stanford University, where he had gained control over 24 systems, two of them owned by NASA and containing flight-control software for NASA’s satellites. The U.S. District Judge set sentencing for 5 February 2001.(David Rosenzweig, “Hacker Pleads Guilty to Invading JPL, Stanford Computers Crime: Mission Viego Man, 20, Accepts Federal Plea Bargain. He Had Gained Control of NASA Computers at Both Sites,” Los Angeles Times, 7 November 2000.)
 An eruption of solar-flare activity prompted NASA to order the ISS crew to take shelter in the Russian-built Zvezda module for 12 hours. The federal Space Environment Center in Boulder, Colorado, rated the solar-flare event an S-4, making it the fourth-largest solar-radiation storm since 1976. NASA calculated that the ISS would travel through danger zones during the seven or eight orbits of a 12-hour period on 9 November. Officials advised the crew to activate radiation- detection monitors in Zvezda’s living quarters and to remain in the aft section of the module during working hours, except for two periods of 15 to 20 minutes during each 90-minute orbit, when they could safely move around the cabin. Michael J. Golightly, Chief of Space Science at Johnson Space Center (JSC), explained that the Zvezda module had a shield heavy enough to reduce the crew’s radiation exposure by 60 percent.(Frank D. Roylance, “Space Station Astronauts Take Shelter from Solar Radiation: Crew Retreats to Module with more Shields During Unusually Severe Flares,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 11 November 2000.)
 The Chandra X-ray Observatory team won a Current Achievement award from the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum for “its efforts in building, placing in orbit, and operating the most sophisticated astronomical observatory ever built.” NASA had first proposed the Chandra in 1976 and had placed the telescope in orbit during a Space Shuttle mission in July 1999. Since its deployment, Chandra had refined scientists’ knowledge of the nature of galactic nuclei, confirmed the existence of supermassive black holes at the centers of galaxies like Andromeda and the Milky Way, captured images of an active starburst galaxy, analyzed the compositions of supernovas, and examined x-ray stars in the Orion Nebula. The museum also honored engineer and aviator A. Scott Crossfield with a Lifetime Achievement award. Crossfield had begun his career in the 1950s as a research pilot for NASA’s predecessor agency, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, and had become the first pilot to exceed Mach 2, accomplishing this feat while flying the rocket-powered Douglas D-558-2. Crossfield had joined North American Aviation in 1955 and had worked on all aspects of the X-15 program. In addition to his work on the X-15, Crossfield had developed the ground-control test methodology that became standard in the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs. He had served as a division vice president at Eastern Airlines between 1967 and 1975 and, after that, as a technical advisor to the U.S. House Science Subcommittee for Transportation, Aviation, and Weather until his retirement in 1993.(Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum, “Chandra X-ray Observatory Team and Scott Crossfield Are Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum Trophy 2000 Winners,” news release, 13 November 2000, http://www.nasm.si.edu/events/pressroom/releaseDetail.cfm?releaseID=88 (accessed 15 April 2008).)
 NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had captured an image of a lone neutron star traveling close to Earth, one of several hundred million neutron stars that scientists believed to exist in the Milky Way. Hubble scientists believed that, at 200 light-years away, this neutron star was the nearest to Earth. No companion star affected its appearance, allowing astronomers to more easily test and confirm stellar theories against its physical properties, such as size, brightness, and true age. Frederick M. Walter of State University of New York at Stony Brook remarked that, as the closest and brightest of the few known isolated neutron stars, this star would be “the easiest to study and is an excellent test bed for nuclear astrophysical theories.”(NASA, “Hubble Sees Lone Neutron Star Streaking Across Galaxy,” news release 00-176, 9 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-176.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 United Space Alliance finalized its investigation into the loose pin that had delayed the October launch of Space Shuttle Discovery, reporting that the pin had come from the Vehicle Assembly Building. Technicians had incorrectly installed the pin, intended to secure a platform above part of the Shuttle’s fuel tank. During the Shuttle’s transport to the launchpad on 8 September, the 4- inch (10-centimeter) metal pin had fallen 73 feet (22 meters), landing on a fuel line near one of the tank’s connections to the Shuttle. After inspectors had found the pin on 10 October, NASA officials had delayed Discovery’s launch 24 hours, so that technicians could remove the pin, preventing damage during liftoff.(Kelly Young, “Pin Found on Shuttle from VAB,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 November 2000.)
 NASA’s Stardust spacecraft entered safe mode after a stream of high-energy protons emanating from a solar flare hit the craft. Stardust, on a mission to return samples of a comet, had been 130 million miles (210 million kilometers) from the Sun, traveling at about 12,000 miles (19,000 kilometers) per hour, when the solar flare erupted on 9 November. The solar wind had brought the stream of protons into contact with the craft hours later, in the middle of the night, confirming that NASA engineers and scientists monitoring the situation had reason to feel concerned.(Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft Survives Encounter with Solar Flare,” 21 November 2000. 1036 Associated Press, “NASA’s Stardust Spacecraft.”)
 The NASA flight team for the Stardust spacecraft commanded it to leave safe mode after having successfully inspected the craft’s cameras. Once back in normal operating mode, the craft controlled its orientation in space perfectly.
 Iridium Satellite LLC announced that the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York had approved its bid to purchase the operating assets, property, and intellectual property of Iridium LLC. Iridium Satellite LLC would continue providing commercial satellite communication services to the U.S. government.(Iridium LLC, “Statement for Iridium Satellite LLC,” news release, 15 November 2000. 299)
 The Russian government decided that it could no longer afford to maintain the Mir space station and would destroy it in February 2001 during a controlled descent. The Russian government had previously decided to abandon Mir, but had extended the space station’s time in orbit after the private MirCorp, based in the Netherlands, had leased time on the station, financing its operation. According to the Russian government, a primary factor in its decision to end Mir’s orbit had been increasing skepticism over MirCorp’s continued ability to finance Mir.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia To Dump Mir Space Station,” 16 November 2000.)
 When the automatic docking system failed, cosmonaut Yuri P. Gidzenko used remote control to dock the first Progress cargo spacecraft arriving at the ISS. The craft, loaded with food, boots, and supplies, had traveled smoothly to the ISS until within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the station. When the spacecraft’s automatic docking system failed to lock onto the space station, Gidzenko took control, guiding the craft to within 15 feet (4.6 meters) of the station. Glaring sunlight and a fogged camera lens forced him to wait 40 minutes, before he was able to complete the maneuver safely.(Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonaut Forced To Dock Cargo Ship by Remote Control,” 19 November 2000.)
 EarthWatch Inc., a Colorado-based company developing a network of satellites to capture images of various regions of the Earth for commercial applications, launched its QuickBird 1 craft from Plesetsk Cosmodrome, aboard a Russian Cosmos-3M rocket. However, ground stations did not pick up its signals as planned. U.S. tracking data listed the craft’s orbit as “decayed,” and a Russian Aerospace Agency spokesperson described the craft as “effectively lost.” EarthWatch had lost its first satellite, Early Bird 1, four days after its 24 December 1997 launch because of a power-system problem.(Stephen Clark, “Commercial Eye-in-the-Sky Appears Lost in Launch Failure,” Spaceflight Now, 21 November 2000.)
 Arizona State University and JPL, a division of California Institute of Technology, announced the creation of the Arizona State University Planetary Imaging Facility and Advanced Training Institute (PIF-ATI) for the study of Mars. Arizona State University and JPL would jointly fund the new facility, which the two institutions intended for scientists and students to use. PIF-ATI expanded on a facility originally planned in support of the Thermal Emission Imaging System (THEMIS), scheduled to fly on the 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft. PIF-ATI would offer scientists and students outside the project greater access to instruments and data, providing access for university students, for students of the fifth through twelfth grades, and for their teachers.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “New Mars Research Facility To Involve Scientists, Kids,” news release 2000-115, 20 November 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marsasu.html (accessed 17 April 2008).)
 Two Earth-monitoring satellites launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base aboard a Boeing Delta II rocket, successfully reaching orbit. NASA launched its Earth Observing I (EO-I) satellite, part of its New Millenium Program, to test several advanced technologies for possible use in future missions. NASA planned to fly the US$193 million craft within 2 miles (3 kilometers) of the Landsat 7 satellite to collect the same images, with the Landsat 7 images serving as the benchmark for the new imager aboard the EO-I. The second satellite⎯the multinational SAC-C satellite, a joint venture of NASA, Argentina, Brazil, Denmark, France, and Italy⎯carried 11 instruments for studying the Earth’s surface, atmosphere, and magnetic field, including an instrument to observe the migration of the Franca whale.(Associated Press, “Two Earth-Monitoring Satellites,” 21 November 2000.)
 NASA selected six teams of scientists to participate in the first new mission of its Origins Program. The teams would use the new Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF), scheduled for launch in July 2002, to study the formation of galaxies, stars, and dust discs, under the following projects: “Galaxy Birth and Evolution,” “Black Holes and Galaxies,” “Unveiling Hidden Stars,” “Inside the Milky Way,” “From Gas to Stars,” and “Planet Formation: When the Dust Settles.” The teams, selected from 28 proposals submitted by astronomers located around the world, comprised the SIRTF Legacy Science Program.(NASA, “The Sky’s the Limit: Science Teams Chose for Space Observatory,” news release 00-184, 21 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-184.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 NASA selected 41 proposals of the 109 scientists had submitted, to conduct research on Earth and in space using NASA’s microgravity research facilities. NASA intended the researchers to use the facilities to “enhance understanding of physical, biological, and chemical processes associated with fundamental physics.” NASA was funding the research with more than US$15 million in grants over a four-year period, under the sponsorship of its Office of Biological and Physical Research. Sixteen of the grants continued work already funded by NASA, and twenty- four were for new research efforts. Thirty-six grants funded ground-based research, and the remaining five funded flight-definition projects.(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Fundamental Physics,” news release 00-183, 21 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-183.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 The U.S. Department of Energy announced its selection of the Idaho Engineering and Environmental Laboratory to produce plutonium-238, the most radioactive form of plutonium. NASA planned to use the isotope, which generates electricity to “keep things from freezing up,” to fuel a spacecraft on a mission to Pluto planned for after 2020.(Associated Press, “A Type of Plutonium,” 22 November 2000.)
 Gerald A. Soffen, Director of University Programs at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), died of a heart ailment. Soffen had begun his career at NASA at JPL, working on biological instrumentation development, moving in the mid-1970s to Langley Research Center (LARC), where he worked on the Viking Mars Project as a project scientist. He became LARC’s chief environmental scientist before transferring to GSFC in 1983. At Goddard, Soffen had helped develop to NASA’s astrobiology program and to establish NASA’s Astrobiology Institute. In 1978 NASA had appointed him Life Sciences Director at NASA Headquarters and, since its establishment in 1990, he had served as Director of the University Programs Office. GSFC Director Alphonse V. Diaz remarked that science and students were Soffen’s two loves, and that “the Agency and the nation will continue to benefit enormously from the talented young people he has brought into the scientific community.”(NASA, “NASA Astrobiology Architect, Dr. Gerald Soffen, Dies,” news release 00-186, 24 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-186.txt (accessed 7 April 2008); Washington Post, “Gerald Alan Soffen, NASA Official,” 27 November 2000.)
 The government of the People’s Republic of China released a document outlining its policy regarding its future human spaceflight program and satellite-launch industries. The document, which provided the outside world with information about China’s top-secret space program, described the Chinese space industry as “an integral part of the state’s comprehensive development strategy” and stated, “exploration and utilization of outer space should be for peaceful purposes and benefit the whole of mankind.” The paper provided details of China’s satellite program, stating that as of October 2000, China had developed and launched 47 satellites with a success rate of over 90 percent. China had four satellite series in operation: the Dongfanghong telecommunications series; the Fengyun meteorological series; the Shijian research and technology series; and the Ziyuan Earth-observation series, which had recently launched its first spacecraft. The paper also outlined China’s efforts toward international cooperation, notably China’s signing of an agreement with a dozen countries, including the United States, Russia, Japan, and several European countries, allowing for scientific exchange and joint development of spacecraft components, as well as for commercial launch services. To date, China had launched 27 foreign-made satellites using its Long March series of rockets.(Stephen Clark, “China Temporarily Lifts Its Veil on Its Secret Space Program,” Spaceflight Now, 24 November 2000.)
 NASA Director of Media Services Brian D. Welch died after suffering a heart attack. Welch, who had led many of NASA’s public outreach efforts, was responsible for its news operations, for NASA Television, and for NASA’s Internet efforts. Welch had begun his career as a cooperative-education student of public affairs at LARC in 1979. In 1981 he had become editor of Space News Roundup, the newspaper of NASA’s JSC. Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Welch had worked as a public affairs mission commentator, Deputy News Chief at Mission Control Center, Manager of JSC’s Mission Commentary Team, and Newsroom Manager during Shuttle flights. NASA had appointed Welch as Chief of News and Information in 1994, and he had become Director of Media Services in 1998. Administrator Daniel S. Goldin spoke of how Welch’s sudden death had stunned NASA, saying that Welch’s “love and enthusiasm for spaceflight and exploration” was “infectious,” and describing Welch’s passionate approach to his work as the true embodiment of “the spirit of this agency.”(NASA, “Brian Welch, NASA Director of Media Services, Dies,” news release 00-187, 27 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-187.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 NASA announced the selection of a science team for the Space Interferometry Mission (SIM), scheduled for launch in 2009. The team consisted of 10 principal investigators leading key science teams and 5 mission specialists. NASA intended SIM, part of its Origins Program, to search for Earth-sized planets around other stars; to measure precisely the locations and distances of stars throughout the Milky Way Galaxy; and to study other celestial objects, helping to answer fundamental questions about the origin and evolution of the galaxy. NASA planned to place the SIM spacecraft in an Earth-trailing orbit around the Sun, enabling the craft’s multiple telescopes to gather the Sun’s light and producing information normally only obtained with much larger telescopes. NASA considered identification of potential observing targets for the Terrestrial Planet Finder a critical part of SIM’s mission. NASA planned the Terrestrial Planet Finder to capture images of planetary systems around other stars and to search for chemical signatures suggesting the possibility of life.(NASA, “Science Team Chosen for Space Interferometry Mission,” news release 00-178, 28 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-178.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 The National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Integrated Program Office (IPO) selected Raytheon Company to provide imaging-sensor instruments for the new NPOESS craft, which would replace the U.S. Department of Commerce’s Polar- Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellites (POES) and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) satellites. Under a contract valued at US$152.8 million, Raytheon would design, develop, and test the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) instrument and develop the algorithms to produce environmental data records from VIIRS data.(Associated Press, “Raytheon Awarded $152.8 Million Contract for Meteorological Satellite Imaging Sensor,” 28 November 2000.)
 Lockheed Martin and NASA entered into a consolidated space operations contract (CSOC), allowing NASA to use the services of two commercial, satellite ground-tracking stations. Under CSOC, NASA customers would have access on a per-pass basis to additional stations on Svalbard Island in Norway, owned by Kongsberg Spacetec-Lockheed Martin Space Data Services, and in Poker Flat, Alaska, owned by DataLynx. Both tracking stations had recently completed CSOC operational-readiness reviews in preparation for inclusion in Lockheed Martin’s catalog of services available to NASA programs.(“Lockheed Martin Adds Two Commercial Stations to CSOC Capability,” Aerospace Daily, 29 November 2000. 1052 NASA, “NASA Technology Allows Engineers to See Airframe Noise,” news release 00-189, 30 November 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-189.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 NASA announced that new technology recently tested at Ames Research Center (ARC) had converted sounds emanating from landing-gear wind noise into color images on computer screens, “enabling engineers to pinpoint loud and preventable aircraft flight noise more easily than in the past.” The imposition of nighttime curfews on noisy takeoffs and landings had prompted aircraft manufacturers to develop quieter planes. Paul T. Soderman, leader of the ARC aeroacoustics group, explained that the ability to visualize the cause of wind noise coming from landing gear enables engineers to analyze the problem so that they can find ways to reduce significantly noise. The engineers had created the sound images using a computer linked to a quarter-scale landing-gear model and an array of 70 microphones inside the wall of a wind tunnel. The researchers had then removed various combinations of landing-gear parts in the wind tunnel, resulting in significant noise reduction.
 Space Shuttle Endeavour launched from Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Florida, on Mission STS-97, carrying to the ISS Commander Brent W. Jett Jr., Pilot Michael J. Bloomfield, and Mission Specialists Joseph R. Tanner, Marc Garneau, and Carlos I. Noriega. The purpose of STS-97, also known as ISS Assembly Flight 4A, was to connect solar arrays, to prepare a docking port for the U.S.-made Destiny module, to install Floating Potential Probes, to install camera cable outside the Unity module, and to transfer supplies, refuse, and equipment between the ISS and the Shuttle.(NASA, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-97, International Space Station Assembly Flight 4A,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/ archives/sts-97.html (accessed 30 October 2008). 1054 Chicago Tribune, “20-Year-Old Pleads Guilty to Hacking into NASA Computers,” 3 December 2000.)
 Raymond Toricelli of New Rochelle, New York, pled guilty to breaking into two NASA computers in 1998, to steal user names and passwords to gain access to other systems. The two computers, which helped launch robotic spacecraft, were at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California. Toricelli had also set up a chat room to direct people to a pornography site, which paid him 18 cents per referral; broken into a San Jose University computer system to gain access to other networks; and stolen more than 15 credit card numbers online. He stated that he had never intended to damage the computers he illegally entered. Prosecutors planned to seek a prison term of 8 to 14 months at Toricelli’s sentencing on 7 March 2001. The maximum penalty for his crime was 27 years in prison and a US$950,000 fine.
 Space Shuttle Endeavour docked successfully with the International Space Station (ISS), the first Shuttle docking at an inhabited ISS. William M. Shepherd, Commander of the ISS, noted the festive mood at the space station, even though the two crews would not meet in person until later in the mission. Soon after Endeavour docked, Canadian astronaut Marc Garneau used the Shuttle’s robotic arm to lift the 49-foot-long (15-meter-long) tower containing the solar array out of the cargo bay, where it would remain suspended 10 feet (3 meters) above the Shuttle while the crew slept.(Steven Siceloff, “Endeavour Docks at Station: Astronauts To Attach Arrays Today,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 December 2000.)
 Endeavour astronauts attempted to deploy the new solar array at the ISS, but only one of the two panels unfurled as planned. Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega conducted a spacewalk to assist in attaching a 17-ton (15,400-kilogram or 15.4-tonne) power assembly, while Marc Garneau maneuvered the Shuttle’s robotic arm from inside Endeavour. The spacewalkers were unable to open the latches on the storage boxes containing the folded solar panels, delaying their attempts to unfurl the array. They began to unfurl the first panel 1 hour behind schedule, but although it reached its full length in 14 minutes, the panel did not appear to have the correct tension. NASA officials decided to delay expanding the second panel for a full day, to give them time to determine the cause of the inadequate tension of the first panel. The ISS crew did not witness the deployment of the solar array, because the Shuttle crew carried out their work during the ISS crew’s sleep period.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Gets Its Wings, but Only One Is Deployed,” New York Times, 4 December 2000.)
 Members of the astronaut crew who had flown aboard NASA’s historic 100th Space Shuttle flight, Mission STS-92, visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility to present Silver Snoopy awards, “the highest accolade that the astronauts corps gives to people who build flight hardware,” to the Lockheed Martin employees who had built the Shuttle’s super-lightweight tank and liquid-oxygen tank. NASA had named the Silver Snoopy award after the Peanuts character, the dog that imagined he was a fighter pilot.(New Orleans Time-Picayune, “Astronauts Thank Lockheed Workers: Company Makes Shuttle Components,” 17 December 2000.)
 Space Shuttle Endeavour Commander Brent W. Jett Jr. successfully unfurled the second panel of the solar array (colloquially referred to as a solar wing) that the crew had deployed on the ISS on 3 December. Jett used computer commands to unfold the panel a few feet at a time, a process that took nearly 2 hours. No problems occurred until the crew had extended the panel almost fully, when it became clear that a panel on each blanket was stuck to a neighboring section. Endeavour’s crew turned the Shuttle to allow the Sun to warm the blankets and fired thrusters to shake the array, snapping the wing into place. The panel began generating electricity before it reached its full 115 feet (35 meters). To NASA’s relief, the panel was stretched tight. Once the crew had completed the process, Commander Jett radioed to Mission Control that they had two tensioned blankets, and Mission Control replied, “Great work, gentlemen. We think you’ve earned your solar wings.”(Associated Press, “Astronaut Manages To Spread Station’s 2nd Wing,” USA Today, 5 April 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Finnish Adding Solar Wing to Station,” New York Times, 5 December 2000.)
 NASA made data from its Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) available to the public. ASTER, a general-purpose imaging instrument featuring 14 spectral bands, extremely high spatial resolution, and stereo-imaging capabilities, had launched aboard NASA’s Terra satellite in December 1999. One of ASTER’s primary goals was “to acquire a one-time cloud-free image of the entire land surface of Earth,” intended as a baseline image for monitoring environmental change.(NASA, “Terra Satellite’s ASTER Data Now Available to the Public,” news release 2000-124, 5 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/terra.html (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 Endeavour astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega worked outside the ISS to connect power lines, correcting an electrical shortage that had restricted the station’s first crew to two of three habitable modules. The two astronauts also inspected the first solar panel that they had unfurled, to determine whether the crew could correct its tension. Wearing a small TV camera on his helmet, Noriega beamed down to Mission Control images of the loose tension cables on the array’s right wing. The cables had slipped off their pulleys during the solar panel’s deployment on 3 December. Tanner remarked that an astronaut could place one tension cable back on its pulley without too much trouble, but that the other cable would require more work. Mission Control instructed the spacewalkers to try to fix the cables on their third and final spacewalk the following day.(Chicago Tribune, “Space Station Gets an Electrical Boost from Solar Wings,” 6 December 2000; Associated Press, “Live from Space, ‘Carlos Cam’,” Newsday (Long Island, NY), 6 December 2000.)
 NASA and the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) announced the signing of a memorandum of understanding to form a partnership to use science and space technology to prevent natural disasters. The agreement called upon NASA and FEMA to apply remote-sensing research images to emergency-management issues, creating accurate and informative maps of flood plains and wildfires, as well as other types of maps, intended to help state and local communities respond to and mitigate natural disasters. The partnership, affiliated with Project Impact: Building Disaster Resistant Communities, would use NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise, as “part of an aggressive new strategy devoted to significantly increasing the application of NASA remote sensing data, information, science and technologies to societal needs.”(NASA, “NASA, FEMA Partner To Use Science and Space Technology for Disaster Prevention,” news release 00-192, 7 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-192.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 Astronauts Joseph R. Tanner and Carlos I. Noriega were able to tighten the slack solar panel on the ISS within minutes, using only a hook to place two tension cables back on their pulleys. Although the wing functioned well even though it was slack, if the astronauts had not adjusted its tension, the solar cells might have torn or the support rods might have bent or broken. After repairing the wing, the two astronauts installed a camera cable and a static-electricity monitor on the outside of the ISS. The monitor would help NASA learn how to protect spacewalking astronauts from electrical shocks.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Breeze Through Wing Repair: ‘All Finished’,” 7 December 2000.)
 Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edgett of Malin Space Science Systems published research in the journal Science based on images from NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft. The two researchers had found that the images showed massive sedimentary deposits on Mars, suggesting that the planet “was once a water-rich land of lakes.” Malin described the images as revealing “hundreds and hundreds of identically thick layers,” features that were “almost impossible to have without water.” J. William Schopf, head of the Center for the Study of Evolution and the Origin of Life at the University of California at Los Angeles, commented that the images provided the “strongest evidence yet for what appear to be sedimentary units on Mars,” supporting the theory that, billions of years ago, Mars had been wetter, warmer, and possibly hospitable to life.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Evidence of Martian Land of Lakes Discovered,” news release 2000-123, 4 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/marslakes.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Associated Press, “Satellite Photos Indicate Mars Was Water Plentiful,” Washington Times, 5 December 2000; Michael C. Malin and Kenneth S. Edget, “Sedimentary Rocks of Early Mars,” Science 290, no. 5498 (8 December 2000): 1927–1937.)
 Hatches between the ISS and Space Shuttle Endeavour opened for the first time, and the three members of the space station crew, who had been living aboard the ISS for five weeks, received their first visitors. ISS Commander William M. Shepherd commended Endeavour’s crew for their installation of the giant solar array on the space station. The two crews spent their day together transferring supplies, such as food, water, mail, and gifts, to the space station and removing trash, damaged items, and unneeded items for return to Earth.(Reuters, “Hatch Is Opened; Endeavour, Space Station Crews Become One,” Chicago Tribune, 9 December 2000; Los Angeles Times, “Endeavour’s Crew Visits Space Station,” 9 December 2000; Warren E. Leary, “Space Station Crew Greets First Visitors,” New York Times, 9 December 2000.)
 Space Shuttle Endeavour landed at KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, after completing the 11-day Mission STS-97 at the ISS, where the crew had installed and deployed the station’s new solar array. Shortly before touchdown, the ISS sailed above KSC, a “reminder of the pressure” on NASA to support more flights to the ISS as the station’s assembly accelerated. Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore remarked that the successful mission of Endeavour to the ISS was “a good way to end this year⎯a very successful five missions.”(William Harwood, “Endeavour Returns from Station Work,” Washington Post, 12 December 2000.)
 A team of three high school students from the North Carolina School for Science and Mathematics in Durham won first place in the Siemens-Westinghouse Science and Technology Competition. The team won for discovering the first evidence of a neutron star in the nearby supernova remnant IC443, using data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and the National Science Foundation’s Very Large Array (VLA) Observatory. The students had located a point-like source of x-rays embedded in a supernova and had determined that the central object was most likely a pulsar, a young and rapidly rotating neutron star. Bryan M. Gaensler, a pulsar expert at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who had reviewed the team’s paper, remarked that the students had produced “a really solid scientific finding.”(NASA, “Students Using NASA and NSF Data Make Stellar Discovery; Win Science Team Competition,” news release 00-195, 11 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-195.txt (accessed 7 April 2008). 1067 Andrew Kramer for Associated Press, “Russian Company To Build Spacecraft To Carry Customers,” 13 December 2000.)
 The Netherlands-based MirCorp, the company originally established to keep the Mir space station in orbit for commercial purposes, announced that, following a board meeting during the previous week, the company had decided to “retool the company to work with other Russian space equipment.” The company planned to develop a new orbiter capable of docking with the ISS, to market existing space technologies, such as cargo spacecraft, and to explore commercial projects involving access to a future Russian module on the ISS.
 Ganymede, the largest moon in Jupiter’s solar system, joined the planet Mars and Jovian moons Europa and Callisto as the only known bodies showing strong evidence of the presence of liquid water beneath their surfaces. During the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union, Margaret G. Kivelson, a planetary scientist at the University of California at Los Angeles, announced that NASA’s Galileo spacecraft had found evidence of a vast sea of liquid beneath the surface of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede. Using data collected from Galileo’s magnetometer during May 2000 and earlier, Kivelson’s team had measured the moon’s magnetic field. The magnetometer had registered readings “best explained by a thick layer of water⎯about as salty as Earth’s oceans⎯hidden about 120 miles [190 kilometers] beneath” the moon’s surface. Thomas B. McCord, a geophysicist at the University of Hawaii who also presented research at the conference, had used Galileo’s Near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer to discover that portions of Ganymede appeared “to have types of salt minerals that would have been left behind by exposure of salty water near or onto the surface.” Gene D. McDonald, an astrobiologist at JPL, which manages the Galileo Mission, remarked that Ganymede might be a more promising destination than Europa for robotic spacecraft searching for life. Ganymede, farther from Jupiter than Europa, has better protection than Europa from Jupiter’s intense and deadly radiation. Therefore, biomarker compounds emerging on the surface of Ganymede would survive longer there than on the other Jovian moons, as would any spacecraft orbiting or landing on Ganymede.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Solar System’s Largest Moon Likely Has a Hidden Ocean,” news release 2000-130, 16 December 2000, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/releases/2000/aguganymederoundup.html (accessed 7 April 2008); Kathy Sawyer, “Evidence of Liquid Found on Jupiter’s Ganymede; Largest Moon May Be a Place To Look for Life,” Washington Post, 17 December 2000.)
 NASA suspended all of Cassini’s observations of Jupiter that required the spacecraft to point⎯to take magnetic-field measurements⎯in order to capture images, after the craft developed a problem with a maneuvering system. NASA permitted Cassini to continue making observations that did not requiring pointing. On 17 December, Cassini’s No. 2 reaction wheel had begun to require extra force to turn, prompting the craft to switch from electrical power to a hydrazine- thrusting system, which Cassini needed to conserve for use in its primary Saturn mission. Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell remarked that, if tests of the maneuvering system were favorable, the craft could begin its observations again in a week to 10 days.(Los Angeles Times, “NASA Halts Spacecraft’s Observation of Jupiter,” 21 December 2000; Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000.)
 NASA’s Office of Earth Sciences selected Gencorp Aerojet to build the Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder (ATMS), a spaceborne instrument for measuring microwave energy emitted and scattered by the atmosphere. NASA intended the ATMS to replace instruments currently used on polar-orbiting weather satellites. NASA planned for the ATMS, working alongside an infrared sounder instrument, to produce daily global atmospheric temperature, humidity, and pressure profiles, essential for accurate weather forecasting and long-term climate research. Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that the advanced technology would improve the accuracy of weather forecasting, from the current three-to-five day forecast span to seven-to-ten day predictions. NASA planned to fly the first unit as part of the National Polar-Orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) Preparatory Project Bridge mission, intended to ensure continuity of research-quality data through the bridging of sounding data between NASA’s Earth Observing System research missions and future NPOESS operational missions. Goddard Space Flight Center would provide oversight of the contract, worth US$206.6 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Build Next Generation Weather Instrument,” news release C00-q, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/contract/2000/c00-q.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 NASA announced it had begun searching worldwide for proposals from principal investigators and institutions to develop its first mission to Pluto. In the announcement of opportunity, NASA solicited proposals for a complete mission to the Pluto-Charon system and the Kuiper Belt, requiring that submitted proposals include an expendable launch vehicle and spacecraft, its bus and systems, and the scientific instrumentation package. Although NASA placed no restrictions on the mission’s launch date, its stated goal was to reach Pluto by 2015, at a cost of no more than US$500 million in FY 2000 dollars. This was the first time that the Office of Space Science had solicited proposals for a mission to an outer planet on a competitive basis. NASA had chosen this approach to elicit “creative ideas from innovative thinkers” capable of developing highly focused missions rapidly and at a relatively low cost. NASA made the announcement after it had issued a stop order on the Pluto/Kuiper Express (PKE) mission on 12 September because of the PKE mission’s unacceptably high increases in cost. NASA also appointed Colleen Hartman, the Deputy Director of the Research Division of the Office of Space Science, as the new Outer Planets Program Director, to act as the point of contact at NASA Headquarters for budget, content, and policy direction.(NASA, “NASA Seeks Proposals for Pluto Mission; Plans To Restructure Outer Planet Program,” news release 00-201, 20 December 2000, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2000/00-201.txt (accessed 7 April 2008).)
 The Huygens Communications Link Enquiry Board released its findings, recommendations, and conclusions, after conducting interviews and hearings with the European Space Agency (ESA), NASA, and industry project staff and experts. The Board had reviewed the unexplained anomalies in the communication subsystem of the Huygens Probe, discovered during a Probe Relay Link Test in February 2000. The ESA Director General had formed an independent inquiry board to assess the current status of the Huygens communication link; to recommend means of safeguarding the mission objectives and guaranteeing full scientific data return; and to recommend ways to prevent similar problems in future projects. The Board had found that the entire project structure had led to the anomaly, outlining the specific problems in its report. The Board also made six recommendations and provided 10 recovery options. The Board’s key recommendation was that, in the future, when a mission carries new hardware, the mission plan should be sufficiently flexible to allow for changes from ground command.(Huygens Communications Link Enquiry Board, “Findings, Recommendations, and Conclusions,” 20 December 2000, http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/ESA_Cassini/huygens_enquiry_board.PDF (accessed 21 April 2008).)
 NASA’s JPL announced that the Cassini spacecraft, after successfully undergoing a series of tests, was resuming the use of its electrically powered reaction wheels to control its orientation. Although mission scientists were uncertain of the cause of the spacecraft’s switch to a different maneuvering system, they suggested that a small piece of material, perhaps from the motor’s magnets, might have lodged in an area where it caused friction. Because the scientists were unable actually to detect any such material, they speculated further that either centrifugal force had subsequently forced the material out, or the motor had ground it up. Scientists also suggested that reduced lubrication in the bearings, during prolonged operation at reduced speeds, might have caused the problem, and that, perhaps, the increased motor speeds used during the tests had restored the lubrication.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Resuming Use of Reaction Wheels,” news release, 21 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=6 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
 Ground controllers in Russia restored communication with Mir, after they had been unable to contact the uninhabited space station for 24 hours. Spokesperson for Russian Mission Control Valery Lyndin allayed fears that Mir would crash to Earth shortly, announcing that Russia had received no indication that the space station was losing pressure. Mission Control Chief Vladimir A. Solovyov explained that the station’s batteries had lost power and no longer had sufficient energy to communicate with ground controllers. Once ground controllers had identified the problem, they had switched off specific systems to direct more energy to ground communications. Although Mir’s solar panels were recharging the batteries, the cause of the power shortage remained unclear.(Washington Times, “Contact with Mir Restored After Loss of Battery Power: Mission Control Allays Fears of Crash,” 27 December 2000.)
 Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev reiterated Russia’s commitment to the international community, stating that Russia definitely would bring Mir safely down in February 2001. Koptev “angrily dismissed Communist demands to keep the nearly 15-year-old station in orbit,” referring to the 20-hour loss of contact earlier in the week as a “final warning that time was up” and an indicator of the level of the station’s wear and tear. Communist lawmakers, including cosmonaut Svetlana Y. Savitskaya, who called the move a concession to NASA, had criticized the government’s decision to destroy the space station. However, Koptev had countered the criticism, saying that, if Mir spun out of control, the Russian president and government would have to explain to the world where the station would fall and how much damage it would cause.(Vladimir Iachenkov for Associated Press, “Space Officials Say Mir Back Under Control, Will Be Dumped in February,” 27 December 2000.)
 Cassini Program Manager Robert T. Mitchell, at NASA’s JPL, announced the resumption of the spacecraft’s observations. Cassini had operated without any problems, since scientists had reactivated its reaction-wheel system on 21 December.(Associated Press, “NASA Cassini Spacecraft Trouble Free Approaching Jupiter,” 28 December 2000; NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Cassini Passes Through Asteroid Belt,” news release, 28 December 2000, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/press-release-details.cfm?newsID=4 (accessed 21 April 2008).)
