 A reentry section of the People’s Republic of China’s Shenzhou 4 spacecraft landed in Inner Mongolia after Shenzhou 4 had orbited Earth for nearly a week. Phillip Clark, a U.K. observer of China’s space program, remarked that the Shenzhou 4 mission was key to flying Chinese astronauts in the future, noting that orbital control of the craft during this flight had been far tighter than in the two preceding tests. Furthermore, during two back-to-back Shenzhou launches, the Chinese had completed all the maneuvers necessary for a rendezvous and docking mission, indicating that China would progress quickly to an orbital docking. Clark predicted that either Shenzhou 7 or Shenzhou 8 would complete a nose-to-nose docking.(Leonard David, “After ShenzhouChina’s Space Plans Boosted Following Successful Mission,” Space.com, 5 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/after_shenzhou4_030105.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
 After a series of delays, a Titan 2 rocket carried into orbit the U.S. military’s Coriolis research satellite, launching from the Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The refurbished Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missile placed the spacecraft in orbit 51⁄2 minutes after launch, and the rocket’s second stage deployed its payload approximately 1 hour later. The US$224 million Coriolis mission carried the Navy’s Windsat microwave polarimetric radiometer and the Air Force’s Solar Mass Ejection Imager. The U.S. military had designed Windsat to measure wind speed and direction at or near the surface of Earth’s seas, providing improved weather forecasting to assist in planning naval operations. The Air Force intended the Solar Mass Ejection Imager to provide “an early warning of coronal mass ejections from the Sun that impact Earth, disrupting communications and power grids.”(Justin Ray, “Coriolis Launched To Track Ocean Winds, Solar Storms,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2003. 105)
 The Arianespace Flight 157 Inquiry Board submitted its report to Arianespace, establishing the most probable cause of the failure of an Ariane 5 ECA on the night of 11/12 December 2002. The Board had analyzed all measurements recorded during Flight 157 and had reviewed all documentation concerning production, quality, and technical records for the Ariane 5 ECA―which used a Vulcain 2 engine―as well as the documentation for all Ariane 5 flights to date. The Board had identified a leak in the Vulcain 2 nozzle’s cooling circuit during the first flight phase. The leak had caused critical overheating of the nozzle, a loss of integrity, and a major imbalance in the thrust of the Vulcain 2 engine, leading to the loss of control over the launcher’s trajectory. The Board concluded that two aggravating factors, occurring simultaneously, had caused the failure: “degraded thermal condition of the nozzle due to fissures in the cooling tubes” and “non-exhaustive definition of the loads to which the Vulcain 2 engine is subjected during flight.” Although its review of the operating data from the Vulcain 1 engine’s successful flights identified no weakness in the functioning and resistance of the nozzle, the Board recommended a thorough review of the Ariane 5. Upon learning the factors involved in the failure of Ariane 5 ECA, Arianespace decided to create a board to study the upcoming 14 January launch of Rosetta. ESA had timed the mission to enable Rosetta to rendezvous with the comet Wirtanen.(ESA, “Arianespace Flight 157Inquiry Board Submits Findings,” http://www.esa.int/esaCP/ESA7198708D_index_0.html (accessed 28 July 2008).)
 NASA announced that the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) aboard the HST had used “a natural ‘zoom lens’ in space to boost its view of the distant universe,” revealing remote galaxies previously beyond HST’s reach. For more than 13 hours, the camera had concentrated on one of the most massive known galaxy clusters, Abell 1689, located more than 2.2 billion light-years away. In combination with dark matter, Abell 1689’s gravity behaves as a 2 million light-year– wide lens in space, bending and magnifying the light of the galaxies behind it. The HST image captured hundreds of galaxies10 times more arcs than a ground-based telescope could reveal“smeared by the gravitational bending of light into a spider-web tracing of blue and red arcs of light.” Scientists intended to use the image map to study the distribution of dark matter in galaxy clusters and to trace the history of star formation in the universe over the past 13 billion years. NASA deemed the image “an exquisite demonstration of Albert Einstein’s prediction that gravity warps space and therefore distorts a beam of light.”(NASA, “Biggest ‘Zoom Lens’ in Space Extends Hubble’s Reach,” news release 03-003, 7 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-003.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
 GenCorp Inc.’s company Aerojet, a member of the Rocket Based Combined Cycle Consortium (RBC3), announced that NASA and RBC3 had successfully completed the first in a series of tests of a full-scale rocket thrust. Conducted at Aerojet facilities in Sacramento, California, the test demonstrated the first successful hot fire of a thruster using a mix of decomposed peroxide, liquid peroxide, and JP-7 jet fuel to generate combustion―a key milestone in NASA’s Integrated System Test of an Air-breathing Rocket (ISTAR) program. The ISTAR program sought to flight- test a self-powered hypersonic flight vehicle at more than six times the speed of sound by the end of the decade. The program was part of NASA’s effort to develop hypersonic technologies by 2025, to create flight vehicles that could provide safe, routine, and affordable space access and air transportation to anywhere on the globe in less than 2 hours.(Aerojet, “NASA, Industry Consortium Successfully Test Full-Scale Hypersonic Engine Thruster,” news release, 7 January 2003, http://www.aerojet.com/program/news/nr_010703_nasa_industry_consortium_ successfully_tests_thruster.htm?program_ID=45 (accessed 30 July 2008); “NASA, “NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel,” news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/ pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
 U.S. Representative William L. Jenkins (R-TN) announced that NASA had awarded East Tennessee State University a grant valued at US$363,310 to study light patterns of stars located hundreds of light-years away. The award would grant researchers of the university’s physics and astronomy department access over the next five years to data from COBEthe Cosmic Background Explorer satellite. The scientists would use the COBE data to study the infrared variability of asymptotic giant branch stars, “older stars with shells of gas and dust around them.” During its mission in 1989 and 1990, the COBE satellite had surveyed the sky on 10 infrared wavelengths, observing the cosmic backlight of the universe, as well as asymptotic giant branch stars. Although astronomers in the field had conducted significant research on the backlight data, they had done little with COBE’s infrared data on the stars.(Sam Watson, “NASA Grant To Fund ETSU Study of Stars,” Johnson City Press (TN), 9 January 2003.)
 A Delta 2 rocket carried NASA’s Ice Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) into orbit, launching from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. ICESat was one in a series of Earth Observing System (EOS) spacecraft to follow the Terra satellite, launched in December 1999, and the Aqua satellite, launched in May 2002. NASA had designed the 661-pound (299.8- kilogram) craft to measure the ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica, so that scientists could determine whether global sea levels were rising or falling. The craft’s only instrument, the Geoscience Laser Altimeter System, would beam rapid pulses of laser light to the icy surface, and the ice sheets would reflect the light back to the satellite, acting like radar. The GPS would determine the ICESat’s location as it fired its laser, enabling program scientists to measure the ice sheets’ topography. The rocket also carried a second, smaller craft into orbitCHIPSat, NASA’s 131-pound (59-kilogram), University Explorer Class probe, the Cosmic Hot Interstellar Plasma Spectrometer. CHIPSat would gather data on the origin, physical processes, and properties of the hot gas between stars. The CHIPSat mission was the first U.S. mission to use end-to-end satellite operations over the Internet, treating the craft “something like a node on the Internet.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches ICE and CHIPS Satellites,” news release 03-011, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-011.txt (accessed 22 July 2008); Associated Press, “Rocket Carrying NASA Satellites Launched,” 12 January 2003; Jim Banke, “Boeing Launches Pair of Science Research Satellites for NASA,” Space.com, 12 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030112.html (accessed 22 July 2008).)
 NASA announced that a two-year collaboration between researchers at Stanford University and NASA’s ARC had resulted in a successful test of an alternative paraffin-based rocket fuel intended to increase operational safety, reduce costs as compared to solid fuels, and, eventually, to provide the fuel in Space Shuttle booster rockets. The researchers had developed a nontoxic, easily handled fuel, producing as by-products carbon dioxide and water, rather than the aluminum oxide and acidic gases that conventional rocket fuel produces. Arif Karabeyoglu had led Stanford University’s contribution to the fuel research, developing the theory of a fast- burning, low-cost, paraffin-based fuel in his doctoral thesis, which Stanford and NASA had partially funded. The testing series had begun on 24 September 2001 at ARC’s Hybrid Combustion Facility, a heavy-duty test chamber capable of accommodating pressures of up to 60 atmospheres. The first phase of the testing program had consisted of approximately 40 runs.(NASA, “NASA Tests Environmentally Friendly Rocket Fuel,” news release 03-010, 13 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2008).)
 Arianespace and ESA announced that, because of the failure of Ariane 5 Flight 157, they had postponed the launch of the Rosetta spacecraft. Arianespace had designed Rosetta to rendezvous with the comet Wirtanen, in a mission that would have included a journey lasting eight years, followed by a two-year study of the comet. Rosetta’s launch had presented several challenges, requiring the Ariane 5 rocket’s upper stage to “undertake its first-ever ballistic coast phase before being ignited, a [2]-hour-long sequence.” Although launch officials had not planned to launch the spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 ECA, the type of rocket that had exploded shortly after launch in December 2002, Rosetta’s launch vehicle was not standard. Arianespace had modified its equipment bay and electrical system. The postponement would cause Rosetta to miss the launch window for the rendezvous with Wirtanen; therefore, mission scientists would search for a new comet for the study and would redesign the mission.(Reuters, “Rosetta Space Launch Set Back by Further Delay,” 15 January 2003.)
 NASA announced that scientist David Atlas of NASA’s GSFC and University of Colorado scientist Christopher Williams had created the first “full-body scan” of an evolving tropical thunderstorm, using data collected from an unusual storm over the Amazon rain forest, which had occurred in February 1999. At that time, a team of scientists from NASA, NOAA, the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and several universities had used sensitive radar equipment, such as scanning Doppler and vertically oriented Doppler, to detect and measure different types of particles from the storm’s base to its top, approximately 8.7 miles (14 kilometers) above the rainforest floor. Participants from the University of North Dakota had operated a jet aircraft to gather some of the data. One of the study’s goals had been validating the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) satellite measurements, to help plan the TRMM’s successor, the Global Precipitation Mission. TRMM had provided data about how such storms operate, thus enabling scientists to understand how wind circulates in the upper atmosphere. The research, which Atlas and Williams had published in the American Meteorological Society’s Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, provided new insight into the intense and hazardous conditions within storms. Scientists expected the research to improve forecasts, helping aircraft avoid dangerous storms and making air travel safer, and to improve satellite measurements of precipitation.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “NASA Scientists Take First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Evolving Thunderstorm,” news release 03-07, 15 January 2003, http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/news-release/releases/2003/03- 07.htm (accessed 28 July 2008); Reuters, “NASA Takes First ‘Full-Body Scan’ of Thunderstorm,” 15 January 2003; Lee Bowman for Scripps Howard News Service, “Probing the Inner Workings of Storm Clouds,” 16 January 2003.)
 As part of Expedition 6, American astronauts Donald D. Pettit and Kenneth R. Bowersox undertook a spacewalk outside the ISS, each spacewalking for the first time, while their Russian colleague Nikolai M. Budarin monitored their work from inside the station. Pettit had replaced Budarin in the spacewalk lineup because NASA doctors were concerned about Budarin’s known cardiovascular issues. In the summer of 2003, Pettit had served as backup for another astronaut in an ISS mission, because NASA doctors were worried about that astronaut’s radiation exposure. NASA had decided to replace Budarin even though Russian doctors disagreed, because NASA was in charge of this spacewalk. During the 7-hour spacewalk, the two astronauts successfully completed their primary tasksreleasing locks on a recently installed radiator and cleaning a docking ring. However, they were unable to erect a light on a boom, because a protruding pin prevented the boom from swinging out of its stowed position.(Associated Press, “Astronauts Take Spacewalk, Including a Late Substitute Who Frees the Space Station’s Sticky Hatch,” 15 January 2003.)
 Space Shuttle Columbia launched on STS-107 from NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 10:39 a.m. (EST). NASA had postponed the launch, originally scheduled for July 2001, because of technical and scheduling problems. Flying an orbital mission, a rare event since the ISS partners had begun construction of the space station in 1998, STS-107 was a “pure research mission.” The crew would conduct scientific investigations in two 12-hour shifts each day in the laboratory module of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. The crew included Shuttle Commander Rick D. Husband; Pilot William C. McCool; Payload Commander Michael P. Anderson; Payload Specialist Ilan Ramon, Israel’s first astronaut and a fighter pilot with the rank of colonel in Israel’s Air Force; Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, an aerospace engineer originally from India; and Mission Specialists David M. Brown and Laurel B. Clark, both physicians. The launch occurred under exceptionally tight security with more than 300 dignitaries and guests from Israel in attendance.(Broward Liston for Reuters, “Space Shuttle Launches with First Israeli Astronaut,” 16 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “Columbia Takes Off Under Tight Security,” New York Times, 16 January 2003.)
 The U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) announced that it had awarded a five- year contract worth up to US$500 million to the Colorado-based companies Space Imaging and DigitalGlobe. Under the contract, which stipulated a base performance period of three years with two additional one-year options, NIMA agreed to purchase a minimum of US$72 million worth of data from DigitalGlobe and a minimum of US$120 million from Space Imaging during the first three years. The contract and accompanying agreements marked “the Pentagon’s strongest commitment yet to buy products and services from the U.S. commercial satellite imaging industry.” Space Imaging, based in Thornton, Colorado, operated the Ikonos satellite launched in September 1999, which was capable of distinguishing ground objects as small as 1 meter. DigitalGlobe, based in Longmont, Colorado, operated the QuickBird satellite, launched in October 1999, which, under certain conditions, was capable of distinguishing objects as small as 0.61 meter.(NIMA, “NIMA Partners with Remote Sensing Industry,” media release 03-05, 17 January 2003, http://www.nga.mil/NGASiteContent/StaticFiles/OCR/nima0305.pdf (accessed 24 July 2008); Warren Ferster, “NIMA Awards Lucrative Contracts to U.S. Satellite Imaging Firms,” Space News, 17 January 2003; Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the Ikonos Satellite,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/ satellite-sensors/ikonos.html (accessed 24 July 2008); Satellite Imaging Corporation, “About the QuickBird Satellite Sensor,” http://www.satimagingcorp.com/satellite-sensors/quickbird.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
 NASA launched a nationwide campaign to recruit elementary, middle, and high school classroom teachers for its astronaut corps, building on the legacy of its Teacher in Space Project of 1985. NASA had selected Christa McAuliffe and Barbara R. Morgan from among 12,000 applicants for the first project, which had ended tragically when Space Shuttle Challenger exploded shortly after launching on 28 January 1986 with McAuliffe on board. McAuliffe’s backup Barbara R. Morgan had rejoined NASA in 1998 to train and qualify as a mission specialist. In December 2002, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had announced Morgan’s assignment to a November assembly mission to the ISS. NASA planned for the new recruitment campaign to extend the legacy of McAuliffe and the work of Morgan, making future educator- astronauts as much a part of the astronaut corps as test pilots, engineers, physicians, astronomers, geologists, and scientists from other disciplines. To accomplish this goal, NASA planned to train teachers with proven technical skills, making them eligible for missions ranging from 12-day Shuttle flights to months-long residencies aboard the ISS. Because of their ability to communicate with students in the classroom more effectively than traditional NASA astronauts, the educator-astronauts would be a critical part of an educational initiative to “make math and science as inspiring to youngsters as pop music and sports.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Seeking a Few Good Teachers,” Houston Chronicle, 22 January 2003.)
 Officials from Boeing and Finmeccanica, an Italian aerospace corporation, signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in a joint ceremony held in Rome and at the Italian Embassy in Washington, DC. The purpose of the MOU was to explore joint initiatives and to pursue growth opportunities in aerostructures and commercial aircraft, aircraft modification, UAVs, satellite systems, navigation, launch services, missile defense, space infrastructure, and avionics. The MOU called for the creation of an executive steering committee to investigate the possibilities of collaborative activity in space navigation, satellite services, launch services, and services to the ISS. The committee would make the final decision about which activities the partnership would pursue.(UV Online.com, “Finmeccanica and Boeing To Collaborate on UAVs,” 23 January 2003, http://www.shephard.co.uk/news/category/1/uvonline/.)
 NASA launched SORCE―its Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment satellite―from a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from a jet plane 140 miles offshore over the Atlantic Ocean. On board the satellite were five instruments designed to help scientists better understand how the Sun affects Earth’s climate. SORCE’s high-precision instruments could measure total radiation from the Sun, and its spectrometers could analyze light in all its various wavelengths, capturing information that scientists hoped would help them build a long-term data set that future generations would use.(NASA, “NASA’s SORCE Satellite Soars into Space To Catch Some Rays,” news release 03-022, 27 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-022.txt (accessed 9 July 2008); Associated Press, “NASA Launches Satellite To Measure Sun’s Radiation,” 25 January 2003.)
 The crew aboard Space Shuttle Columbia joined Mission Control for a moment of silence at 11:39 a.m. (EST), the exact time that Challenger had exploded after launch 17 years before. The astronauts also remembered the three astronauts killed in a launchpad fire in their Apollo spacecraft on 27 January 1967. Airwaves also fell silent on the ISS, as the crew of two American astronauts and one Russian cosmonaut aboard the space station paused to remember the tragedies.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Honor Challenger Victims,” 28 January 2003. 110)
 Alain Bensoussan, president of the French space agency, announced that he was resigning from his post because he no longer had the support he needed to continue his job. Bensoussan had been the “target of increasingly bitter attacks” lodged by frustrated employees who no longer perceived a clear direction in the agency’s mission. Bensoussan had also faced the failure of a new Ariane 5 rocket and an agency budget that had decreased steadily since 1997, despite the addition of new programs. Moreover, the French government had commissioned a report evaluating the space agency’s current status and future direction, and the report had been “lukewarm in its assessment” of Bensoussan. Following the publication of the report, France’s space minister Claudie Haignere had stated that the agency had not yet made a decision about its future management. The commission’s findings and the space minister’s statement had not provided a strong message of support for Bensoussan’s leadership.(Peter B. de Selding, “French Space Agency Chief To Resign,” Space News, 29 January 2003.)
 A Delta 2 rocket launched, carrying a GPS-2R8 satellite and an Experimental Spacecraft System (XSS-10) microsatellite into orbit. The U.S. Air Force was launching the GPS-2R8 to replace the 22nd GPS satellite, which had launched 10 years earlier, joining a constellation of 26 operational GPS spacecraft. Although the military GPS created in the 1970s had generated a commercial industry with sales in excess of US$6 billion, the system had continued to exist primarily to serve the U.S. military. The U.S. Air Force was launching the 62-pound (28-kilogram) XSS-10 spacecraft to test new guidance and navigation software and to demonstrate new technologies, such as a miniature communications system, a lightweight propulsion system, and advanced lithium polymer batteries.(Jim Banke, “Delta 2 Rolls, Launches GPS and Experimental Satellites,” Space.com, 29 January 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/delta2_launch_030129.html (accessed 23 July 2008).)
 NASA announced its collaboration with Japan’s NASDA and the Japanese Meteorological Research Institute to study snowfall over Wakasa Bay, Japan. The study would use NASA’s EOS Aqua satellite in conjunction with research aircraft, which would gather data for the study using the coastal radar systems. NASA had begun the Wakasa Bay Field Campaign on 3 January 2003, scheduling the study to run through 14 February 2003. Although, historically, scientists had found it difficult to quantify contributions to the global hydrologic cycle from the northern Pacific Ocean, they expected that the new satellite instruments, which could detect precipitation over water, would provide data needed to interpret the effect of Pacific Ocean hydrology on the world.(NASA, “NASA Joins Snow Study over the Sea of Japan,” news release 03-025, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-025.txt (accessed 29 July 2008).)
 Israeli scientists announced that, while traveling aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, astronaut Ilan Ramon had successfully captured images of smoke from a burning rain forest, a dust storm above the Mediterranean Ocean, and a small dust plume off the African coast over the Atlantic Ocean. Operating a twin-camera multispectral instrument in Columbia’s payload bay, Ramon had scanned dust and other aerosol particles, which storms had blown from deserts and high winds had carried across the globe. The instrument had also operated during the night, capturing images of the tops of thousands of thunderstorms. The team of scientists from Tel Aviv University’s Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) intended to use the images to develop a better understanding of climate change, one of the goals of Columbia’s research flight, which had encountered two years of delays. Joachim Joseph, a principal researcher on the project, remarked that the experiment had gathered “very good data, very unique data.” The purpose of the US$2 million experiment was to “provide a better understanding of how migrating dust plumes affect climate.” (NASA, “Shuttle’s Desert Dust Experiment Delivers,” news release N03-010, 29 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/note2edt/2003/n03-010.txt (accessed 9 July 2003); Associated Press, “Astronaut Photographs Dust Storm,” 31 January 2003; Warren E. Leary, “ Space Shuttle Crew Completes Israeli Dust and Cloud Studies,” New York Times, 31 January 2003.)
 NASA announced that it had settled negotiations with United Space Alliance, increasing the value of its two-year extension of the spaceflight operations contract (SFOC) by US$59.91 million. The finalized SFOC extension supporting the Space Shuttle Program brought the total value of the two-year contract to US$2.90 billion. The extended contract would run through 30 September 2004.(NASA, “NASA Finalizes Contract with United Space Alliance,” news release C03-001, 31 January 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/contract/2003/c03-001.txt (accessed 15 July 2008).)
 After completing a 16-day orbital science mission that NASA judged a success, the crew of STS- 107 perished when Space Shuttle Columbia broke apart above Texas during reentry. NASA’s Mission Control lost communication with Columbia at 9:00 a.m. (EST) and immediately switched to the contingency plan to preserve all flight-activity information. NASA had scheduled the landing for 9:16 a.m. (EST). NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe issued a statement describing all the steps NASA had taken after the loss of the Shuttle. NASA officials had spoken with President George W. Bush and Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge; met with family members of the crew; assembled an internal mishap investigation team; and appointed a mishap investigation board. The board comprised an external group of people independent from NASA, charged with examining all the information that Mission Control had locked down when it lost communication with Columbia.(NASA, “NASA Statement on Loss of Communications with Columbia,” news release 03-030, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-030.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); NASA, “Statement by NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe,” news release 03-032, 1 February 2003, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-032.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); Washington Post, “The Columbia Catastrophe,” 2 February 2003.)
 Progress M-47 launched atop a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome one day after the loss of Space Shuttle Columbia “threw future missions to the orbiting complex in doubt.” The launch, scheduled long in advance, took place as “stunned Russian space officials offered condolences to their American colleagues.” Russian officials also expressed concern that the loss of Columbia and the ensuing suspension of Shuttle missions might place Russia’s “cash-strapped space program under more pressure to deliver crews and supplies to the station.” Sergei Gorbunov, a spokesperson for the Russian Space Agency, explained that Russia had no reserve of Soyuz spacecraft. He pointed out that if the U.S. space program intended to use Russian craft to transport crews to the ISS, NASA would need to buy Russian Soyuz TMAs, the type of craft designed to carry cosmonauts to the ISS. Russia had routinely built only two Soyuz spacecraft per year.(Associated Press, “Russians Send Supply Ship on Way to Space Station,” 2 February 2003.)
 NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the members of the Space Shuttle Mishap Interagency Investigation Board, also known as the Gehman Board. To chair the Board, NASA had appointed retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr., who had cochaired the independent commission that investigated the attack on the USS Cole in Aden, Yemen, on 12 October 2000. Other members included Rear Admiral Stephen A. Turcotte of the U.S. Naval Safety Center; Major General John L. Barry of the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Ohio; Major General Kenneth W. Hess of Kirtland Air Force Base in New Mexico; James N. Hallock of the U.S. Department of Transportation; Steven B. Wallace of the FAA; and Brigadier General Duane W. Deal of the 21st Space Wing at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado. Several senior- level NASA leaders were also named to the panel: G. Scott Hubbard, Director of NASA’s ARC; Bryan D. O’Connor, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance and a former astronaut; and Theron M. Bradley Jr., NASA’s Chief Engineer. NASA intended the Gehman Board to make a parallel investigation, complementing NASA’s own internal investigation. The Board would have access to the same scientific information and to the cooperation of the same agencies as NASA.(NASA, “NASA Announces Space Shuttle Columbia Accident Investigation Board (The Gehman Board),” news release 03-034, ftp://ftp.hq.nasa.gov/pub/pao/pressrel/2003/03-034.txt (accessed 15 July 2008); David Arnold, “Specialist Panel Convenes, Begins Search for Cause,” Boston Globe, 4 February 2003.)
 Progress M-47/ISS-10P docked with the ISS, delivering 2.75 tons (2.5 tonnes or 2,495 kilograms) of supplies, which would enable the Expedition 6 crew to remain at the station until June without Shuttle support. The crewRussian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin and American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettithad served at the outpost for 73 days, and NASA had scheduled their return to Earth on Shuttle Atlantis for 1 March. However, in the wake of the Columbia disaster, NASA had grounded all Shuttles indefinitely. Although the suspension of Shuttle flights did not place the ISS crew in danger, it did affect the schedule of space station construction and interrupted NASA’s plan to install a high-speed gyroscope at the station in March, to replace one that had broken down in June 2002. With only three operational gyroscopes, the ISS would continue to drift, but NASA did not consider the matter a time-critical problem.(Todd Ackerman, “Cargo Craft Resupplies Outpost Crew Hanging in Orbit,” Houston Chronicle, 5 February 2003; NASA, “Spaceflight 2003: International Space Station Goals and Objectives,” http://www.nasa.gov/directorates/somd/reports/2003/iss.html (accessed 13 November 2009).)
 Telesat Canada selected Astrium, Europe’s largest space company, to manufacture a replacement for its Anik F1 satellitethe Anik F1R. Engineers had determined that the Anik F1, based on the 702 platform of Boeing Satellite Systems, was defective. Several of the Boeing-built 702 satellites were “afflicted with a solar panel malady” expected to shorten each craft’s operational lifetime. Telesat planned to base the Anik F1R, which would carry 24 C-band and 32 Ku-band transponders, on Astrium’s Eurostar 3000 platform.(Telesat, “Telesat Selects European Manufacturer for New Anik F Satellite,” news release, 4 February 2003, http://www.telesat.ca/news/releases/2003/03-02-e.asp (accessed 12 August 2008); Sam Silverstein, “Telesat Canada Selects Astrium to Replace Anik F1,” Space News, 4 February 2003.)
 NASA notified SPACEHAB Inc. that NASA had not renewed SPACEHAB’s contracts for building and maintaining the Space Vehicle Mockup Facility (SVMF), the facility with ISS mockups at NASA’s JSC, and for operating the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory (NBL) facility, where astronauts simulate spacewalks in a swimming pool. Instead, NASA had awarded the multiyear contract, valued at up to US$78.97 million, to Raytheon Technical Services of Houston. SPACEHAB’s subsidiary Johnson Engineering had operated the NBL for approximately 10 years. In 1998 SPACEHAB had acquired Johnson Engineering and had continued to operate the NBL. SPACEHAB had depended on Johnson Engineering and the NBL/SVMF contract for about half of its US$100 million in annual revenues. The loss of the contract followed SPACEHAB’s loss of one of its major flight articles, the Research Double Module, a pressurized science facility that had made its debut during STS-107 on the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia. SPACEHAB had insured the module for only US$17.7 million of its US$62.7 million value. SPACEHAB expected to contract with NASA to fly additional modules, which would enable the company to recoup its investment in the hardware.(NASA, “NASA Buoyancy Laboratory, Space Vehicle Mockup Facility Contract Awarded,” news release, 7 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_c03004_bb_030207.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Brian Berger, “Double Whammy: Spacehab Loses NASA Contract,” Space News, 12 February 2003; Brian Berger, “$100 Million Commercial Science Lab Lost on Columbia Was Insured,” Space News, 2 February 2003.)
 Senator John McCain (R-AZ), chair of the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, and U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY), chair of the U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, cochaired a joint hearing of congressional leaders, focusing on the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. Recommendations resulting from the hearing prompted NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe to issue a second amendment to the charter of the Space Shuttle Accident Investigation Board, an independent panel led by retired U.S. Navy Admiral Harold W. Gehman Jr. and known as the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) or, informally, as the Gehman Board. The amendment removed any requirement, real or perceived, instructing Gehman to “coordinate or await approval from NASA for any dimension of the panel’s investigation.”(NASA, “Joint Congressional Hearing Results in Second Charter Amendment for Gehman Board Columbia Accident Briefing,” news release 03-069, 12 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03069.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
 NASA announced that it had positively identified the remains of all seven members of STS-107 at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and that officials in Angelina County, Texas, had signed the death certificates. Eileen Hawley, spokesperson for NASA’s JSC in Houston, said that officials had released the crew members’ remains to their families for private memorial services. NASA had already returned the remains of Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon to Israel, where burial services had taken place on 11 February.(NASA JSC, “Columbia Astronaut Remains Identified,” news release H03-070, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2003/h03-070.html (accessed 14 August 2008); Associated Press, “Remains of All Shuttle Astronauts Identified,” 14 February 2003.)
 NASA issued a statement on behalf of the CAIB announcing that preliminary analysis performed by a NASA working group indicated that the temperature level in Columbia’s left wheel well during reentry indicated the presence of plasma. Heat transfer related to a missing tile in the structure would not have been sufficient to elevate the temperature to the level revealed in the preliminary analysis.(NASA, “Statement by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-072, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03072.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
 NASA announced the Level 1 requirements for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) system, the next- generation system of space vehicles designed to transport crews to and from the ISS and to provide rescue missions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had proposed the concept in November 2002 “as a way to take some of the pressure off the aging space shuttle fleet.” NASA had envisioned a simple craft, easier to launch and with greater maneuverability in orbit. However, NASA had not intended the OSP system as a substitute for the Shuttle, the only U.S. spacecraft able to haul heavy cargo into space. The OSP concept was to include in its first design an escape pod for the ISS, ready for use by 2010. Its second version, intended for completion by 2012 would be a craft capable of transporting people.(NASA, “Initial Requirements Set for Orbital Space Plane System,” news release 03-073, 18 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03073.html (accessed 16 July 2008); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “NASA Views Space Plane as Helpmate to Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 19 February 2003.)
 NASA released a newly revised charter for the CAIB, permitting the Board’s chairperson to replace its executive secretary with someone not working for NASA. The revision was the third attempt to quell congressional concerns about the Board’s independence. Legislators had mixed reactions to the new revisionsome saw it as an improvement, but others maintained that the charter did little to guarantee a credible inquiry and argued that its provisions might deter whistleblowers. U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that the revision had not addressed the fundamental problems: NASA had appointed the commission members; NASA had staffed the commission; and the commission reported to NASA.(Richard A. Oppel Jr., “New Charter for Shuttle Board, But Critics Are Not Appeased,” New York Times, 19 February 2003.)
 NASA’s Deputy Chief of Staff Scott Pace announced that NASA would not seek a waiver to the Iran Non-Proliferation Act of 2000 (Pub.L.No.106-178) The law prohibited NASA from purchasing space hardware from Russia unless Russia certified that Russian aerospace companies had not aided Iranian missile programs for at least a year. If the White House did not grant a waiver, NASA would be unable to buy Russian Progress and Soyuz vehicles―the United States’ only viable means of reaching the ISS after the suspension of Shuttle flights. Pace explained that NASA would not press the White House for a waiver, because NASA did not intend “to make foreign policy,” acknowledging that the White House or the U.S. Department of State was responsible for seeking changes in the Iran Non-Proliferation Act, if appropriate.(Brian Berger, “NASA Official: Agency Won’t Seek Waiver to Iran Act,” Space News, 20 February 2003.)
 President George W. Bush signed into law an omnibus appropriations bill (Pub.L.No.108-7), setting aside US$50 million to help NASA fund its investigation of the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster. Taking into account that NASA’s costs could exceed US$50 million to cover the investigation and to correct the problems with the Shuttle program, the law allowed NASA to seek additional funding if necessary. U.S. Senator Bill Nelson (D-FL) initiated discussion about the need for additional funding for the Columbia accident investigation, urging senior members of the Senate responsible for appropriations to include enough money to help NASA avoid further erosion of the already depleted Shuttle funds. The Challenger accident investigation had cost the United States US$75 million.(Frank Oliveri, “NASA Gets $50 Million for Shuttle Investigation,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 22 February 2003.)
 Having received a very weak signal from the Pioneer 10 spacecraft on 22 January 2003, NASA announced that it would make no further attempts to contact the craft. On 2 March 1972, NASA had launched Pioneer 10, built by TRW Inc., on a three-stage Atlas-Centaur rocket. In just 12 weeks, Pioneer 10 had traveled beyond Mars, had become the first spacecraft to pass through the asteroid belt, and had continued to travel beyond Jupiter into deep space, “venturing into places where nothing built by humanity had ever gone before.” Pioneer 10 had last returned telemetry data on 27 April 2002. In the previous three attempts of JPL’s Deep Space Network to contact it, Pioneer 10 had emitted very weak response signals, and in the last attempt at contact on 7 February, the Deep Space Network had detected no signal from the spacecraft. Engineers reported that Pioneer 10’s radioisotope power source had decayed. Originally, NASA had designed Pioneer 10 for a 21-month mission, but the spacecraft had lasted more than 30 years.(NASA, “Pioneer 10 Spacecraft Sends Last Signal,” news release 03-082, 25 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03082.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
 NASA researchers announced that the ER-2, a modified U-2 aircraft, had collected tiny interplanetary dust particles (IDPs) in Earth’s stratosphere, which likely contained bits of ancient stars. The particles, collected over a period of two decades, included the only samples of comets that researchers were able to study in a laboratory. Lindsay Keller, a researcher in the Office of Astromaterials Research and Exploration Science at NASA’s JSC, remarked that the stardust grains were typical of the kind of dust available at the beginning of the solar systemthe building blocks of the Sun and planets. Scott Messenger, an astrophysicist at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, described the IDPs as rich in stardust and molecular cloud material, suggesting that the particles had remained essentially unchanged since the solar system’s formation. To detect the remnants of the early stars, scientists had used Washington University’s new type of ion microprobe, which measured isotopic ratios on scales much smaller than previously possible.(NASA, “NASA Finds Remnants of Ancient Stars in Earth’s Upper Atmosphere,” news release 03-084, 27 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_03084.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
 NASA released a flight-deck videotape, which the crew of STS-107 had recorded on 1 February between 8:35 and 8:48 a.m. (EST). NASA had recovered the videotape from the Shuttle’s crash site near Palestine, Texas. The video showed flight-deck activity as Columbia passed over the south central Pacific Ocean at an altitude of approximately 500,000 feet. Filmed with a small on- board camera, mounted to the right of Pilot William C. McCool and then passed to Mission Specialist Laurel B. Clark, the videotape showed Commander Rick D. Husband, Pilot McCool, Mission Specialist Kalpana Chawla, and Mission Specialist Clark on the flight deck during reentry. The astronauts were conversing among themselves as they worked through routine checklist activities with flight controllers at NASA’s Mission Control.(NASA, “NASA Releases Columbia Crew Cabin Video,” news release N03-23, 28 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/feb/HP_news_n03023.html (accessed 16 July 2008).)
 Missile Defense Agency (MDA) officials announced that the flight test in December 2002 of the Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system had been unsuccessful, because a faulty computer-chip connection in the Raytheon exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) had prevented the EKV from separating from its booster during flight. Although the MDA had not recovered the EKV, engineers had determined the problem with the chip’s connection using laboratory simulations, concluding that no significant underlying problem with the EKV technology had caused the failure. The December test, the third unsuccessful GMD intercept attempt, had been the second attempt in which the EKV had failed to separate from the booster. U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Ronald T. Kadish, Director of the MDA, remarked that quality-control problems had likely caused the test failure and announced the formation of an office to improve the MDA’s performance.(Marc Selinger, “Test Failure of GMD System Blamed on Problem with Computer Chip,” Aerospace Daily, 5 March 2003.)
 ESA formally opened its first deep space ground station in New Norcia, Australia. Construction on the US$47 million (EUR 28 million) facility had begun in April 2000. The key component of the station was a massive antenna, 40 meters (125 feet) high and weighing 600 tonnes (661.4 tons or 600,000 kilograms), with a 35-meter (110-foot) dish. ESA had selected the New Norcia site because its distance from urban areas protected it from interference from other transmission devices, its latitude was perfect for deep space operations, and its weather was excellent. ESA had built and opened the station in time for it to play a key role in ESA’s Mars Express mission, scheduled for launch in June. The Mars Express craft would carry a lander dubbed Beagle 2―named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life―which would map the surface, subsurface, atmosphere, and ionosphere of Mars.(ESA, “ESA’s First Deep Space Ground Station Opens in Western Australia,” ESA news release 14-2003, 5 March 2003, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_14_2003_p_EN.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Australian Town Host to European Space Quest,” 6 March 2003.)
 NASA announced that Administrator Sean O’Keefe had appointed three new members to the CAIB in compliance with a request from CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. The new members were Douglas D. Osheroff, the J. G. Jackson and C. J. Wood Professor of Physics and Applied Physics at Stanford University and a 1996 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics; Sally K. Ride, a physicist and professor of Space Science at the University of California, San Diego, as well as a former NASA astronaut and the first American woman in space; and John M. Logsdon, Director of the George Washington University Space Policy Institute. O’Keefe had also appointed NASA astronaut retired U.S. Air Force Colonel Michael J. Bloomfield, in response to Gehman’s request that Bloomfield replace former astronaut Bryan D. O’Connor as Astronaut Advisor to the Board. O’Connor would return to NASA Headquarters in his role as NASA Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “New Members Added to the Columbia Accident Investigation Board,” news release 03-097, 5 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03097.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 Four witnesses appeared before the CAIB at its first public hearing. Director of NASA’s JSC Jefferson D. Howell Jr. and Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore spoke about workforce issues, particularly, about NASA’s concern regarding the erosion of its skill base. Keith Chong, a senior scientist at the Boeing Company, discussed Boeing’s work on the foam insulation applied to large propellant tanks such as the Shuttle’s external tank and the Boeing Delta 4 booster. Henry McDonald, former Director of NASA’s ARC, discussed the Space Shuttle Independent Assessment Team (SIAT), which he had led before leaving NASA. The SIAT report had identified problems within the Shuttle program. McDonald expressed disappointment that NASA had not implemented some of the SIAT’s recommendations. He said that he believed some of the recommended improvements, such as modernized records, could have significantly influenced decisions that NASA had based on risk assessments.(Leonard David, “Columbia Accident Hearing Probes NASA Workforce Erosion, Shuttle Safety Issues,” Space.com, 6 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_hearing_030306.html (accessed 29 August 2008); Matthew L. Wald, “NASA Records in Disarray, Study Leader Tells Board,” New York Times, 7 March 2003. 385 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593, 1 April 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx593.html (accessed 28 August 2008); Reuters, “Delta 4 Sends Up Its First U.S. Air Force Satellite,” 10 March 2003.)
 The newest Boeing Delta rocket, the Delta 4, launched the USA 167also known as the Defense Satellite Communications Systems Phase 3 (DSCSIII-A3), or Discus satelliteinto orbit, from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The American geostationary military communications satellite was the first U.S. Air Force craft launched atop Boeing’s newest Delta rocket, as well as the first mission for the U.S. Air Force’s Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program. The craft, a triaxially stabilized spacecraft with solar power of 1.24 kilowatts, operating at six superhigh frequencies between 40 and 85 megahertz, joined the DSCS III constellation of eight similar craft to provide very secure global links to the U.S. military. The launch of the Discus satellite featured the smallest of the Delta 4’s several possible configurations, with two stages and no booster rocket.
 NASA scientist Robert Michael Hornstein died of a brain tumor at the age of 57. Hornstein had worked for NASA since 1968, directing its worldwide network of antennas used for communicating with orbiting spacecraft. Hornstein, who had joined NASA during the Apollo program to design programs for ground tracking systems, was “recognized for helping save the Apollo 9 mission from being aborted shortly after launch when he modified tracking software to compensate for a computer malfunction in the launch vehicle.” As Ground Networks Director, Hornstein had helped administer network-tracking facilities during Space Shuttle orbits, the Voyager program, the Galileo recovery effort and mission to Jupiter, the Magellan program, and the international Halley’s Comet tracking program. He had helped manage the upgrade of Deep Space Network facilities in Australia, California, and Spain and had acted as NASA’s primary representative in arranging cooperative tracking efforts with other countries. NASA had awarded Hornstein its Outstanding Leadership Award and Exceptional Service Medal, and the Soviet Union had honored him with membership in its Federation of Cosmonautics.(Washington Post, “Robert Hornstein; NASA Scientist Ran Tracking System,” 28 March 2003.)
 NASA awarded Wyle Laboratories Inc. a five-year contract to perform a range of activities in the Office of Bioastronautics of the Space and Life Sciences organization at NASA’s JSC. Previously, NASA had relied on multiple contracts to perform these tasks. The contract was a cost-plus-award-fee contract with indefinite quantity/indefinite delivery and level-of-effort work. Although the base period of the contract was five years, two options could extend it to 10 years, bringing the total value to US$968.9 million.(NASA, “Wyle Wins NASA Contract To Support Bioastronautics,” news release c03-f, 11 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03f.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 The U.S. Air Force Space Command announced its planned elimination of 1,125 positions over the next seven years, as part of a service-wide, post-September 11 initiative to reduce staffing levels. The move would free it to “pour more resources into the Air Force’s ‘highest priority missions’,” such as special operations and intelligence. The plan called for the elimination of 314 civilian and 442 military positions by October 2004, at both senior and lower levels. U.S. Air Force Major Sean McKenna, a Space Command spokesperson, commented that the reductions did not indicate that the Air Force had assigned lower priority to space.(Jeremy Singer, “Air Force Space Command To Cut Staff,” Space News, 13 March 2003.)
 NASA announced its selection of the Time History of Events and Macroscale Interactions during Substorms (THEMIS) project for the next mission of NASA’s Medium-class Explorer (MIDEX) program. The mission would study the causes of auroras. THEMIS comprised five small satellites with identical suites of electrical, magnetic, and particle detectors. With a launch date set for 2007, NASA would place the craft in carefully coordinated orbits, where they would line up along Earth’s magnetic tail every four days, to track disturbances. THEMIS satellite data would combine with data gathered from a network of observatories across the Arctic Circle. NASA also announced that it had the opportunity to select an instrument for ESA’s Extreme Universe Space Observatory mission aboard the ISS, which would observe the blue light generated when high-energy cosmic rays collide with Earth’s atmosphere.(NASA, “NASA Selects Next Medium-Class Explorer Mission,” news release c03h, 20 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03h.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 NASA awarded a contract valued at up to US$238.7 million to the Physical Science Laboratory at New Mexico State University, to operate and maintain scientific balloon facilities and to provide engineering support for the NASA Scientific Balloon Program. The four-year contract with two three-year options had a baseline value of US$39.8 million.(NASA, “NASA Selects PSL for Balloon Program Support Contract,” news release c03-g, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03g.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 In the CAIB’s second public hearing, expert witnesses discussed what they knew about the reentry of Space Shuttle Columbia on 1 February. William H. Ailor III, Director of the Center for Orbital and Reentry Debris Studies at the Aerospace Corporation, explained to the CAIB that part of the difficulty of deciphering the precise cause of the orbiter’s breakup was that space agencies had done little work over the past years in reconstructing spacecraft breakups. The lack of a systematic effort to retrieve debris from such incidents compounded the problem. R. Douglas White, Director for Operations Requirements, Orbiter Element Department for United Space Alliance, the prime contractor for NASA’s Space Shuttle Program, provided a “dramatic portrayal of Columbia’s troubled trajectory from orbit.” He drew attention to the behavior of Columbia’s aileron, the hinged control surface attached to the craft’s trailing edge, remarking that its behavior was a first indication that “something odd was happening to the space plane.” Paul Hill, Space Shuttle and ISS Flight Director at NASA’s JSC and leader of the team piecing together the still and video images of the Shuttle’s final minutes, told the CAIB about the work of the image analysts. Hill also expressed gratitude to the public for submitting amateur photographs and videos for analysis.(Leonard David, “Columbia Board Hearing: ‘Clues, Critical Events’ Destroyed on Reentry,” Space.com, 18 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030318.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
 NASA opened its inaugural annual Service Life Extension Program (SLEP) Summit at the NASA Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. SLEP was part of the new Integrated Space Transportation Plan (ISTP) established to “ensure the viability of the Space Shuttle Program.” NASA intended the annual summit to provide a forum to aid the U.S. spaceflight community in shaping long-range strategy, setting priorities, and determining the selection and recommendation process to sustain the Shuttle system. In the wake of the Columbia tragedy, the summit also addressed return-to-flight issues in its first meeting. The summit brought together approximately 200 government and aerospace industry professionals who heard from seven SLEP panels: Safety, Sustainability, Infrastructure, Aerospace Industry, Performance, Operations, and Resources. Panels consolidated and submitted their recommendations to NASA’s Space Flight Leadership Council (SFLC), which then identified 60 candidate projects for further consideration and chartered a team to prepare an internal submission, which SLEP would vet over the summer, during NASA’s upcoming FY 2005 budget process. SLEP intended to refine its long-term strategy further at the following year’s summit.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Holds First Summit,” news release n03-030, 14 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_n03030.html (accessed 25 August 2008); NASA, “NASA Develops Long-Term Planning Process for Space Shuttle,” news release 03-119, 24 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03119.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 NASA announced the replacement of its Mishap Response Team with the newly formed NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT), which would continue to support the CAIB. NASA had formed the Mishap Response Team within hours of the Columbia disaster on 1 February but had drawn criticism for the team’s composition, which included staff that had directly overseen the Shuttle’s mission. Linda Ham had led the Mishap Response Team, even though, as a senior Shuttle program manager, she had assisted in making key decisions during the 16-day Columbia mission. NASA and the CAIB intended for the NAIT to support the CAIB, and they had organized the NAIT to mirror the CAIB’s structure, with three subsections: materials, operations, and engineering. NASA had appointed Deputy Director of JSC Randy Stone to chair the NAIT.(NASA, “NASA Columbia Accident Support Activities Reorganized,” news release 03-113, 21 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03113.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Robyn Suriano, “New Team Created To Help with Shuttle Probe,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 24 March 2003.)
 NASA officials and a CAIB spokesperson stated that NASA had recovered intact, from a field in Texas, the Orbital Experiment Support System, an electronic box containing vital information from Space Shuttle Columbia’s descent. NASA had designed the system to activate at about 400,000 feet, when Earth’s atmosphere first affects the Shuttle. The box contained data that the Shuttle had not transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control via telemetry.(CNN, “Crucial Columbia Part Found,” 20 March 2003.)
 A NASA four-engine, P3-turboprop, “flying laboratory” airplane flew its last flight in a two- week-long series of flights scanning a section of Alaska’s coast. The scanning was part of a collaborative project between NASA, NOAA, and representatives from the University of Colorado and the University of Alaska at Fairbanks. The project, called Arctic 2003, had collected data about sea-ice variability for comparison with data that NASA’s Aqua satellite had collected. The Aqua had launched in May 2002 with a state-of-the-art radiometer for studying water systems. The P3 had carried equipment similar to Aqua’s radiometera Japanese- developed microwave scannerbut because it had flown closer to the ground than the Aqua, the P3 had been able to collect sharper images. P3 flights had traveled over Norton Sound, St. Lawrence Island, St. Matthew Island, Point Hope, and Barrow. In addition to the P3 and Aqua data, ground crews had traveled to some areas to collect samples of ice and snow.(Associated Press, “Flights Help Scientists Understand Sea Ice Changes,” 24 March 2003.)
 NASA announced that it had awarded US$39.9 million in additional work under the consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) with Lockheed Martin Space Operations Company, to fund NASA’s JPL’s maintenance and operation of the Deep Space Network in the United States, as well as to provide technical support to the Spanish and Australian Deep Space Network complexes. The additional work brought the total value of the CSOC to US$2.1 billion.(NASA, “NASA Awards $39.9 Million Contract Addition to Lockheed Martin,” news release c03-i, 25 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_c03i.html (25 August 2008).)
 In the CAIB’s third public meeting, U.S. Air Force Lieutenant General Aloysius G. Casey, a retired three-star general and former Director of the Space Division of Air Force Systems Command, presented his opinions about the Columbia disaster, based on his decades of experience with missiles and rocket systems. Casey shared with the Board his knowledge of high-speed impacts, referring to the insulating foam that had fallen from the Shuttle’s external tank 81 seconds after the 16 January launch. He also shared his knowledge of the level of testing necessary to determine whether a system is qualified to fly. Casey stated that NASA needed to “do a better job in quantifying the safety margins for all of the shuttle’s various systems and be more sensitive to clues the hardware may be offering when things don’t work as designed.” Board Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr., remarking that the “subject of ‘successful flights don’t re-establish margins’ has come back again and again,” called Casey’s insight very helpful. However, Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, noted that he had never considered falling foam to be a safety issue and that it had never caused “any significant damage in the program to date.” Rather than a safety issue, Bridges had considered the foam a maintenance concern. Bridges commented that if he had been aware of the safety implications, he would have recommended a stop to flying.(Jim Banke, “NASA Missed Trouble Signs, Expert Tells Columbia Board,” Space.com, 25 March 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030325.html (accessed 29 August 2008).)
 NASA awarded its Commercial Invention of the Year to the Video Image Stabilization and Registration System (VISAR) and its Government Invention of the Year to the Computer Implemented Empirical Mode Decomposition Method, also known as the Hilbert-Huang Transformation (HHT) Method. David H. Hathaway, a solar physicist, and Paul Meyer, an atmospheric scientist, both of NASA’s MSFC, had created the basis for the VISAR technology, which turns dark, jittery images into clearer stable images. NASA had developed VISAR in response to an FBI request for assistance. The FBI first used VISAR in 1996 to analyze video of the bombing at the Olympic Summer Games in Atlanta. At the time of the award, investigators were using VISAR to help isolate images collected during the launch of the ill-fated Space Shuttle Columbia, images that they were examining to locate possible damage to the orbiter. Norden E. Huang, Director of the Goddard Institute of Data Analysis at NASA’s GSFC, had invented the HHT Method, which had applications in a variety of fields. Researchers could use the HHT Method in the study of topics as diverse as climate cycles, earthquake engineering, geophysical exploration, submarine design, turbulence flow, basic nonlinear mathematics, satellite data analysis, structural damage detection, nonlinear wave evolution, variations in solar neutrinos, blood pressure variations, and heart arrhythmias. NOAA had used the HHT Method to analyze sea-surface temperature data collected by Earth-orbiting spacecraft, successfully linking environmental changes with weather changes.(NASA, “NASA Selects Commercial and Government Inventions of the Year,” news release 03-120, 26 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03120.html (accessed 25 August 2008); Brian Lawson, “ NASA Cites Two for Imaging Work: Invention Has Been Used To Help Law Enforcement Effort,” Huntsville Times (AL), 27 March 2003.)
 On the 35th anniversary of the accident that killed Yuri Gagarin, the Russian daily Komsomolskaya Pravda published extracts of a secret investigation of Russia’s KGB (the Soviet-era Office of State Security) into the cause of the Soviet cosmonaut’s death. Gagarin and his instructor had died on 27 March 1968, during a routine training exercise at the Chkalovsky Air Base outside Moscow. The government had ordered three official investigations, one by the civilian government and two military, but all three had ruled out sabotage. An inspection of Gagarin’s MiG-15 had identified no mechanical failures and investigators had concluded that the fighter “went into a spin after either hitting birds or suddenly swerving to avoid a weather balloon or another aircraft.” The circumstances of his death had since “been cloaked in mystery and rumours that the Communist Party had Gagarin killed because of his love of drink and women.” The KGB’s counterintelligence unit had conducted its own secret investigation, finding that ground staff’s actions had “amounted to a ‘dangerous violation’ of standing instructions,” leading to the death of Gagarin and his instructor.(Ben Aris, “KGB Held Ground Staff To Blame for Gagarin’s Death,” Daily Telegraph (UK), 28 March 2003. 400 Kathy Sawyer, “Columbia’s Last Seconds Recorded,” Washington Post, 28 March 2003)
 Investigators of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident stated that the recently recovered Orbital Experiment Support System, which stored data about temperature, aerodynamic pressure, vibration, and other variables, appeared to contain information up to a fraction of a second before the orbiter broke apart over Texas. Technicians had located a time tag on the tape indicating that it had stored data until 9:00:18 a.m. (EST) on 1 February. 
 NASA announced the publication in the Journal of Geophysical Research of the conclusions of a research team that had used data spanning the years 1991 through 2000, which the Microwave Limb Sounder on NASA’s Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite had collected. The team had found that ozone depletion over Earth’s Arctic region varies in amount, timing, and pattern of loss, confirming previous variations in Arctic ozone-loss estimates. The team’s findings provided the first “consistent, three-dimensional picture of ozone loss during multiple Arctic winters.” (NASA, “NASA Finds Wide Annual Fluctuations in Arctic Ozone Loss,” news release 03-125, 28 March 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/mar/HP_news_03125.html (accessed 25 August 2008).)
 Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced an agreement between NASA and the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA), which provided for NIMA to capture detailed satellite images of Space Shuttles in orbit. NASA had sought this agreement with NIMA because of critics’ “pointed questioning” of NASA’s decision not to capture satellite images that it could have used to check for damage to Columbia’s heat shields while the Shuttle was in orbit. The agreement would enable NASA to “employ NIMA assets during targets of opportunity” without requiring NASA to make a specific request for imaging. Before the disaster, NASA had turned down a NIMA offer to capture images of Columbia, and NASA officials had withdrawn an unofficial request for U.S. Air Force telescopes to capture images. O’Keefe stated that the agreement did not represent any NASA decision “about whether those images might have helped determine damage” to Columbia.(Associated Press, “Military To Capture Future Shuttle Flight Images,” 29 March 2003. 123)
 Japan launched two reconnaissance satellitesInformation Gathering Satellites (IGSs), IGS 1A and IGS 1Batop an H-2 rocket from Tanegashima Space Center. The pair, the first of at least four such spacecraft that Japan intended to place in orbit as part of a US$2.05 billion program, were capable of monitoring global natural disasters and hurricanes, as well as observing nuclear explosions and missile launches in nearby countries. Because the craft were able to monitor weather events, the launch did not violate the terms of the Japan-North Korea Declaration of September 2002. However, Japanese space officials acknowledged that Japan had developed the program in reaction to the “Taepodong shock,” when a North Korean Taepodong ballistic missile flew over Japan’s main island in 1998. North Korea protested the IGS program as a “‘hostile act’ that violates the spirit” of the countries’ bilateral agreement. One of the IGS craft carried optical cameras with 1-meter (3.3-foot) resolution and the other carried synthetic-aperture radar to capture images with resolutions of several meters. Japanese space officials provided no information about which craft carried which instrument.(NASA, Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan’s First Spy Satellites Reach Earth Orbit,” 27 March 2003.)
 An American GPS satellite, GPS 2R-9, launched atop a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS 2R-9also known as NAVSTAR 52 and USA 168replaced the aging GPS 2-5, which had been in orbit since 1989. The fleet of GPS satellites consisted of 28 spacecraft.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 593; Kelly Young, “Delta 2 To Carry GPS Satellite into Space,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 31 March 2003.)
 NASA named astronaut and veteran Shuttle Commander James D. Halsell Jr. to lead its Return to Flight Team, which would prepare for the first Shuttle launch since the loss of Columbia, to occur as early as September 2003. Halsell had logged more than 1,250 hours in space on five Shuttle missions and, most recently, had served as Manager of Shuttle Launch Integration at NASA’s KSC. Before the Columbia disaster, NASA had assigned Halsell to STS-118, a mission to the ISS scheduled for later in 2003.(Larry Wheeler, “NASA Names Shuttle Leader,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 April 2003.)
 The Russian military successfully launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome a military communications satellite aboard a Molniya-M booster. The purpose of the satellite Molniya 1-92 was to orbit above the far northern regions of Russia relaying commands and communications among military forces. At the lower end of its orbit, the craft would sweep quickly over the Southern Hemisphere, returning to orbit above northern Russia. From this position, the craft would serve users who were out of range of most communications satellites, which, traditionally, orbit at geostationary positions above the equator.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594, 1 May 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx594.html (accessed 14 October 2008); Stephen Clark, “Military Spacecraft Launched by Russian Forces,” Spaceflight Now, 2 April 2003.)
 Alex Roland, a history professor at Duke University and former NASA historian, and Brian E. Chase, Executive Director of the National Space Society and a former congressional aide, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space concerning problems in NASA’s Space Shuttle Program. Roland stated that the Shuttle was not sustainable as a safe, reliable, and economical launch vehicle and recommended its phaseout. Roland faulted NASA for ignoring the findings of the Presidential Commission on the Space Shuttle Challenger Accident (Rogers Commission), which had paved the way for the Shuttle to return to flight after the Challenger disaster in 1986. The Rogers Commission had recommended that NASA begin developing a next-generation launch vehicle immediately. However, 16 years later, NASA continued to rely on the Space Shuttle and had no replacement in sight. Chase recommended the short-term maintenance of the remaining Shuttles and endorsed the George W. Bush administration’s plan to develop an Orbital Space Plane (OSP) ready to transport crews to the ISS by 2010. He also recommended that NASA use commercial heavy-lift launch vehicles for hauling cargo to the space station.(Jefferson Morris, “Former NASA Historian Urges Phaseout of Shuttle,” Aerospace Daily, 4 April 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Experts Disagree on Future of Shuttle,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 3 April 2003.)
 Boeing announced that its Integrated Defense Systems unit had signed a contract with the Japan Defense Agency and the trading company ITOCHU Corporation to build the first aircraft of the Japan Air Self Defense Force 767 Tanker Transport Program, comprising four aircraft and support. For its 767 Tanker Transport, Japan had selected the military derivative of the 767- 200ER commercial aircraft, reconfigured with an advanced Boeing air-refueling boom and an advanced remote aerial refueling operator system. With its selection of the convertible freighter configuration, Japan would have the flexibility to carry either cargo or passengers. The 767 Tanker Transport Program would enable Japan to meet its commitment to international cooperative efforts, such as delivering humanitarian aid and meeting the air-refueling needs of Japan and other countries around the world. (The Boeing Company, “Boeing, Japan Sign 767 Tanker Transport Contract,” news release, 4 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030404m.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
 NASA and industry researchers completed a series, begun on 1 April, of collision-avoidance tests between airplanes and remotely controlled UAVs. Although UAVs had achieved high- profile military roles overseas, the United States had not yet approved the use of robotic drones within U.S. airspace. The collision-avoidance tests were part of the efforts of the FAA, NASA, and the DOD to determine what safety and reliability standards UAVs would need to meet. For example, the FAA sought to ensure that robotic drones could respond to instructions from air traffic controllers as quickly as human pilots of conventional aircraft could respond. Researchers had created 20 collision scenarios in restricted airspace over four days, using an F/A-18 jet and a propeller-driven Beechcraft. During the tests, ground-based pilots operating the experimental Proteus drone had only been able to see evidence of the other two planes in the form of a stream of radar and other data and had never actually observed the physical aircraft. Yet, in each scenario, the pilots had been able to maneuver the drone to avoid colliding with the other aircraft.(Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “NASA Envisions Robot Planes in U.S. Skies,” 5 April 2003. 125)
 The CAIB questioned NASA flight managers and tank engineers about damage from launch debris―a key concern of the CAIB―during 4 hours of technical testimony at a public hearing. The CAIB sought to uncover why NASA officials had considered the recurrent problem of foam falling during launches a maintenance issue rather than a flight safety concern. NASA testimony included the description of the layers of checks, justifications, and paperwork required to certify a Shuttle for launch, as well as evidence of NASA engineers’ collective conviction that the shedding foam did not present a threat to flight safety and, therefore, was not a sufficient reason to cancel a launch. In October 2002, foam falling from the bipod area of its external tankthe area where two metal struts connect the fuel reservoir to the orbiterhad struck Space Shuttle Atlantis. The foam that had fallen from Space Shuttle Columbia striking its wing had come from the same area of Columbia’s external tank as the foam that had struck Atlantis. However, engineers and managers had examined Atlantis’s debris incident and had determined that falling foam did not present a safety-of-flight concern for Columbia. Nevertheless, because of the Atlantis incident, managers had requested that engineers responsible for the Shuttle’s external tank develop a plan to prevent debris from breaking away from the bipod area of the tank. Engineers had not completed the plan at the time of Columbia’s flight.(Todd Halvorson, “Engineers: Launch Debris Troublesome Since Start,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Foam Problem,” 8 April 2003.)
 The U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin launched the Milstar II military communications satellite into orbit aboard a Titan 4B launch vehicle with a Centaur upper stage. The satellite joined four other Milstar satellites already in orbit, completing the constellation. The Milstar constellation provided secure, global communication links for U.S. military joint forces, transmitting voice, data, and imagery, as well as providing video-teleconferencing capabilities. Milstar II was the third satellite to carry the Boeing Satellite Systems–built, medium-data-rate payload, which had 32 channels, each capable of processing data at speeds of 1.5 megabits per second. The craft carried a low-data-rate payload as well, built by Northrop Grumman Space Technology.(Lockheed Martin, “U.S. Air Force and Lockheed Martin Team up to Successfully Launch Final Milstar II Satellite on a Titan IV B Rocket,” news release, 8 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/USAirForceLockheedMartinTeamUpSucce.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
 American astronauts Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit undertook a 61⁄2-hour spacewalk at the ISS to finish preparing the station for the arrival of a new crew. In the second spacewalk of their four-month mission, Bowersox and Pettit worked on power connections, replaced lighting for a transport trolley, reconfigured cables on a navigational gyroscope, and secured covers on the station’s thermal control system. Cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin monitored the astronauts’ work from inside the ISS.(Reuters, “Astronauts End Space Walk from Orbiting Station,” 9 April 2003. 126)
 A European Ariane 5 rocket launched two satellites into orbit from Kourou, French GuianaPanAmSat’s Galaxy 12 commercial telecommunications satellite and the Indian Space Research Organisation’s (ISRO’s) INSAT 3A satellite. The Ariane 5G standard version was the first launch of an Ariane rocket since the enhanced Ariane 5 ECA had failed in December 2002, a failure that had prompted a complete review of the Ariane 5 system, particularly its main-stage cryogenic engine. The 1.8-tonne (2-ton, 1,800-kilogram, or 3,968-pound) Galaxy satellite built by Orbital Sciences Corporation carried 24 C-band transponders to provide voice, video, and data transmissions to North America and South America from its position at longitude 72o west. The 3-tonne (3.3-ton, 3,000-kilogram, or 6,614-pound) INSAT 3A geostationary communications and weather-monitoring satellite carried 12 C-band, 6 extended C-band, and 6 Ku-band transponders, to provide voice, video and data transmission to western Asia, eastern Asia, and India from its position at longitude 93.5o east. The ISRO satellite carried the typical INSAT package of visual, infrared, and water-vapor band sensors to monitor clouds and storms, as well as a separate transponder for an international search-and-rescue program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Peter B. de Selding, “Ariane 5 Successfully Returns to Flight,” Space News, 11 April 2003.)
 British Airways and Air France announced that, because of poor economic conditions, supersonic jet travel aboard Concorde jets would end in October after 26 years of the premium service. British Airways announced it would retire its fleet of seven at the end of October, and Air France announced it would stop flying its Concorde aircraft on 31 May, with a definitive retirement date for the fleet set for 31 October.(Los Angeles Times, “Economic Woes Bring End to Flights of Supersonic Jets,” 10 April 2003.)
 International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the Boeing-built AsiaSat 4 satellite aboard a Lockheed Martin–built Atlas 3 rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida, marking 64 consecutive successful launches for the Atlas rocket over 10 years. The mission was ILS’s third launch for AsiaSat, the dominant satellite operator in its region. Boeing Satellite Systems had designed the AsiaSat 4 craft, a high-power 601HP spacecraft, to provide 15 years of direct-to-home communications and broadband services to customers in Asia and Australia.(Lockheed Martin, “Atlas III Launch of Asiasat 4 Successful in 1st ILS Mission of 2003,” news release, 11 April 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/AtlasIIILaunch OfAsiaSat4)
 Boeing announced that Boeing Electronic Dynamic Devices Inc. (EDD) had won three new contracts―the Carbon-Based Ion Optics project, the NASA Evolutionary Xenon Thruster (NEXT) system, and the High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) project―under NASA’s In- Space Propulsion Program to develop advanced xenon ion–propulsion technologies. Teamed with NASA’s JPL and GRC, EDD would lead the two-phased effort to develop advanced carbon-based ion optics, ultimately testing designs for carbon-based ion optics for their potential use in the next-generation ion engine. According to terms of the second contract, EDD would support GRC in developing the NEXT system, a next-generation, high-power, ion-propulsion
 SuccessfulI.html (accessed 19 September 2008); The Boeing Company, “Boeing-Built AsiaSat 4 Communication Satellite Successfully Launched,” news release, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/
 2003/q2/nr_030411t.html (accessed 19 September 2008). system intended for space science missions. Under the third contract, EDD would support GRC in developing and testing technologies for the HiPEP project.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing EDD Wins NASA Contracts for Advanced Electric Propulsion,” news release, 14 April 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030414s.html (accessed 19 September 2008).)
 John E. Riley, a 33-year member of NASA’s Public Affairs Department, broadcast voice of NASA’s Mission Control for the Apollo program, and NASA spokesperson, died of cancer at the age of 78. He had begun working for NASA in 1959 and, as a member of the Apollo program team, had provided commentary during the first moonwalk. Riley had also initiated the practice of encouraging astronauts’ interviews with media and had traveled with astronauts internationally.(Matt Schwartz, “Obituary: Riley, 78, Longtime Spokesman for NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 21 April 2003.)
 The CAIB released its first two official recommendations, suggesting that before resuming Shuttle missions, NASA should 1) improve its inspections of the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings, and 2) ensure that U.S. spy satellites would capture detailed images of the orbiters during each mission. Although the Board had not yet begun developing its final report, the CAIB released preliminary recommendations so that NASA could begin to implement them expeditiously. The CAIB made the first recommendation because it had found that inspection techniques in place did not enable engineers to assess the structural integrity of the orbiter’s heat shield, considered a “criticality one” item. The failure of the heat shieldcomprising the reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC) panels that protect the front of the orbiter’s wings during reentry, the RCC panels’ supporting structure, and the attaching hardwarewould lead to the loss of the vehicle and crew. The CAIB made the second recommendation because it had discovered that NASA officials had cancelled an informal request that the U.S. military capture images of Columbia to check for possible damage caused by launch debris. NASA already had a new memorandum of agreement with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) to provide NASA with images of orbiting Shuttles. Previously, NIMA had only made images available upon request, but the CAIB recommended that NASA and NIMA make imaging each Shuttle flight a standard requirement.(Jim Banke, “Columbia Board Releases Two Recommendations to NASA,” Space.com, 17 April 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_caib_030417.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
 At the Mojave Airport in California, aircraft designer Burt Rutan unveiled for the first time his White Knight launch system and SpaceShipOne spacecraft, which he had built in secret. Rutan had designed the White Knight, a type of aircraft, to carry the spacecraft to 50,000 feet, where the White Knight would release SpaceShipOne to launch like an aircraft into a steep climb. Rutan had begun testing the launch platform at lower altitudes in August 2002, also testing on the ground the release mechanism between the spacecraft and the launch platform. In the public unveiling, Rutan flew the White Knight only. The craft flew to an altitude of 9,000 feet (2,734 meters) before spiraling down to make a soft but extremely short landing. Rutan demonstrated SpaceShipOne’s systems, explaining that the craft should land in the same manner as the launch system. The flight profile of the system allowed SpaceShipOne to reach 54 nautical miles (62 miles or 99.8 kilometers) maximum altitude over a flight patch of 35 miles (56.3 kilometers). NASA designated anyone flying at an altitude of over 50 miles (80.4 kilometers) as an astronaut. If Rutan’s system succeeded in flights outside the atmosphere, it would become the first private human spaceflight program.(Jon Bonne, “Private Manned Space Plane Unveiled,” MSNBC.com, 19 April 2003.)
 NASA announced the resignation of Space Shuttle Program Manager Ronald D. Dittemore. A 26-year veteran of NASA, Dittemore had supervised the Space Shuttle Program for more than four years. Dittemore had joined NASA in 1977 as a propulsion-systems engineer, working on orbital maneuvering and reaction-control systems for the Space Shuttle before his selection as a Space Shuttle Flight Director in 1985. In 1993 NASA had appointed him Deputy Manager for the Space Shuttle Program Integration and Operations Office in the Space Shuttle Program Office. He had also served as Manager of Space Shuttle Program Integration and as Chairperson of the Space Shuttle Mission Management Team before his selection in 1996 to manage the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office. He had become Space Shuttle Program Manager in 1999, assuming responsibility for the overall management, integration, and operation of the program. In announcing his departure, Dittemore remarked that, before the Columbia tragedy, he had been struggling over whether to leave NASA and had decided to resign in the spring of 2003. However, after the Columbia accident, he had immediately postponed his departure. Deputy Associate Administrator for the Space Shuttle Program Michael C. Kostelnik and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe credited Dittemore with keeping communications open between NASA and the public in the wake of the tragedy. Dittemore planned to remain in his position until the CAIB had finished its work and established a return-to-flight program, to enable NASA to make a smooth management transition.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post,” news release 03-149, 23 April 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/apr/HP_news_03149.html (accessed 19 September 2008); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Director Dittemore To Leave NASA,” 23 April 2003.)
 A panel of five retired NASA and contractor managers, whose expertise dated to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs, testified in a public hearing before the CAIB that engineers had never designed orbiters’ wings to sustain strikes from any form of debris. The panel members agreed that engineers had known in the 1970s that the RCC panels along the leading edge of the orbiters’ wings presented a technical challenge, and that NASA should have taken appropriate precautions against debris striking the RCC panels. Milton A. Silveira, who had helped design the orbiter, remarked that wings of airplanes were also incapable of sustaining such strikes. Robert F. Thompson, another designer of the orbiter, who had headed the Space Shuttle Program in the 1970s, added that providing an impenetrable wing edge was impossible. According to Thompson, if NASA had insisted on that standard, it would have had to abandon the Shuttle project. Diane Vaughn, a sociologist affiliated with Boston College, who in 1996 had published the book The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and Deviance at NASA, spoke to the panel about NASA’s approach to risk-management and decision-making systems. Vaughn observed that NASA had failed to address institutional problems present at the time of the Challenger disaster, and that as a result, NASA decision-makers had remained unable to access the type of data they needed to assess risk accurately and to act on that knowledge.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “NASA Pioneers Testify on Shuttle Columbia Tragedy,” 24 April 2003; Kathy Sawyer, “NASA Mistakes Will Repeat Without Changes, Board Told,” Washington Post, 24 April 2003.)
 The Russian military launched the geostationary Cosmos 2397 aboard a Proton-K rocket. According to rumor, Cosmos 2397, a classified spacecraft reportedly built by NPO Lavochkin, was an early warning satellite.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Program Manager Decides To Leave Post”; Stephen Clark, “Proton Lifts Military Satellite,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003.)
 The NASA Accident Investigation Team (NAIT) presented to the CAIB the results of its ongoing analysis of the Columbia disaster. Ten members of the CAIB were either present or listening via telephone, and 30 to 40 NASA and contractor personnel participated in the private briefing. The CAIB indicated that the Space Shuttle Program required more work in four areas―aerothermal analysis, foam-impact testing, testing of flown RCC panels, and metallurgical analysis from debris. According to the CAIB, NAIT had “provided an overview of the latest data-recorder information, and the CAIB issued its guidance based on that data and board investigators’ continuing analysis of the latest orbiter debris.”(William Harwood, “NASA, CAIB Investigators Compare Notes on Disaster,” Spaceflight Now, 24 April 2003. 424 Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Next Shuttle Crew Named as Columbia Probe Proceeds,” 25 April 2003.)
 NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named the commander, the pilot, and a mission specialist of the next Space Shuttle mission, even though NASA had not selected any dates for future Shuttle missions since the suspension of Shuttle flights following the Columbia disaster. O’Keefe said that NASA’s target to resume Shuttle flights was the end of the calendar year. O’Keefe said that the crew―Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of Japan’s NASDA―would be “challenged with the opportunity to be the first crew to return to flight.” O’Keefe said that the ISS partners would probably fill the other three slots with a three-member crew headed for the ISS.
 Soyuz TMA-2 launched aboard a Soyuz-U rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying one Russian cosmonaut and one American astronaut for a six-month stay at the ISS. American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko would replace the three-person crew that had lived at the space station since November 2002. An expert on solar flares, Lu had flown to Russia’s space station Mir in 1997 and to the fledgling ISS in 2000 on STS-106. Malenchenko and Lu had been fellow crew members aboard Space Shuttle Atlantis on STS-106. During that mission, Lu and Malenchenko had teamed up in a spacewalk to hook up exterior cables.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Chris Kindler, “Soyuz Capsule Includes NASA-Required Features,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 23 April 2003; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Named for Space Station Mission,” 2 April 2003, “NASA Mission Archives: STS-106,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/archives/sts-106.html (accessed 17 November 2008).)
 In its first launch since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in February, NASA launched its Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) research satellite aboard a Pegasus XL rocket released from an L-1011 cargo plane that had flown out of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. GALEX carried a telescope measuring 19.7 inches (50 centimeters) in diameter, designed to provide a wide-angle view of the ultraviolet light that distant galaxies emit. NASA had planned the mission, which would survey the light emitted by a million galaxies over 28 months, to learn more about galaxies dominated by hot, short-lived stars that give off a great deal of energy as ultraviolet light. The mission cost US$103.7 million.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 594; Associated Press, “NASA in 1st Launch Since Columbia Breakup,” 28 April 2003. 427 Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “BeppoSAX Satellite Falls Harmlessly into Ocean,” 30 April 2003.)
 The Dutch-Italian satellite known as BeppoSAX reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed into the equatorial Pacific Ocean seven years after its launch into orbit on 30 April 1996. The Italian Space Agency and the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace jointly operated the 3,086-pound (1,400-kilogram) x-ray satellite, best known for its discovery of 50 gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The Italian Space Agency had estimated that as much as 1,325 pounds (601 kilograms) of the craft could survive reentry, with individual pieces weighing 220 pounds (99.7 kilograms) and had, therefore, notified 39 countries that pieces of the spacecraft could potentially land in their territory. However, the debris falling closest to land splashed into the ocean 186 miles (299 kilometers) northwest of the Galapagos Islands.
 Investigators announced their discovery that thousands of worms known as C. elegans―part of a science experiment aboard Columbia―were still alive, having survived the violent, high-velocity reentry and impact, traveling at least 120 miles per hour (193 kilometers per hour). The containers holding the worms had remained sealed for several weeks following their recovery while accident investigators at NASA’s KSC processed them. Terri L. Lomax, a NASA space biologist, remarked that, although it was unclear what scientists would learn from the worms, the fact that they had survived the accident was data in and of itself.(Kathy Sawyer, “Worms Used for Study Survive Columbia Crash,” Washington Post, 1 May 2003.)
 The National Inventors Hall of Fame in Akron, Ohio, inducted 17 aviation and aerospace inventors, among them Harold A. Rosen, recognized for his pioneering work in developing the world’s first 24-hour commercial communications satellite and for his subsequent contributions to satellite communications. Rosen had led the Boeing Satellite Systems team that had begun developing the geostationary Syncom in 1959. The team had planned for Syncom to communicate directly and continuously with any ground station in its line of sight, in contrast to the communications satellites in use at the time, which required expensive tracking computers. The first Syncom had failed to launch successfully, but Syncom 2 had reached its synchronous orbit on 26 July 1963. Later that year, Syncom 2 had relayed by satellite the first live two-way call between heads of state―a phone call between President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC, and Nigerian Prime Minister Abubaker Balewa in Africa. Syncom 3 had brought live coverage of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics to U.S. viewers. The satellites had remained active through 1966, surpassing their one-year design life. David L. Ryan, Vice President and General Manager of Boeing Satellite Systems, remarked that contemporary satellites that deliver video, voice, and data communications are all descendants of Syncom, and “when Harold Rosen and his colleagues launched Syncom, they launched a revolution and changed the world.”(The Boeing Company, “Boeing Satellite Pioneer Harold Rosen Inducted to National Inventors Hall of Fame,” news release, 1 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030501n.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
 Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
 Boeing announced the successful completion of Phase III testing of the X-31A Vector aircraft―the world’s only international experimental airplane in the X-plane series to receive international collaboration―demonstrating the use of thrust-vectoring technologies for performing extremely short takeoff and landing (ESTOL) operations. The U.S. Navy, Germany’s defense procurement agency, the European Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, and Boeing Phantom Works had conducted the ESTOL demonstrations, carrying out the final flight on 29 April at Patuxent River Naval Air Station in Maryland. The demonstrations had consisted of a series of fully automated ESTOL landings on an actual runway using a high angle-of-attack landing, proving that an integrated flight-and-propulsion control system had potential use in ESTOL. Such capabilities would give fighter aircraft greater operational flexibility and lower life-cycle costs.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing X-31A Vector Completes International Flight Test Program,” news release, 7 May 2003, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2003/q2/nr_030507a.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
 NASA announced that it had selected several radioisotope-based, power-conversion technologies for research and development. The awards represented the first competitive technology procurement funded entirely by NASA’s Project Prometheus. The projects covered distinct areas in power-conversion technology: thermoelectrics, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling engines, and Brayton engines. NASA intended the awards to lay the foundation for technology development enabling new classes of missions, such as networked science stations on Mars and small spacecraft capable of complex maneuvers in deep space. Each award would cover three one-year performance periods with continued support from one period to the next, contingent on the program’s needs, availability of funds, and each team’s ability to meet milestones. The total funding was US$43 million divided into various increments covering fiscal years 2003 to 2006.(NASA, “Advanced Radioisotope-Power Technologies R&D Teams Selected,” contract release c03-n, 7 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03n.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
 The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)–D2 rocket from Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The main payload was the GSAT-2, a geostationary communications and space-monitoring satellite, which carried four C-band and two Ku-band transponders that would provide voice and video transmissions to India and neighboring countries. The GSLV-D2 also carried into orbit experimental payloads: a Coherent Radio Beacon Experiment, a Solar X-ray Spectrometer, an external Total Radiation Dose Monitor, a Radiation Sensitive Field Effect Transistor, and a Surface Change Monitor. However, its main mission was to test the GSLV-D2, an improved version of the GSLV first launched in April 2001.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595, 1 June 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx595.html (accessed 20 November 2008); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Second GSLV Rocket with GSAT,” Space.com, 8 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/gslv_launch_030508.html (accessed 1 December 2008).)
 The Japanese probe Muses-C―renamed Hayabusa (Falcon) after its deployment―launched from Kogoshima Space Center on the southern Japanese island of Kyushu, aboard an M-5 solid- fuel rocket. The probe’s mission was to rendezvous with the asteroid 1998 SF36, gather surface samples, and return to Earth. Japan’s Institute of Space and Astronautical Science expected the 510-kilogram (1,124-pound) spacecraft to arrive at the asteroid in June 2005. The craft would then skim the surface several times over three months, collecting 1 gram (0.04 ounces) of surface material from various sites. The Institute had designed the mission to return the samples to Earth in a capsule in June 2007. If the probe succeeded, the samples would be the first space rocks collected since the end of the U.S. Apollo Lunar Exploration Program 30 years before.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Eric Talmadge for Associated Press, “Japan Launches Rocket To Probe Asteroid,” 9 May 2003.)
 NASA announced the selection of William W. Parsons Jr., Director of NASA’s SSC, to succeed Ronald D. Dittemore as Manager of the Space Shuttle Program. Dittemore had announced his resignation on 23 April. NASA appointed SSC Deputy Director Michael U. Rudolphi to serve as interim Director of SSC.(NASA, “NASA Selects New Space Shuttle Program Manager,” news release 03-164, 9 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HP_news_03164.html (accessed 2 December 2008); Michelle Krupa, “No 2 Man Takes Helm at Stennis Center: Ex-director Moves Up to Shuttle Position,” New Orleans Times- Picayune, 13 May 2003.)
 Northrop Grumman Corporation, Raytheon Company, and the Boeing Company formed a team to develop the U.S. Air Force E-10A Multi-Sensor Command and Control Aircraft (MC2A), a next-generation aircraft that could replace the Airborne Warning and Control System and the Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System aircraft. The initial agreement called for the production of five MC2A craft for the U.S. Air Force, but the program could increase to allow for production of as many as 50 such aircraft. Boeing would provide its twin-jet 767-400 transport aircraft as a platform for powerful multifunction radar with the capability of detecting enemy forces on the ground, as well as low-flying cruise missiles. Northrop Grumman and Raytheon would develop a radar and electronic self-defense system to integrate with a Battle Management Command and Control System produced under a separate contract.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing and Raytheon Announce Teaming Agreement for Next- Generation Air Force Surveillance System,” news release, 12 May 2003, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=40216 (accessed 8 December 2008); Congress Daily, “Aerospace Giants To Team Up On Air Force Project,” 12 May 2003.)
 The White House unveiled the U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy, which President George W. Bush had approved on 25 April to replace former President William J. Clinton’s 1994 Presidential Decision Directive-23. The new policy loosened government restrictions on the collection and sale of commercial satellite imagery, directing military and civilian agencies first to approach the commercial sector to fulfill satellite imagery needs. The NSC had created the new guidelines as part of a review of U.S. national space policy, which the White House had directed the NSC to conduct in June 2002 with the support of the Office of Science and Technology Policy. The new policy retained the government’s ability to restrict operations of commercial satellite imaging companies for national security reasons, but emphasized that the U.S. military should plan actions in the knowledge that adversaries also had access to commercial satellite imagery. The policy encouraged companies to use the most capable systems possible. However, at the same time, the government retained the right to restrict the sale of the most advanced imagery to U.S. government customers. The policy named the U.S. National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) as the interface between government and industry for national security applications of commercial satellite imagery. The U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Interior, and NASA would fulfill that role for civilian applications.(Jason Bates, “White House Loosens Curbs on Commercial Satellite Imaging,” Space News, 13 May 2003; Dan Caterinicchia, “Commercial Satellite Policy Released,” Federal Computer Week, 15 May 2003.)
 Hellas-Sat, a geostationary communications satellite jointly owned by Greece and Cyprus, launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard an Atlas 5 rocket with a Russian RD-180 motor. The 3.45-tonne (3.8-ton or 3,450-kilogram) Astrium Eurostar 2000+ model carried 30 Ku-band transponders to provide voice, video, data, and broadcast services to Europe, North Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. The launch, the second for the Atlas 5 series, was the 65th consecutive successful flight for the Lockheed Martin–built Atlas rocket and for mission provider International Launch Services (ILS).(Lockheed Martin, “ILS Launches Hellas-Sat on Atlas V―65 Successes in a Row for Atlas,” news release, 13 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2003/ILSLaunchesHellasSat)
 Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB) Chairperson Harold W. Gehmen Jr. testified before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation, that the safety office created at NASA in the aftermath of the Challenger explosion in 1986 had been “all but useless.” Gehman stated that serious conflicts of interest had “hamstrung the NASA engineering
 OnAtlasV.html (accessed 21 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595. (NASA, “Soyuz 3 Taxi Flight Crew,” http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/station/crew/exp3/taxi3/index.html (accessed 26 November 2008); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 576, 1 November 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/ spacewarn/spx576.html (accessed 26 November 2008).)
 department that advises senior managers about shuttle safety.” He explained that the links of engineering specialists with NASA’s Space Shuttle Program had apparently been too close to permit independent review of the condition of the orbiters. In addition, he said that NASA’s Safety Organization lacked sufficient personnel. Gehman testified that, although NASA’s Safety Organization appeared perfect on paper, the procedures lacked substance in reality. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, who appeared at Gehman’s side at the hearing, assured the Senate panel that NASA would hold its officials accountable, and that NASA would correct all faults in management that the CAIB identified. However, O’Keefe did not respond to Gehman’s criticism of NASA’s safety team.(Traci Watson, “Probe Slams NASA Safety,” USA Today, 15 May 2003; Nick Anderson, “NASA Is Chided for Faults in Safety Teams,” Los Angeles Times, 15 May 2003.)
 NASA’s ARC in Mountain View, California, closed three wind tunnels until the end of FY 2003 because of budget cuts, fewer defense contracts, and the increased use of computer simulations. NASA reported that, unless it received major contracts from the DOD or from the private sector within a year from October 2003, ARC would close the wind tunnels permanently. Two of the wind tunnels, the largest and second-largest wind tunnels in the world, had operated for nearly six decades, testing dozens of aircraft and spacecraft, including Korean War–era fighter planes, helicopters, and the Space Shuttle. The largest wind tunnel, known as “80 by 120” in reference to its height and width, was the only wind tunnel in the world that could accommodate full-size aircraft. With the closure of the three tunnels, ARC dismissed 23 contractors and reassigned 23 employees, changes that would save ARC US$12 million per year in operational costs.(Joshua L. Kwan, “NASA/Ames Center Shuts Wind Tunnels,” San Jose Mercury News (CA), 19 May 2003.)
 NASA announced the selection of 15 organizations from industry, government, and academia to carry out 22 propulsion-technology research proposals in five areas of the In-Space Propulsion Program: aerocapture, advanced chemical propulsion, solar-electric propulsion, space-based tether propulsion, and solar-sail technologies. The goal of the program, under the management of the Office of Space Sciences at NASA Headquarters, was to make exploration of deep space more practical, affordable, and productive.(NASA, “NASA Selects In-Space Propulsion Innovations for Research,” contract release C03-q, 16 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_news_c03Q.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
 Lockheed Martin announced it had teamed up with Argon Engineering to conduct a flight test and evaluation of Argon’s Lighthouse Communications Intelligence (COMINT) processing capability in a high-density urban environment. The test team had flown the Lighthouse COMINT sensor in the area of Phoenix, Arizona, for more than 24 hours, during eight flights ranging in altitude from 5,000 to more than 20,000 feet (1,524 to more than 6,096 meters). The series of flights confirmed that the sensor was “capable of handling the high dynamic signal densities of urban and military environments.” Wes Colburn of Lockheed Martin ISR Systems remarked that Argon’s open architecture Lighthouse COMINT system provided a dynamic sensor suite capable of meeting fighters’ needs in complex and modern electromagnetic threat environments. The flight tests had validated that the Lighthouse COMINT system was extremely capable in an airborne environment, as well as on submarines, ships, and land sites where it was already in use.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin and Argon Engineering Team Up for the First Flight of the Lighthouse COMINT System,” news release, 21 May 2003, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/ press_releases/2003/LockheedMartinArgonEngineeringTeamU.html (accessed 21 November 2008).)
 NASA announced the appointment of David A. King as the new Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 15 June. NASA would reassign Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson, in preparation for his planned January 2004 retirement from NASA. King had been MSFC’s Deputy Director since November 2002, assisting Stephenson in managing a range of propulsion, space science, and materials research, as well as development work. NASA had also dispatched King to Lufkin, Texas, within hours of the Columbia disaster, to serve as the senior on-site NASA official in the search-and-recovery effort. In that capacity, he had created critical, initial work processes; established effective working relationships among federal and state government agencies; and set the foundation for the two subsequent NASA officials who would share responsibility for leading effective recovery efforts. Before serving as Deputy Director of MSFC, King had been Deputy Director of Shuttle Processing, Launch Director of six Shuttle missions, and Director of Shuttle Processing at NASA’s KSC. As Director of Shuttle Processing at KSC, he had managed and coordinated all Space Shuttle processing, launch, and landing operations and had made the final determination to launch during the three-day countdown process.(NASA, “David A. King Named Marshall Space Flight Center Director,“ news release 03-181, 23 May 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/03181_king_msfc_director.html (accessed 20 November 2008); Patty Reinert, “Marshall Space Flight Center Chief Will Leave Post in January,” Houston Chronicle, 21 May 2003.)
 Beidou 1C, a People’s Republic of China geostationary navigational satellite, launched from Xichang Satellite Launching Center in Sichuan province aboard a Long March 3A rocket, joining two other Beidou craft launched in 2000 to complete the satellite constellation. Xinhua, the Chinese national media outlet, reported that the transportation industry, telecommunications industry, weather forecasters, environmental planners, emergency personnel would be able to use the global positioning and navigational satellites. However, western analysts speculated that China was more likely to use the Beidou satellites’ capabilities to make its own military and weapons systems more precise.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 595; Stephen Clark, “China Lofts Navigation Craft on Long March Booster,” Spaceflight Now, 25 May 2003.)
 Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
 NASA Chief of Staff and White House Liaison Courtney A. Stadd announced his resignation, effective 4 July 2003, to pursue opportunities in the private sector. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of John D. Schumacher to succeed Stadd as Chief of Staff. Stadd had led President George W. Bush’s NASA transition team and had worked with two NASA administrators to help cast NASA’s strategic direction. Schumacher brought invaluable experience and perspective to his new position. Since June 1995, he had served as NASA’s Assistant Administrator for External Relations, with responsibility for NASA’s interaction with Executive Branch offices and agencies, for international relations, and for administration of export and international technology-transfer control. In addition, he had served as a liaison with NASA’s History Office, advisory councils, and commissions.
 European space ministers met at ESA headquarters in Paris to sign an agreement to save the Ariane 5 launcher program. The officials voted to re-obligate EUR 228 million (US$269 million) from an existing program to put the rocket’s new version back on track for commercial service by late 2004. Additionally, they agreed to reimburse Ariane 5 contractors for many fixed costs of maintaining their plants and equipment between 2005 and 2009, a measure expected to keep the industry afloat with the injection of EUR 960 million (US$1 billion) while waiting for the commercial launch market to improve.(Peter B. de Selding, “European Nations Commit To New Ariane 5 Investment,” Space News, 28 May 2003. 448 Jacob Jackson, “SAIC Wins $48 Million NASA Space Work,” Washington Technology, 28 May 2003.)
 Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC) of San Diego, California, announced that it had won a US$48 million, four-year contract to support the development of NASA’s next- generation space vehicle under NASA’s Space Launch Initiative (SLI) program. Under the contract, SAIC would provide vehicle and systems engineering as well as other services, such as scheduling, configuration management, risk management, and financial planning.
 The CAIB carried out preliminary tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, firing foam at a fiberglass replica of the wing of an orbiter. The impact of a 1.67-pound (0.76-kilogram) piece of foam fired at 533 miles per hour (858 kilometers per hour) created a narrow 22-inch-long (56-centimeter-long) gash in the fiberglass wings. The CAIB conducted the test in preparation for an official test with panels composed of reinforced carbon-carbon (RCC), a material two and one-half times more resilient than fiberglass. In addition to determining whether foam could damage the fiberglass, the CAIB intended the test to calibrate the mechanism for testing the RCC without using up scarce RCC samples.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Mockup Wing Is Torn by Foam in Shuttle Test,” New York Times, 30 May 2003; Mark Carreau, “Foam Test Leaves Gash in Shuttle Wing Replica,” Houston Chronicle, 30 May 2003. 450 Leonard David, “Japan Recovers Capsule That Carried Made-in-Space Product,” Space.com, 29 May 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/japan_capsule_030529.html (accessed 4 December 2008).)
 Japan’s Unmanned Space Experiment Recovery System (USERS) capsule splashed down 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) south of Tokyo, Japan, near the Ogasawara Islands, while the USERS Service Module continued to orbit Earth. Japan’s NASDA had launched the system aboard an H- 2A booster from the Tanegashima Space Center in September 2002, along with a Japanese Data Relay Test Satellite. The capsule contained a superconductive product, created within the capsule during its 10 months in space, using an electrically heated furnace. Japanese researchers were investigating contamination-free, high-quality crystals, created in a microgravity environment, for their potential use in the superconductive magnets needed in flywheel-type, electric-energy storage systems and magnetically levitated train transportation. Scientists planned to collect data from the USERS Service Module to use in the design and production of future satellite hardware. The Institute for Unmanned Space Experiment Free Flyer, a group established in 1986 to promote the industrialization of space, had initiated the USERS project.
 ESA launched its Mars Express mission from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan aboard a Russian Soyuz-Fregat rocket. Mars Express consisted of ESA’s Mars Orbiter and a 65-kilogram (143.3-pound) lander, Beagle 2, named in honor of the ship that Charles Darwin sailed on during his search for the origins of life. The orbiter, scheduled to reach Mars in December, carried multiple cameras, spectrometers, and radar equipment. Following the launch, ESA Director of Science David J. Southwood remarked that its success signified Europe’s official entry into the interplanetary travel club.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596, 1 July 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx596.html, (accessed 12 December 2008); Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches First Ever Mars Space Mission,” 3 June 2003.)
 The Canadian Space Agency awarded a four-year, US$116 million contract to MD Robotics to provide engineering services for robotic elements for the ISS. Under the contract, MD Robotics, a subsidiary of MacDonald, Dettweiler and Associates Ltd., would maintain and upgrade software for robotic components and would continue developing and testing a two-armed robot called Dextre, scheduled for installation at the ISS in 2005. MD Robotics had designed Dextre for attachment to the ISS, either at the end of the robotic arm currently in place―Canadarm 2―or on the mobile base station. Dextre would perform external maintenance tasks at the ISS.(Jason Bates, “MacDonald Dettweiler Nabs Space Station Contract,” Space News, 3 June 2003.)
 Edward J. Weiler, NASA’s Associate Administrator for Space Science, testified before the U.S. Senate Commerce Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and Space about Project Prometheus, a proposed nuclear technology program. The proposal called for NASA to spend US$3 billion between 2003 and 2008, developing more powerful radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) to convert energy from the decay of radioactive material into electricity and to explore the use of fission to power spacecraft and their instruments. A strong supporter of the program, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, a former Secretary of the Navy, hoped to apply lessons learned from the nuclear submarine program to spacecraft. Weiler stated that nuclear fission was necessary for sending spacecraft to scrutinize the outer planets of the solar system, such as Jupiter, and could open the door to human spaceflight to Mars. NASA hoped to use the powerful RTGs developed in Project Prometheus for a robotic mission to Mars in 2009. NASA proposed to make a mission to Jupiter’s moons as its first use of fission technology in space exploration.(Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Advice to NASA Supports Nuclear-Fueled Spaceflight,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 4 June 2003.)
 NASA announced that it had awarded the contract to manage the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Science and Operations Control Center to a nonprofit consortium, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA). The contract, valued at US$162.2 million, stipulated that AURA manage the Science and Operations Control Center at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland. AURA would provide products and services required to prepare the science program, develop ground systems, provide science and engineering support, provide integration and test support, perform educational and public outreach, and perform flight and science operations during the launch and commissioning of JWST, scheduled for launch in 2011.(NASA, “Webb Spacecraft Science and Operations Center Contract Award,” contract release c03-r, 6 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_c03r_Webb.html (accessed 6 June 2003).)
 The CAIB conducted an outdoor test re-creating the conditions at Columbia’s launch, to determine whether foam could break reinforced-carbon wing pieces. During the test, a pair of orbiter wing parts cracked and shifted out of alignment after investigators shot a 1.5-pound (0.68-kilogram) piece of foam at the panel at a speed of 525 miles per hour (845 kilometers per hour). The impact created a gap of less than 0.1 inch (0.25 centimeter) wide and at least 3 inches (7.6 centimeters) long. G. Scott Hubbard, the CAIB member in charge of the test, stated that the Board required further analysis to determine whether the damage would have allowed hot atmospheric gases to penetrate the wing during reentry.(Marcia Dunn, “Impact Test Supports Shuttle Foam Theory,” Washington Post, 9 June 2003.)
 France’s Alcatel Space signed a US$148 million contract with South Korea’s state-operated KT Corporation to build South Korea’s first satellite with military capabilities. South Korea planned to place Koreasat 5 in orbit by early 2006. KT Corporation spokesperson Cho Chul-Je told the media that South Korea’s military would use military transponders on the satellite for communication and operation, but he declined to confirm reports that the craft would assist the military in collecting security information in Northeast Asia. The craft would also be equipped with commercial transponders. Koreasat 5 would replace Koreasat 2, which had launched in 1996, allowing telecommunications companies to expand mobile networks to Japan, the People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, and the Philippines.(Agence France-Presse, “French Company To Build South Korea’s First Military Satellite,” 8 June 2003.)
 Progress M1-10 launched successfully from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying 2,400 kilograms (5,300 pounds) of fuel, canned food, water, oxygen, and equipment for scientific experiments to the ISS. Yuri P. Semyonov of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), the company leading Russia’s participation in the ISS, remarked that Progress M1-10 carried a supply of extra water because NASA had canceled all Shuttle flights in the wake of the Columbia disaster. The ISS Expedition 7 would have a staff of two, rather than three crew members―Russian Flight Commander Yuri I. Malenchenko and U.S. Flight Engineer Edward T. Lu―to save fuel and water until Shuttle flights resumed.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Russian Supply Vessel Docks with International Space Station,” 11 June 2003; Reuters, “Russian Rocket Sends Fuel, Food to Space Station,” 9 June 2003.)
 NASA announced the successful first test flight of Altair, its UAV. The purpose of the test flight was to evaluate Altair’s airworthiness and flight controls. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had established performance specifications for the craft, which was an extended-wing version of the MQ-9 Predator B military UAV―one of several UAVs designed for civil applications.(NASA, “NASA’s Newest Unmanned Aircraft Makes Successful First Flight,” news release 03-193, 9 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03193_altair.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
 From its floating platform Odyssey, Sea Launch launched a telecommunications satellite Thuraya-2 aboard a Zenit 3-SL rocket. The satellite belonged to Thuraya Satellite Telecommunications Company based in Abu Dhabi in the United Arab Emirates, a company providing mobile telephone services to more than 100 countries in the Middle East, Europe, Africa, and Asia. Sea Launch had launched Thuraya-1 in October 2000.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Communications Satellite Launched,” 10 June 2003; Jim Banke, “Sea Launch Soars Again Carrying Thuraya-2 to Orbit,” Space.com, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/zenit_launch_030610.html (accessed 15 December 2008).)
 NASA launched the first of two Mars Exploration Rovers from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida aboard a Delta 2 rocket. The destination of the 384-pound (174-kilogram) rover Spirit was the Gustev Crater, a site that scientists believed had been a crater lake. NASA intended the second of the identical rovers, called Opportunity, to launch later in June and to land on the opposite side of Mars from the Gustev Crater at a site called Meridiani Planum, which had a large deposit of a type of mineral (gray hematite) that usually forms in wet environments. NASA had designed the rolling rovers to capture sharper images, explore wider regions, and examine rocks better than any previous craft that had landed on Mars, searching for evidence of wet environments on the planet.(NASA, “NASA Prepares Two Robot Rovers for Mars Exploration,” news release 03-189, 4 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03189_ROVERS.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Andrew Bridges for Associated Press, “First of NASA Rovers En Route to Mars,” 11 June 2003.)
 ESA launched aboard an Ariane 5G rocket Optus-1, a Japanese-built, hybrid communications/military satellite jointly owned by Australia and Singapore, and B-Sat 2C, a Japanese geostationary communications satellite from Kourou, French Guiana. The Australian Defence Force and Optus, the Australian telecommunications firm and subsidiary of Singapore Telecommunications, had jointly funded the Optus-1 craft. To avoid mixing up data between defense and commercial applications, the two portions of the Optus-1 payload operated independently, one devoted to military use and the other to television broadcasts, high-speed Internet services, and voice and data communications across Australia and parts of Asia. B-Sat 2C would provide direct digital broadcasts to Japan and neighboring countries using Ku-band transponders.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Agence France-Presse, “Europe Launches Japanese-Built Australian Military Satellite Half Owned by Singapore Government,” 12 June 2003.)
 U.S. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN), senior Democrat on the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, introduced H. R. 2450, the Human Space Flight Independent Investigation Commission Act, in an effort to ensure that future investigations of human spaceflight accidents would remain independent and “free from any perception that [NASA] is hiding something.” Gordon had wanted President George W. Bush to appoint an independent commission, free of any NASA personnel, to investigate the Columbia disastersimilar to the commission that had investigated the Challenger accident in 1986. Instead, NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had to revise the charter of the CAIB three times before the Board had attained a measure of independence. Moreover, the Board still included one NASA official and relied on NASA staff, an arrangement that Gordon feared would undermine the credibility of the CAIB’s final report. H.R. 2450 proposed that, in the event of another disaster, the investigative panel would follow the Challenger model, requiring a 15-member commission, with the chairperson of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) serving as a member and the President of the United States appointing the other 14. Under the terms of the Act, commission members would have diverse backgrounds, although some would also have spaceflight and accident investigation experience. The resolution also stipulated that NASA personnel could not serve, either on the investigative panel or on its staff. The commission would have subpoena powers and would report its findings simultaneously to the President, Congress, and the public.(Leonard David, “Lawmaker Calls for Independent Space Accident Investigations,” Space.com, 16 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts107_gordon_030616.html (accessed 19 December 2008).)
 The CAIB held its final public hearing, moving its focus beyond the cause of the disaster to a probe of the overall state of NASA’s management. Witnesses identified several key weaknesses in NASA’s management of its personnel, which could have affected safety issues in the Space Shuttle Program. Allen Li of GAO, which had issued a report in 2001 about NASA workforce issues, noted that NASA had faced substantial challenges in attracting and retaining a highly skilled workforce. Therefore, key areas of NASA’s programs had an insufficient number of qualified workers, and the remainder of the staff showed signs of overwork and fatigue. In response to the 2001 report, NASA had developed new systems for monitoring such issues, and Li said that NASA had made noteworthy progress. However, NASA was still requesting congressional approval of personnel reforms that would help ameliorate the situation, reforms that would give NASA the authority to streamline the hiring process and the ability to offer larger recruitment and retention bonuses. Marcia S. Smith of the Congressional Research Service provided the CAIB with a history of NASA’s budget situation but remarked that the CAIB would have difficulty tying budgetary changes directly to safety issues and Shuttle operations. Russell D. Turner, the former CEO of the prime contractor for Shuttle operations, United Space Alliance, defended the work of the firms involved in the Space Shuttle Program.(Tom Shoop, “NASA Needs Management Overhaul, Shuttle Investigators Told,” Government Executive, 13 June 2003.)
 NASA named Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, to head NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, effective 10 August. Bridges, a retired U.S. Air Force Major General and former astronaut who had piloted STS-51F in 1985, was a “natural selection to lead the Agency’s premiere center for aviation and space research,” according to William F. Readdy, Associate Administrator for Space Flight at NASA Headquarters. Bridges had been Director of KSC since 1997 and, before that, had held various key aerospace positions, serving as Commander of the Air Force Flight Test Center at Edwards Air Force Base in California, as well as Commander of the Eastern Space and Missile Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Florida and Commander of the 412th Test Wing at Edwards Air Force Base. With his appointment as Director of LaRC, Bridges replaced Delma C. Freeman Jr., who had planned to retire but had been serving as Acting Director until NASA found a permanent director. Freeman planned to retire. In transferring Bridges to LaRC from KSC, NASA hoped to strengthen its engineering department in preparation for resuming Shuttle flights.(NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-197, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03197_bridges.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “Kennedy Space Center Director Transferred,” 13 June 2003.)
 NASA appointed two veteran astronauts―Apollo Commander Thomas P. Stafford and Space Shuttle Commander Richard O. Covey―to lead the task force assisting NASA’s return-to-flight team. The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), composed of distinguished experts and industry professionals representing a wide range of disciplines, would help the NASA team implement the CAIB’s findings following the release of its final report. Stafford, a retired Lieutenant General in the U.S. Air Force who had flown four missions during the Gemini and Apollo programs, had also chaired the NASA Advisory Council Task Force on ISS Operational Readiness. Covey, a retired U.S. Air Force Colonel, had piloted the 1988 Shuttle Mission STS-26, the first flight following the Challenger accident. He had also piloted Mission STS-51I in 1985 and had commanded STS-38 in 1990 and STS-61 in 1993.(NASA, “Former Apollo and Shuttle Commanders Lead Columbia Accident Report Task Force,” news release 03-196, 13 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03196_covey_lead.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
 The CAIB and members of the U.S. Congress reached an agreement giving selected members and staff of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology access to confidential interviews that CAIB had conducted with 225 witnesses, including NASA managers and others involved with Columbia’s mission. Because the most sensitive testimony about management decision making and engineering practices was contained in privileged statements, CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. had resisted unfettered congressional access, fearing the potential effect on witnesses in future investigations of accidents if the CAIB were to release privileged testimony. Gehman had argued that privacy was critical to the Board’s ability to elicit full, frank, and timely information, citing U.S. Supreme Court decisions supporting privileged interviewing, which was a common practice in military aircraft accident investigations. The agreement had granted committee members and a select list of staff access to the statements at the CAIB’s office andin limited circumstances and under the supervision of a CAIB representativeto those at congressional offices. The CAIB retained the right to refuse to make information from statements to the Board available to the public. In addition, the CAIB would keep a record of those who viewed the information.(Kathy Sawyer, “Congress To Review Shuttle Interviews,” Washington Post, 16 June 2003.)
 Russia’s Space Forces launched a Molniya 3-53 military communications satellite aboard a four- stage Molniya-M rocket from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in the Arkhangelsk region of Russia. Molniya 3-53 was the second Molniya communications satellite launched in 2003.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 596; Associated Press, “Russia Lofts Military Payload from Plesetsk, Makes Plans for Commercial South American Shots,” 20 June 2003; Stephen Clark, “Molniya Satellite Deployed from Plesetsk Spaceport,” Spaceflight Now, 20 June 2003.)
 NASA released topographic data collected during its Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), which had lasted from 11 to 22 February 2000, producing three-dimensional measurements of more than 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator. Because of South America’s proximity to the equator and its frequent tropical cloud cover, traditional satellites had encountered difficulty acquiring imagery of its topography, but the cloud-penetrating radar on board the SRTM had produced information with scientific and commercial value that would help improve life on the continent. SRTM Project Scientist Michael Kobrick of NASA’s JPL remarked that the data would assist governments to prepare for natural hazards like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, and floods. In addition, the information would help improve aviation safety in mountainous areas, and would help land-use planners make better-informed decisions about the development of critical infrastructure. The mission was a cooperative project of NASA, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) of the U.S. DOD, and the German and Italian space agencies.(NASA, “South America Shines in NASA’s Latest Space Radar Map Release,” news release 03-204, 19 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03204_S_Amer_Space_Radar.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
 NASA announced that 12 new teams would join the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), a research consortium studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life on Earth and in the universe. The new teams, with members from the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC; Indiana University in Bloomington; Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts; SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California; and NASA’s ARC and GSFC would join the four lead teams that NASA had selected in 2001. The five-year awards, with annual funding levels of US$1 million, would commence in the autumn of 2003 when the agreements with the NAI’s 11 founding teams had concluded. Six of the new teams were among the founding member teams.
 NASA released to the public recovered photographs and video that Columbia’s crew had taken during its mission in January. The CAIB had determined that the material was not relevant to their investigation into the Shuttle’s demise. The imagery included nearly 10 hours of recovered video and 92 photographs. The Shuttle had carried 337 videotapes, of which 28 had recoverable footage, and 137 rolls of film, of which only 21 contained recoverable photographs. Search-and- recovery crews had located more than 84,000 pieces of debris.(NASA, “New Space Shuttle Columbia Images Released,” news release 03-212, 24 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03212_columbia_images.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
 NASA announced the appointment of James W. Kennedy as the new Director of NASA’s KSC, effective 10 August, succeeding Roy D. Bridges Jr. On 13 June, NASA had appointed Bridges to lead NASA’s LaRC. Kennedy had served as KSC’s Deputy Director since November 2002 and, before that, he had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama. Kennedy had also served as Project Manager for the X-34 and DC-XA initiatives and had led KSC’s OneNASA effort to coordinate teamwork across all field centers. He had managed MSFC’s Space Shuttle Projects Resident Office at KSC in 1996, returning to MSFC later that year to manage the Solid Rocket Booster Project. In 1998 he had become Deputy Director of Science and Engineering and, one year later, Director of Engineering. In those positions, he had established and maintained a nationally recognized research and development capability in space research and technology.(NASA, “James W. Kennedy Named Director, NASA KSC,” news release 03-217, 26 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03217_Kennedy_KSC.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Kelly Young, “Kennedy Takes Over KSC,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 June 2003.)
 The remotely operated Helios Prototype aircraft crashed into the Pacific Ocean during a test flight within the confines of the U.S. Navy Pacific Missile Range Facility (PMRF) test range. Ground-based mission controllers had been flying the solar-electric, propeller-driven, proof-of- concept flying wing remotely. The craft had been aloft west of Kauai, Hawaii, for about 29 minutes at approximately 8,000 feet (2,438 meters), when the accident occurred, destroying it. High-efficiency solar cells, spread across the upper surface of its 247-foot-long (75-meter-long) wing, supplied power to its electric motors and other systems during daylight; at night, an experimental fuel cell–based electrical system generated power. The prototype, designed to fly at altitudes up to 100,000 feet (30,480 meters) had set a world record for altitude of winged aircraft―96,863 feet (29,524 meters)―during a flight in August 2001. NASA had intended the craft to fly single-day atmospheric-science and imaging missions at high altitudes, as well as to perform multiday telecommunications-relay missions at lower altitudes of 50,000 to 65,000 feet (15,240 to 19,812 meters). The prototype was one of several in development that NASA had sponsored and funded under the Environmental Research Aircraft and Sensor Technology program.(NASA, “Helios Prototype Solar Aircraft Lost in Flight Mishap,” news release 03-219, 27 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03219_Helios.html (accessed 12 December 2008); B. J. Reyes for Associated Press, “Record-Setting Solar Airplane Crashes,” 26 June 2003.)
 NASA announced the creation of a five-member board, led by Thomas E. Noll of LaRC, to investigate the Helios Prototype accident. The board would work with the U.S. Navy and the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration to determine the cause of the accident.(Warren E. Leary, “Board Named To Investigate Crash of a Plane Prototype,” New York Times, 28 June 2003.)
 The German-Russian Eurockot Launch Services’ Rockot launch vehicle, a modified Russian ballistic missile, lifted off from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome carrying nine satellites and nanosatellites. The Rockot booster fired its Breeze upper stage twice, the first time releasing the 145-pound (66-kilogram) Czech Micromeasurements of Satellite Acceleration (MIMOSA) satellite into orbit and, the second time, leaving the Canadian Microvariability and Oscillation of Stars (MOST) scientific satellite and six Japanese, Danish, and U.S. nanosatellites in a Sun- synchronous orbit. A mock-up of a Russian Earth observation satellite that remained attached to the upper stage would gather mission data before de-orbiting. The Czech Astronomical Institute had launched MIMOSA to gather data on the density of Earth’s upper atmosphere, using a sensitive accelerometer designed to detect slight drag forces. President of the Canadian Space Agency Marc Garneau described the 113-pound (51.3-kilogram) MOST as “the world’s smallest space telescope,” with an aperture of just 15 centimeters (6 inches), about the size of Galileo’s telescope. Using an ultra-high-precision attitude-control system, the craft would very finely point toward targets, such as neighboring stars, studying how stars eject gas into the interstellar medium and seeking data to answer fundamental questions about the universe. Students had designed the two Japanese nanosatellites―CubeSat XI-IV and CUTE-1―to test various space technologies in flight. Three more student-built nanosatellites deployed via a launch tube―the Canadian CANX-1and the Danish AAU CubeSat and DTUSAT―would image stars. Quakesat, an American photo-imaging nanosatellite, would conduct an earthquake detection experiment.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597, 1 August 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx597.html (accessed 12 December 2008); Stephen Clark, “Rockot Booster Successfully Launches 9 Payloads,” Spaceflight Now, 30 June 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “Rockot Delivers Multiple Satellites to Earth Orbit from Russia,” Space.com, 30 June 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/rockot_ launch_)
 Armadillo Aerospace successfully carried out a milestone test of the company’s candidate for the X Prize, dropping the reusable suborbital spacecraft from a helicopter to demonstrate that they could recover the complete vehicle after flight. To conduct the test, the team placed 660 pounds (273 kilograms) of sandbags in the craft’s cabin area, to simulate passengers, and mounted a set of five Olympic barbell plates, to simulate the weight of the engines, plumbing, and backup
 030630.html (accessed 15 December 2008). recovery system that the competitor’s full-size vehicle would have. A helicopter towed and released the craft, the drogue immediately inflated, pulling out the main parachute. Nine seconds elapsed between release and full canopy inflation, causing a negligible shock of only two Gs. The team was expecting greater opening shock after high-altitude flights. Overall, the vehicle fared wellthe craft sustained minor damage to the vehicle’s crushable nose cone, and none of the sandbags in the cabin ruptured.(Leonard David, “X Prize Entry Undergoes Drop Test,” Space.com, 7 July 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/armadillo_test_030707.html (accessed 12 January 2009).)
 NASA engineers and investigators, together with members of the CAIB, watched as engineers fired foam insulation at a mockup of the leading edge of an orbiter wing, creating a 16-inch-wide (40.6-centimeter-wide) hole in the reinforced-carbon-carbon panel. Engineers used a compressed nitrogen gas cannon to fire a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam at the wing mockup at a speed of 530 miles per hour (853 kilometers per hour), duplicating the force exerted on Columbia’s wing when a piece of foam of the same size hit the orbiter during launch. The test results showed that it was possible that a foam block falling from the external tank could have breached the orbiter’s leading edge, allowing hot gases to penetrate the wing structure during reentry and resulting in the breakup of Columbia.(Alan Levin, “Shuttle Foam Test Leaves Hole,” USA Today, 8 July 2003; John Kelly, “Foam Punches Large Hole in Wing: Test is ‘Smoking Gun’, Shuttle Panel Says,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 8 July 2003.)
 After numerous delays, NASA launched Mars Explorer Rover-B (MER-B) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida, in time to meet the 15 July deadline. If NASA had not met that deadline, it would have had to wait an additional four years to launch the craft. MER-B, nicknamed Opportunity, was an exact duplicate of MER-A, known as Spirit, which had launched on 10 June. Bad weather, a failed battery cell, and a problem with the cork insulation, which had failed to adhere to the aluminum rocket, had caused the launch’s delay.
 NASA released documents showing that the Columbia accident was not the first time that superheated gas had invaded an orbiter’s wing when it reentered Earth’s atmosphere. The documents showed that in 2000 Atlantis had entered orbit with a 0.25-inch (0.64-centimeter) breach in its wing’s leading edge, allowing plasma to enter the wing during the orbiter’s reentry. The incident had caused only minor damage. Improper insulation installation during Atlantis’s overhaul in 1997 had caused the gap to form. Instead of filling up the gap, the insulation had been “folded up and pushed away,” leaving an exposed cavity.(John Schwartz and Matthew L. Wald, “Earlier Shuttle Flight Had Gas Enter Wing on Return,” New York Times, 9 July 2003.)
 The Boeing Company announced that, because commercial launches were costly and in relatively low demand, it would not seek commercial satellite launch contracts for five years, focusing instead on providing service for the U.S. military and NASA. However, Boeing was a member of the consortium International Launch Services (ILS), which would continue to offer commercial launch services. ILS used Russian-made Zenit 3-SL rockets to launch commercial payloads from a floating platform known as Sea Launch. Boeing indicated that it would accommodate customers that preferred to use Delta rockets instead of the Russian-made rockets. The company stated that the change in business strategy would not affect any employees who worked on the launch programs.(Brian Monroe and Wayne T. Price, “Boeing To Bail Out of Commercial Launches,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 July 2003.)
 Undersecretary of the U.S. Air Force Peter B. Teets testified before the House Science Subcommittee on Environment, Technology, and Standards that the National Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) System spacecraft would not be available until late 2009 or 2010, at the earliest. The U.S. Air Force and NOAA had jointly funded the system, the first of its kind, originally planning to deliver it in early 2008. The Bush administration had decided to request less money for the project in the near term than it had previously planned, and that decision had reportedly caused the delay. Because of the postponement of the delivery date, the Air Force and NOAA would need to restructure the contract to account for anticipated cost growth. The new system would replace the polar-orbiting systems that the agencies had previously operated separately. Greg Withee, NOAA’s Assistant Administrator for Satellite and Information Services, stated that the delay could result in a 21-month gap in coverage if NOAA encountered problems with its existing fleet.(Jeremy Singer, “Delay Means Cost Growth for New Weather Satellites,” Space News, 17 July 2003.)
 In response to the anticipated recommendations of the CAIB, NASA announced its plans to create an independent NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC) at NASA’s LaRC, providing a central location to coordinate engineering and safety assessment for all of NASA. The NESC, expected to draw on the talents of 250 staff throughout NASA to conduct analysis and share technical information, would report to Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. Bryan D. O’Connor, Associate Administrator for the Office of Safety and Mission Assurance at NASA Headquarters, would have responsibility for policy. NASA intended for the NESC to provide independent assessment and testing of engineering, in support of critical NASA projects and programs; to conduct reviews and evaluations of engineering and safety; to provide a central location for trend analysis; to provide a structure to support engineering collaboration for problem resolution; to provide central coordination of engineering and programmatic lessons learned, technical standardization, and development of technical discipline expertise; and to provide independent inspection and validation of activities to ensure the constant maintenance of NASA safety standards.(NASA, “NASA Announces Independent Engineering and Safety Center,” news release 03-239, 15 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03239_safety_center.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Warren E. Leary, “In Response to Panel, NASA Plans Safety Center,” New York Times, 16 July 2003.)
 An Atlas 5 rocket launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, at 11:45 p.m. (UT), carrying the Rainbow 1 satellite into orbit. The 4.3-tonne (4.7-ton or 4,300-kilogram) Cablevision Systems Corporation satellite would provide direct-to-home television services in the contiguous United States. The Atlas 5, on its third flight since its inaugural flight in August 2002, carried for the first time two 64-foot (19.5-meter), Aerojet-built solid rocket boosters, which enabled the rocket to clear the launchpad in just 7 secondsonly half of the time required in the two previous launches. The launch marked the completion of flight-testing of all major new systems in the Atlas line. The U.S. military had designed Atlas 5 under its Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV) Program.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 597; Associated Press, “Most Powerful Atlas Rocket Carries Cablevision Satellite into Space,” 18 July 2003.)
 NASA issued new safety standards for future space vehicles, such as the proposed Orbital Space Plane (OSP) and next-generation launch systems, requiring crew-escape systems and methods of aborting launches. Earlier, NASA had rejected recommendations for the proposed systems as too impractical or expensive for the existing Space Shuttle fleet. The new standards represented NASA’s effort to provide “maximum reasonable assurance” that, in the future, mission failures would not automatically endanger the crew. The standards, known as the Human-Rating Requirements and Guidelines for Space Flight Systems, stipulated that NASA would design future spacecraft to allow the crew to escape quickly during prelaunch procedures and to abort the mission or to effect an emergency escape during ascent.(Eric Pianin, “New Standards Are Issued for Space Vehicle Safety,” Washington Post, 18 July 2003.)
 NASA’s JSC extended its contract with Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International Inc. (HSSSI) for work related to the Extravehicular Mobility Unit (EMU), the U.S. spacesuit used for extravehicular activity (EVA). The extended option, valued at US$26 million, was the last of the available annual-renewal options of a contract worth US$333 million over six years. Under the contract, HSSSI was responsible for the successful performance of the EMU, including the design, development, certification, production, and enhancement of the EMU and of other hardware used in spacewalking.(NASA, “NASA Extends Spacesuit Contract,” contract release C03-x, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_c03x_spacesuit.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
 NASA announced the release of the first scientific product of the Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) mission, a joint effort of NASA and the German Aerospace Center. The GRACE mission had produced the most accurate map to date of Earth’s gravity field, using preliminary data collected over 111 days. Project scientists had created the map from selected data, which they had used to calibrate and validate the instruments of the pair of American and German satellites comprising GRACE. The satellites had measured Earth’s gravitational force from orbits 500 kilometers (310.7 miles) high, with 220 kilometers (136.7 miles) separating them, making a pass of the entire planet once each month, and producing measurements of unprecedented accuracy. The measurements provided precise views of ocean currents and tidal changes, enabling scientists to better understand how the oceans affect climate. Although the data was preliminary, NASA had released it to oceanographers immediately, months in advance of the scheduled start of routine GRACE scientific operations, underscoring the mission’s importance and the data’s value.(NASA, “Oceanographers Catch First Wave of Gravity Mission’s Success,” news release 03-244, 21 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03244_gravity_success.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Larry O’Hanlon, “Gravity Map Shows Earth Is Very Lumpy,” Discovery News, 29 July 2003.)
 NASA announced the successful implementation of new software in three computers controlling the precision pointing of NASA’s Far Ultraviolet Spectroscope Explorer (FUSE) satellite. In mid-April 2003, NASA had installed the software for the spacecraft’s Attitude Control Instrument Data System and the processor for the Fine Error Sensor guide camera, and testing of the new configuration had been ongoing since that time. George Sonneborn, FUSE Project Scientist at NASA’s GSFC, explained that the uploaded software would allow FUSE to operate with any number of gyroscopes, or none, in the event of gyroscope failure. Tests showed that FUSE could operate with no gyroscopes without experiencing any degradation in quality of scientific data and with only a slight loss of efficiency in scheduling observations. Before the new software installation, FUSE had required at least one operating gyroscope on each of its three axes to conduct normal scientific operations.(NASA, “NASA Team Gives Fuse Spacecraft Triple Brain Transplant,” news release 03-243, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03243_fuse_transplant.html (accessed 23 December 2008).)
 Starchaser Industries Ltd., a British entry for the X Prize competition, successfully tested its Nova 2 rocket capsule, dropping it from a Fairfield C123K aircraft near Kingman, Arizona. Parachute expert Ted Strong piloted the capsule, which the aircraft had released at an altitude of 10,000 feet (3,048 meters). Traveling at 100 miles per hour (161 kilometers per hour), the craft deployed a 10-foot (3-meter) drogue parachute to stabilize its descent, and 5 seconds later, the pilot “oriented the capsule into a horizontal position” before deploying the main steerable canopy. The pilot flew the capsule like a glider to a precision landing.(Space.com, “X Prize Entry Starchaser Successfully Test Drops Piloted Capsule,” 24 July 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/starchaser_test_030424.html (accessed 12 January 2009). 486 NASA, “Atlas V Chosen To Launch New Horizons Mission,” contract release C03-y, Space.com (accessed 23 December 2008).)
 NASA announced the selection of the Lockheed Martin Commercial Launch Services’ Atlas 5 expendable launch vehicle for the Pluto New Horizons mission scheduled to launch in January 2006. The agreement with Lockheed Martin stipulated a firm fixed-price, launch-service task order under the terms of NASA’s launch services contract with Lockheed Martin. NASA planned for its Pluto New Horizons mission to conduct the first reconnaissance of the binary planet system of Pluto-Charon, gathering information about the surfaces, atmospheres, interiors, and space environments of Pluto and Charon.
 NASA announced the results of its own mishap investigation board’s review of the loss of the X- 43A Hyper-X research vehicle during its launch on 2 June 2001. The experimental plane was the first of three that NASA had developed and produced in a US$185 million program. The board concluded that the flight had failed because “the vehicle’s control system design was deficient in several analytical modeling areas, which overestimated the system’s margins.” For the test flight, the X-43A had launched aboard the nose of a modified Pegasus launch vehicle carried by NASA’s modified B-52 bomber. The bomber had released the Pegasus at an altitude of 24,000 feet (7,315.2 meters), igniting its solid rocket motor (SRM) and sending the research-vehicle payload on its test flight. After beginning its planned pitch-up maneuver, the X-43A had experienced a control anomaly leading to a structural overload of the starboard elevon. The vehicle had then deviated significantly from its planned trajectory, and NASA had destroyed it 48.6 seconds after its release. The mishap investigation board, which had found a number of modeling inaccuracies, had been able to reproduce the flight mishap only after incorporating all of the inaccuracies into its analysis, leading the board to conclude that no single factor or potential contributing factor had caused the mishap. The board also found that preflight analyses, including wind tunnel tests, had failed to predict how the rocket would perform in flight.(NASA, “NASA Mishap Board Identifies Cause of X-43a Failure,” news release 03-246, 23 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03246_X43A_Mishap.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Associated Press, “Rocket Failure Doomed Hypersonic NASA Jet, Investigation Finds,” 23 July 2003.)
 NASA announced appointments to the Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG), formed to conduct an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. On 13 June, NASA had initially announced the formation of the SCTG to oversee an independent assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement the CAIB’s recommendations. Cochaired by veteran astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, NASA had selected the SCTG’s members from experts in industry, academia, and government, active in fields relevant to spaceflight safety. NASA had organized the SCTG pursuant to the Federal Advisory Committee Act, selecting only non-NASA employees as members, as well as one nonvoting, ex officio NASA representativethe Deputy Associate Administrator for Safety and Mission Assurance.(NASA, “NASA Names Return to Flight Task Group Members,” news release 03-248, 25 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03248_SCTG_Named.html (accessed 23 December 2003).)
 NASA confirmed that its satellites’ observations had provided the first evidence that the rate of ozone depletion in Earth’s upper atmosphere was decreasing, a possible indication of the first stage of ozone-layer recovery. Scientists had analyzed data that NASA’s first and second Stratospheric Aerosol and Gas Experiment (SAGE) and Halogen Occultation Experiment (HALOE) satellite instruments had collected, discovering a decrease in ozone depletion after 1997. The scientists had found that the rate of depletion was consistent with the decline in abundance of the human-made chemicals that contribute to ozone destruction. However, according to Michael J. Newchurch of the University of Alabama, the lead scientist for the study, ozone depletion was still occurring, although its rate had decreased. Joseph M. Zawodny, a scientist on the SAGE II satellite-instrument science team at NASA’s LaRC, remarked that the finding would not have been possible if the two satellites had not lasted so long past their normal mission lifetimes. SAGE II was approaching its 19th launch anniversary, and HALOE had returned data for 11 years. Scientists had also used international ground networks to corroborate the satellites’ data. The findings indicated the effectiveness of international treaties in encouraging countries to curb pollutionspecifically the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its amendments.(NASA, “NASA Observations Confirm Expected Ozone Layer Recovery,” news release 03-253, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03253_Ozone_Recovery.html (accessed 23 December 2008); Peter N. Spotts, “After 30 Years, Ozone Is Recovering,” Christian Science Monitor, 1 August 2003.)
 The ISS marked its 1,000th consecutive day of human residency aboard the station. The first crew had arrived 2 November 2000, and since then, seven crews had lived and worked on the ISS. During that time, the living and working area had increased by 6,000 cubic feet (170 cubic meters) to the current area of 15,000 cubic feet (424.8 cubic meters), and ISS partners expected the station would eventually more than double its size. The seven ISS crews, consisting of 10 American and 10 Russian crew members, had conducted 12 spacewalks and had welcomed 11 visiting Space Shuttles, 4 Soyuz taxi crews, and 10 Progress cargo vehicles. Crews had added to the ISS the largest solar arrays ever produced for use in space, the first track-mounted railcar in space, and a science facility described as the most sophisticated space laboratory to date.(NASA, “Milestone Marked in Space1,000 Days of Human Presence on Station,” news release 03-251, 29 July 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jul/HQ_03251_iss1000_days.html (accessed 23 December 2008). 491 William Glanz, “NASA Outlines Cost of Columbia Probe,” Washington Times, 1 August 2003.)
 For the first time, NASA quantified the costs related to the loss of the Shuttle, stating that, in the six months since the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster, it had spent US$152.4 million to conduct the investigation and recover debris. The figure included US$111.9 million for NASA to support the CAIB’s inquiry with research and analysis, including the expensive high-speed, foam-impact tests at the Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, which had provided evidence that foam striking Columbia after lift off had caused the hole in the left wing. NASA had spent US$18.7 million to fund the 13-member investigative board, paying the salaries of the five civilian members, office rent, travel expenses, and the expense of holding public hearings and maintaining the CAIB’s Web site. NASA had also spent US$21.8 million recovering debris from the Columbia accident, compared to the US$30 million it had spent salvaging pieces of Challenger. Shortly after the tragedy, the U.S. Congress had approved US$50 million to cover expenses, and it was considering a supplemental appropriation of US$50 million. John Scofield, spokesperson for the House Committee on Appropriations, remarked that nobody had criticized NASA’s spending, because nobody wanted to do the necessary work “on the cheap.” Scofield added that the committee was conducting its own analysis to confirm that NASA had correctly estimated its expenditures, but that Congress would likely reimburse NASA for much of the cost. NASA had spent a total of US$62 million (adjusted for inflation) to investigate the 1986 explosion of Challenger. 
 NASA selected the University of Arizona’s Phoenix lander concept for a US$325 million mission to Mars in 2007, beating out finalists from Arizona State University, NASA’s JPL, and NASA’s LaRC. The Phoenix concept, aptly named for the mythical bird that rose from ashes, drew on the technology of past expeditions, such as the canceled 2001 Mars Surveyor Program. Phoenix’s purpose was to search for evidence of water and carbon dioxide gasa robotic arm would scoop soil samples, small on-board ovens would heat the samples, and on-board instruments would analyze them, checking the soil for organic compounds. NASA called the Phoenix mission the first of a type of mission it had designated as Scout missions. If funding remained available, NASA planned to hold competitions every four years to select relatively small missions like Phoenix as Scout missions.(Chris Kridler, “Mission Will Look for Mars Ice,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 5 August 2003)
 X Prize contestant SpaceShipOne successfully carried out its first glide flight after the White Knight carrier craft towed it to an altitude of 47,000 feet (14,326 meters) and released it. Pilot Michael W. Melvill guided the craft to a desert landing. Scaled Composites, which had built SpaceShipOne, issued a report of the test indicating that the two vehicles had separated cleanly, that handling qualities of the craft had correlated closely with ground-based simulations, and that on-board avionics and cockpit displays had performed flawlessly.(Leonard David, “X Prize Contestant Scaled Composites’ SpaceShipOne Flies,” Space News, 9 August 2003.)
 From its Odyssey Platform in the Pacific Ocean, Sea Launch lifted off its 10th commercial mission, launching the shared commercial communications satellite Echostar 9also known as Telstar 13atop a Ukrainian Zenit 3-SL rocket. Space Systems/Loral had built the 10,443- pound (4,737-kilogram) satellite, which two companies shared. Echo Star Communications Corporation operated the Ku-band and Ka-band transponders to provide additional direct- broadcast television service, via the corporation’s DISH network. Loral Skynet operated the 24 C-band transponders to provide cable television service to North America, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Central America.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598, 1 September 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx598.html (accessed 21 January 2009); Jim Banke, “Shared Communications Satellite Lofted into Orbit by Sea Launch,” Space News, 8 August 2003.)
 NASA announced the selection of Donald J. Campbell, Director of GRC at Lewis Field, as Special Assistant to the Deputy Administrator for Nuclear and Alternative Power Generation Systems, effective 1 October 2003. In his new position, Campbell would lead the development and integration of high-power generation systems for propulsion, considered fundamental building blocks for sustained robotic and human exploration in outer space and deep space. Campbell had directed GRC since January 1994. Local political and community leaders had criticized Campbell for his leadership style, which had not galvanized the GRC workforce or fully leveraged the Center’s economic potential. NASA named Deputy Director of GRC Julian M. Earls to succeed Campbell as GRC’s Director.(NASA, “Glenn Research Center’s Donald J. Campbell Selected as NASA Deputy Administrator Special Assistant,” news release 03-260, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/ HQ_03260_Campbell.html (accessed 29 December 2008); NASA, “Dr. Julian M. Earls Selected To Lead NASA Glenn Research Center,” news release 03-261, 8 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03261_Earls.html (accessed 29 December 2008); John Mangels and Michael O’Malley, “NASA Glenn Chief Leaves; Deputy Gets Job,” Cleveland Plain Dealer (OH), 9 August 2003.)
 The Canadian Space Agency successfully launched its scientific satellite SciSat 1 aboard a Pegasus XL rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet flying out of Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The 330-pound (150-kilogram) atmospheric-research satellite carried two instrumentsthe Fourier Transform Spectrometer and the Measurements of Aerosol Extinction in the Stratosphere and Troposphere Retrieved by Occultation (MAESTRO)intended to monitor atmospheric ozone and dust composition in an altitude range of 4 to 100 kilometers (2.(Associated Press, “Rocket Launch Aids New Space Program,” 11 January 2001; Associated Press, “Second Unmanned Chinese Spacecraft Returns to Earth,” 16 January 2001.)
 to 62.1 miles). Designed to last two years, the craft would orbit Earth 15 times each day, focusing on the chemical processes that control the distribution of ozone in the atmosphere.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “Canadian Ozone Satellite Successfully Launched from Plane Off California Coast,” 13 August 2003.)
 NASA released the final report of the Hubble Space TelescopeJames Webb Space Telescope (HST-JWST) Transition Plan Review Panel, an advisory panel assembled to review NASA’s plans for removing the HST from service as early as 2011, when NASA was preparing to launch the JWST. John N. Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, had chaired the independent panel of astronomers. The panel recommended three options to NASA: 1) to launch two additional Shuttle-servicing missions to the HST in 2005 and 2010, to maximize the scientific productivity of the telescope; 2) to launch one Shuttle-servicing mission before the end of 2006, to replace gyroscopes and, possibly, to install a propulsion device to de-orbit the craft once scientific operations had become impossible, or, alternatively, to de-orbit the craft using an autonomous robotic system; and 3) if no Shuttle missions were possible, to launch a robotic mission to install a propulsion module to bring down the HST in a controlled descent once scientific operations had become impossible. The panel also described various ways to extract maximum scientific return from the HST if NASA opted for any of the recommended three scenarios.(NASA, “Panel Identifies Three Options for Space Telescope Transition,” news release 03-264, 14 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03264_telescope_transition.html (accessed 23 January 2009); NASA Space Telescope Transition Plan Review Panel, “Report of the HST-JWST Transition Panel: Executive Summary” (report, Washington, DC, August 2003), http://www.nasa.gov/ audience/formedia/features/ MP_Public_Reports.html (accessed 23 January 2009); Sam Silverstein, “Hubble Review Panel Urges Second Extra Servicing Mission,” Space News, 19 August 2003.)
 NASA announced that the Demonstration for Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft had completed the lengthy design-certification review for the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program, verifying the craft’s safety, performance, and functional requirements. The DART team, based at NASA’s MSFC, planned to demonstrate the vehicle without a human pilot in 2004, launching it on a Pegasus rocket dropped from an L-1011 jet. At 40,000 feet (12,192 meters) over the Pacific Ocean, the Pegasus rocket and the DART craft would separate, and DART would travel from a parking orbit to maneuver close to a target satellite or to rendezvous with it. The demonstration would require 24 hours. DART was the first of three flight-testing demonstrators: Boeing Expendable Launch Systems was developing the X-37 flight demonstrator, and Lockheed Martin Corporation was developing the launchpad-abort demonstrator. DART was NASA’s first completely computer-controlled, rendezvous-capable spacecraft.(NASA, “Space Flight Demonstrator Completes Design Certification,” news release 03-274, 21 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03274_dart_design.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
 A 66-foot-high (20-meter-high) VLS-1 O3 rocket exploded on its launchpad during tests at Alcântara Launch Center in Brazil, delivering “a serious blow to Brazil’s nascent space program.” Brazil had hoped to be the first Latin American nation to place a satellite in orbit. According to the Brazilian Ministry of Defence, the accident, which occurred three days before a scheduled launch, killed 21 people, mostly civilian technicians, injured 20 others, and destroyed two research satellites. The rocket had successfully completed two days of tests before the explosion. Brazil’s Minister of Defence José Veigas Filho stated that, for unknown reasons, one of the four main motors of the US$2.2 million rocket had ignited, leading to the explosion that destroyed the launchpad. The accident was Brazil’s third failed attempt to launch a rocket with a research satellite.(“Brazil’s Rocket Test Kills 21,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 23 August 2003; Stan Lehman, “Brazil Mourns Dead, Vows to Reinforce Space Program,” Houston Chronicle, 25 August 2003.)
 Scientists studying data produced by the thermal emission spectrometer (TES) on board NASA’s Mars Global Surveyor published findings in the journal Science disputing the theory that Mars once had a warm climate. Using the TES, which measured infrared light from rocks, scientists had searched for patterns of color to identify different minerals, particularly carbonates. Carbonates form only in the presence of liquid water. TES data confirmed small concentrations of carbonates in Martian dust, but no large deposits, such as those that would have formed at the bottom of a lake or ocean. Lead author of the article, Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University, remarked that, according to the data, it was “extremely unlikely” that large bodies of water exposed to the atmosphere for an extended period had ever existed on Mars. Matthew P. Golombek of NASA’s JPL commented that the new findings directly contradicted the idea that, at one time, Mars may have been warmer and wetter with a denser carbon-dioxide atmosphere. Previously, scientists had proposed this theory to explain Mars’s apparent geological formations resembling the intricate patterns of riverbeds, carved canyons, and delta fans.(Joshua L. Bandfield, Timothy D. Glotch, and Philip R. Christensen, “Spectroscopic Identification of Carbonate Minerals in the Martian Dust,” Science 301, no. 5636 (22 August 2003): 1084; New York Times, “Study: No Past Standing Water on Mars,” 22 August 2003; Kenneth Chang, “New Data Dispute Theory That Mars Had Warm Climate,” New York Times, 22 August 2003.)
 NASA successfully launched its Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF) aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral, Florida. The Lockheed Martin–built SIRTF was the fourth and final of NASA’s Great Observatories, following the HST, the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory, and the Chandra X-ray Observatory. NASA had designed the 110-pound (50-kilogram), 33.5-inch (85-centimeter) telescope to measure heat from celestial objects. SIRTF would study some of the same deep space objects as the other Great Observatories, as well as studying other parts of the cosmos. Michael Jura, SIRTF interdisciplinary scientist for planetary science at the University of California at Los Angeles, remarked that one of SIRTF’s main scientific goals was to develop a better understanding of star and planet formation. The project, originally proposed in the mid- 1970s, had faced repeated budgetary cutbacks and delays. NASA planned for SIRTF’s mission to last a minimum of 30 months, at an anticipated cost of US$1.19 billion.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Associated Press, “NASA Launches Rocket with Infrared Scope,” 25 August 2003. 154)
 NASA announced that it had awarded a follow-on contract to the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to continue providing scientific and operational support for the Chandra X-ray Observatory. The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory had provided scientific and operational support since Chandra’s launch in July 1999. The follow-on contract, valued at US$373 million, funded support through 31 July 2010. NASA had planned Chandra’s mission to last five years from the time of its launch, but had extended the mission to 10 years because of Chandra’s success.(NASA, “NASA Awards Chandra X-ray Observatory Follow-on Contract,” contract release c03-z, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_C03z_Chandra_Contrct.html (accessed 29 December 2008).)
 Harold W. Gehman Jr. delivered the CAIB’s final report to NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe, presenting its findings and recommendations. The CAIB found that a 1.7-pound (0.77-kilogram) piece of foam insulation, traveling at more than 500 miles (804.6 kilometers) per hour, had damaged Columbia’s wing during launch, ultimately leading to its disintegration during reentry. The report stated that management decisions during Columbia’s flight reflected missed opportunities, ineffective communication channels, flawed analysis, and ineffective leadership. When cameras tracking Columbia provided two grainy images showing the foam striking the wing, engineers had immediately begun to discuss obtaining further images of the Shuttle or initiating a spacewalk to check for damages. However, mission managers had “adjourned for a holiday weekend and did not discuss the foam strike.” Upon returning to work on 21 January, the managers had assessed the strike as a postlanding maintenance problem, because smaller foam strikes had left harmless dents in Shuttles during all previous missions. The CAIB’s Executive Director John L. Barry remarked that, among NASA’s competing goals of maintaining costs and meeting schedules, safety had lost out. The Board directly criticized Administrator Sean O’Keefe for increasing pressure to meet a February 2004 launch deadline, thereby creating a pattern similar to that which had led to the Challenger disaster in 1986. The CAIB recommended that NASA implement 15 actions before the next Shuttle flight, including creating an independent safety-and-engineering organization to help establish satisfactory safety margins. Upon receiving the Board’s final report, O’Keefe reiterated NASA’s intention to comply fully with the recommendations.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Columbia Accident Report,” news release 03-276, 26 August 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/aug/HQ_03276_AOK_Acpt_CAIB.html (accessed 29 December 2008); Mark Carreau, “Columbia Accident Board Casts Wide Net of Blame,” Houston Chronicle, 27 August 2003; Kathy Sawyer and Eric Pianin, “Report Blames Flawed NASA Culture for Tragedy,” Washington Post, 27 August 2003. 504 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 598; Justin Ray, “Resupply Ship Bound for the International Space Station,” Spaceflight Now, 28 August 2003.)
 Progress M-48 12P launched on a Soyuz FG rocket, carrying 2.6 tonnes (2.87 tons or 2,600 kilograms) of food, fuel, water, and equipment to the ISS. Among the supplies Progress M-48 carried were an Iridium satellite phone and GPS equipment for the use of the Expedition 7 crewRussian Commander Yuri Malenchenko and NASA Science Officer Edward T. Luwhen they returned to Earth in the Soyuz TMA-2 spacecraft in October. The Russian Space Agency had added the satellite phone and GPS equipment to the supplies because Soyuz TMA-1 had experienced an internal glitch while returning the Expedition 6 crew to Earth, resulting in a long, tense search for the craft and crew.
 NASA announced the appointment of John M. Grunsfeld to succeed Shannon W. Lucid as NASA’s Chief Scientist, effective immediately. NASA tasked Grunsfeld with ensuring the scientific merit of NASA’s programs. Grunsfeld, an astronomer, astrophysicist, and veteran astronaut, had been an integral member of two Space Shuttle–servicing missions to the HST. Lucid had served as Chief Scientist since February 2002. NASA’s Administrator Sean O’Keefe had asked her to return to NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, to help with return-to-flight efforts. During her tenure as Chief Scientist, Lucid had updated NASA science policy, a project that NASA had not undertaken since 1996. One of her most important tasks had been working with the Offices of Biological and Physical Research, Earth Science, Space Science, and Space Flight to develop a comprehensive plan for prioritizing research projects on board the ISS.(NASA, “Astronaut John M. Grunsfeld Succeeds Shannon Lucid as NASA Chief Scientist,” news release 03-280, 3 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03280_Grunsfeld.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 CAIB Chairperson Harold W. Gehman Jr. and NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe appeared before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation to discuss NASA’s return-to-flight goals in light of the CAIB’s findings. Committee members criticized the CAIB for its reluctance to assign individual blame within NASA for the Columbia disaster, but Gehman replied that the Board did not need to make judgments about individual accountability. O’Keefe added that NASA would have held individuals accountable only if someone had acted maliciously in the sequence of events that led to the loss of Columbia. O’Keefe also pointed out that all former members of the Shuttle team had either left their positions, or NASA had reassigned them. Gehman testified that the decisions and conditions that had led to the loss of the orbiter had begun years before, stating that Congress and the White House shared responsibility with NASA for creating the conditions responsible for the accident. Congress and the White House had reduced NASA’s budget by 40 percent over the previous decade, affecting the operation of NASA’s management system. When committee members asked whether NASA required additional funding for 2004, O’Keefe responded that the current budget did not cover some of the CAIB’s recommended activities, such as establishing an independent authority to oversee Space Shuttle technical requirements, recertifying the orbiters, and accelerating the Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. Committee members asked for O’Keefe’s assurance that NASA would change its culture, implementing processes that would prevent future Shuttle accidents.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Senators Rip NASA over Columbia Probe,” 4 September 2003; Brian Berger, “Lawmakers Press O’Keefe for Cost Figures,” Space News, 4 September 2003.)
 NASA announced the completion of tests, which had taken place on 27 August at Edwards Air Force Base in California, demonstrating the possibility of reducing the impact of sonic booms. The research team showed that modifying an aircraft’s shape alters the shape of its sonic boom, thus reducing the sound level. Northrop Grumman Corporation had modified the fuselage and nose of an F-5E fighter jet for the demonstration. The modified jet and a regular F-5E had each flown at Mach 1.36 from the same supersonic corridor. The two aircraft had demonstrated no difference in performance except that the modified jet’s sonic boom was 33 percent less intense than that of the unmodified F-5E. Analysis and wind tunnel tests had predicted the outcome, but NASA had never before flight-tested the theory. Richard Weizman of NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology remarked that the demonstration was the culmination of 40 years of work by visionary engineers. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency had managed the Shaped Sonic Boom Demonstration (SSBD) program under its Quiet Supersonic Platform Initiative. NASA’s LaRC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC), as well as Northrop Grumman Corporation, had been partners in the SSBD program under a US$7 million cooperative agreement.(NASA, “NASA Opens New Chapter in Supersonic Flight,” news release 03-283, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03283_supersonic_flight.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Irene Mona Klotz for United Press International Science News, “Test Shows Shape Sheds Sonic Boom’s Bang,” 22 September 2003.)
 CAIB Chair Harold W. Gehman Jr. and three other Board members appeared before the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss the CAIB’s findings. Gehman testified that budgetary pressures that the U.S. Congress and the White House ultimately controlled had been partly responsible for NASA’s management failures. House Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) concurred that Congress shared some of the blame in the 1 February loss of Columbia but reiterated that NASA needed to make changes. Many of the committee’s questions focused on prospective remedies for NASA’s poor risk management. While agreeing that NASA had a tendency to be overly optimistic in risk assessment, Gehman and other investigators explained to the committee that, because of the age of the Shuttle fleet, risk calculations were little more than estimates. Boehlert expressed concern that NASA was rushing to meet unrealistic return-to-flight dates―NASA had proposed a March 2004 launch date―rather than studying the CAIB report carefully and taking deliberate steps toward returning the Shuttles to flight.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Shuttle Probe Rips White House, Congress,” Washington Post, 5 September 2003; Patty Reinert and Mark Carreau, “Don’t Rush New Launch, Lawmakers Warn NASA,” Houston Chronicle, 5 September 2003.)
 While moving NOAA’s 14-foot (4.3-meter) NOAA-N Prime weather satellite from a vertical to a horizontal position, workers at a Lockheed Martin plant dropped the nearly completed US$239 million craft, causing serious damage. Lockheed Martin spokesperson Buddy Nelson stated that the cart holding the spacecraft “was not in the proper configuration for the planned activity.” NASA’s GSFC was responsible for overseeing the construction and launch of the satellite, and NOAA would assume control of the craft once it was in orbit. Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company had been building weather satellites since the NOAA satellites’ initial launch in the early 1960s.(Associated Press, “$239M Satellite Damaged at Lockheed Plant,” New York Times, 10 September 2003.)
 NASA released its first preliminary return-to-flight plan, briefing reporters at JSC in Houston, Texas. The 158-page report, which Associate Administrator William F. Readdy called “an evolving document,” indicated that 11 March 2004 was the earliest possible date for a Space Shuttle to return to flight. However, Readdy emphasized that NASA would be safety-driven, not schedule-driven, in its efforts to launch the first Shuttle to fly since the Columbia disaster. NASA had tentatively scheduled Atlantis for a launch between 11 March and 6 April 2004. In the preliminary plan, NASA indicated that it had changed Atlantis’s original mission of ferrying supplies and a new crew to the ISS. Instead, the mission would be a developmental flight during which the crew would test the new procedures and safety equipment that the CAIB had recommended. Although the ISS would still be Atlantis’s destination, the mission would not carry ISS replacement crew. NASA’s Space Shuttle Program Manager William W. Parsons Jr. said that the greatest challenges for future Shuttle missions would be developing methods to minimize the shedding of foam from the orbiter’s external tank and to repair tile and protective heat panels while in space. In addition, NASA would have to install cameras and sensors on the Shuttles and on the ISS robotic arms, to detect vehicle damage.(John Schwartz and Warren E. Leary, “NASA Says It Won’t Rush Shuttle Back to Space,” New York Times, 9 September 2003.)
 NASA selected Team Encounter LLC as the first private company contracted to manage a commercial mission carrying one of NASA’s space science technology experiments into space. Valued at approximately US$6.5 million, the contract required the commercial company to mount NASA’s hardware on Team Encounter’s spacecraft and to integrate and test the system before the launch, scheduled to take place in 2004 or 2005. As the demonstration experiment for the mission, NASA selected a solar-sail technology known as the Inertial Stellar Compass (ISC) Technology Experiment. After the launch, Team Encounter would provide to NASA about 30 days of data from the ISC experiment. Charles Gay, NASA Program Executive for the New Millennium Program, remarked that the award was an opportunity for NASA to work with commercial industry in a mutually beneficial venture providing NASA with an effective way of validating its technology experiments in space at a reasonable cost.(NASA, “NASA Selects Commercial Space Ride for Technology Experiment,” contract release c-03-cc, 4 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03cc_space_ride.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 The U.S. Air Force launched a Titan 4B rocket with a Centaur upper stage carrying USA 171, an Orion classified satellite serving the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). The Air Force provided no comment on the payload’s destination or its whereabouts following the separation of the second stage of the Centaur. The Air Force had delayed the launch of USA 171 since April 2002 because of a series of technical problems and issues with the payload. The launch was likely the last of the Titan-Centaur launches, with only three Lockheed Martin–built Titan 4 rockets and one Titan 2 remaining to launch. The Air Force had contracted with Boeing and Lockheed Martin to replace the Titan 4 family with the Boeing Delta 2 and the Lockheed Martin Atlas 5, to provide the Air Force with cheaper, more reliable access to space for military payloads.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 599, 1 October 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx599.html (accessed 3 February 2009); Associated Press, “Air Force Launches Titan 4B Rocket Carrying Secret Military Payload,” 9 September 2003; Chris Kridler, “Titan Carries Spy Satellite into Orbit,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 September 2003.)
 NASA announced that NOAA, Lockheed Martin, and NASA had formed teams to investigate the 6 September accident involving the NOAA-N Prime satellite. While moving the spacecraft from a vertical to a horizontal position, Lockheed Martin workers had dropped it, significantly damaging the craft. NASA and Lockheed Martin had placed the satellite under guard, securing all records. NASA and NOAA were waiting for an assessment of the damage to determine how the accident would affect satellite programs.(NASA, “NASA, NOAA and Lockheed Martin Investigate Satellite Accident,” news release 03-287, 9 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03287_satellite_accident.html (accessed 28 January 2009). 514 Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Boeing Names New ISS Leader,” 12 September 2003.)
 The Boeing Company named John Elbon to replace Joe Mills as Vice President and Program Manager of Boeing’s ISS NASA Systems. In his new position, Elbon would lead Boeing’s efforts as prime contractor of the ISS, holding the central role in the space station’s design, testing, and building, as well as working with the 16 participating countries. Boeing had appointed Mills to lead its newest space initiative, the Jupiter Icy Moon Orbiter Program, part of NASA’s development of nuclear-power and electronic-propulsion technologies intended to revolutionize space exploration.
 NASA announced the appointments of three additional voting members to the Stafford-Covey Task Group mandated to perform an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s recommendations. The new members were Kathryn C. Thornton, a physicist, former astronaut, and veteran of three Space Shuttle missions; Susan J. Helms, Chief of the Space Control Division’s Requirements Directorate at U.S. Air Force Space Command, who had been a member of five Space Shuttle crews and had lived aboard the ISS as a member of Expedition 2; and career systems analyst Christine H. Fox, Vice President and Director of the Operations Evaluation Group at the Center for Naval Analyses. The new appointments brought the total number of task group members to 30, including one member selected from NASA staff who would not vote. Members representing industry, academia, and government, divided among three panels, would examine the management, technical, and operational aspects of NASA’s return-to- flight effort.(NASA, “Three Members Added To Stafford-Covey Task Group,” news release 03-293, 12 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03293_three_members.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 NASA and the U.S. Army transferred an XV-15 tilt-rotor aircraft to the National Air and Space Museum’s Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center near Washington Dulles International Airport in Virginia. J. Victor Lebacqz, Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Aerospace Technology, described the XV-15―a unique type of aircraft possessing the takeoff, hover, and landing capabilities of a helicopter, with the range and speed of a turboprop aircraft―as one of NASA’s most successful research aircraft and a prime example of cutting-edge aerospace research. Tilt-rotor flight research had begun in the 1950s with the Bell XV-3 convertiplane. In 1977 the first of two XV-15s built by Bell Helicopter–Textron had made its maiden flight. The XV-15 had achieved speed and altitude records for its class, receiving multiple awards from national organizations. Its success had led to the development of the V-22 Osprey and to the world’s first civil tilt-rotor, the nine-passenger Bell-Agusta 609, which was under development and scheduled for delivery in 2007.(NASA, “Tilt Rotor Aircraft Joins National Air and Space Museum Collection,” news release 03-295, 16 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03295_tilt_rotor.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 NASA awarded its Kennedy Space Center Integrated Communications Services (KICS) contract, valued at approximately US$190.7 million, to InDyne Inc. of McLean, Virginia. Under the cost- plus-award fee/firm-fixed price, indefinite-delivery/indefinite-quantity contract, InDyne would provide communications services at NASA’s KSC in support of the Space Shuttle Program, ISS Program, Payload Carriers Program, and Launch Services Program Office payloads. The KICS contract was the first of five work packages in NASA’s space mission communications and data services solicitation, which succeeded the NASA consolidated space operations contract (CSOC) and incorporated the requirements of the visual information technical contract as well as the telephone service requirements of the outsourcing desktop initiative.(NASA, “First Contract in SMCDS Solicitation Awarded To InDyne, Inc.,” contract release c03-ff, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_c03ff_indyne_contract.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 NASA announced the successful completion at KSC of the Multi-Element Integrated Test (MEIT) between Kibo, the Japanese Experiment Module-Pressurized Module (JEM-PM), and NASA’s Node 2. Only the third such integrated test carried out at KSC, its successful completion was a major milestone in demonstrating on-orbit performance of key ISS elements―on-orbit activation sequence, command-and-track systems that support audio and video systems, and caution-and-warning systems that monitor life systems in ISS modules. A team of international participants representing many organizations had carried out the MEIT. Members included ESA, Japan’s NASDA, the Canadian Space Agency, and the Italian Space Agency; NASA and Boeing employees at NASA’s KSC, JSC, DFRC, and GRC; as well as flight-crew members from the United States, Japan, and Brazil.(NASA, “Space Station Elements Successfully Complete Testing,” news release 03-298, 17 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03298_station_elements.html (accessed 28 January 2009).)
 A team of engineers from academia and industry conducted the first known flight test of a powered, liquid-propellant, aerospike engine, which they had developed under the California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN). The X-33/Venturestar single stage–to–orbit rocket plane, which NASA and Lockheed Martin had shelved, had been a prototype for aerospike-motor technology. Students at California State University at Long Beach had designed and developed the research vehicle Prospector 2 to use a mixture of liquid oxygen and ethanol. The rocket pitched after several seconds of stable flight, crashing to the floor of the Mojave Desert in California and destroying student payloads on impact. However, the aft section of the vehicle, which contained the aerospike, remained mostly intact. The mission achieved its single objective: to lift the vehicle into the air using the liquid-propellant aerospike engine. The test revealed several areas of the aerospike-engine design that needed improvement.(Space News, “Rocketeers Fly Aerospike Engine,” 24 September 2003.)
 NASA’s Galileo mission ended when the Galileo spacecraft disintegrated in Jupiter’s atmosphere. NASA had managed the course of the craft’s demise to prevent its becoming uncontrollable once it had depleted its propellant. Galileo had launched from Space Shuttle Atlantis in 1989, following multiyear delays―originally, NASA had planned for the craft to launch in 1982 aboard a Centaur rocket. The probe had made significant contributions to scientists’ knowledge of Jupiter and its moons, including collecting evidence of the possibility of life on Europa. Galileo had outlasted its prime mission by six years, despite enduring numerous technical problems and more than four times the amount of radiation that engineers had designed the spacecraft to withstand.(NASA JPL, “Galileo End of Mission Status,” news release, 21 September 2003, http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=129 (accessed 2 February 2009); Usha Lee McFarling, “Stalwart Galileo Is Vaporized near Jupiter,” Los Angeles Times, 22 September 2003.)
 The National Academies’ National Research Council and Transportation Research Board released a report addressing the need to overhaul the air transportation system to meet an ever- increasing demand for air travel. NASA and the FAA had sponsored the report, Securing the Future of U.S. Air Transportation: a System in Peril, which representatives of industry, academia, and government had written. The Board had found that aircraft and air traffic– management systems were not improving to meet growing demand; noise and air pollution were increasing as air traffic increased; passengers were dissatisfied with travel costs and with uncomfortable conditions in airplanes; and security continued to be a major concern to travelers and to the industry. In comparing the U.S. air transportation system to that of Europe, the report stated that Europe considered the satisfaction of consumer needs a priority, whereas the United States did not address the issue. Among its goals, Europe hoped to achieve the primacy of the European aeronautics industry, to develop a supersonic aircraft carrying 1,200 passengers, and to build an air traffic system that would set the global standard for efficiency, whereas the United States had no similar strategy. Therefore, the report recommended that the federal government make air transportation a national priority with strong, focused leadership.(The National Academies, “Overhaul of Air Transportation System Needed To Meet Ever-Increasing Demand,” publication announcement, 23 September 2003, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/ onpinews/newsitem.aspx?RecordID=10815 (accessed 4 February 2009); National Research Council, Securing the Future of U.S. Air Transportation: A System in Peril (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2003); Associated Press, “Report: US Aviation Needs Major Changes,” New York Times, 24 September 2003.)
 NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe accepted the resignation of all members and staff of the Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP), which the U.S. Congress had first chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire. ASAP’s function was to provide an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator about the safety of NASA’s operations, facilities, and personnel. In her resignation letter, ASAP Chairperson Shirley C. McCarty stated that the panel had decided to resign so that the NASA’s Administrator and Congress would have an opportunity to revitalize ASAP and to reshape its charter and mission. The panel also noted its frustration that, over the years, legislation had weakened its authority and that the CAIB final report had described the ASAP as “often not very influential.” Experts had noted that NASA had often ignored warnings that the safety panel issued and that ASAP had possessed no authority to enforce its recommendations. In accepting the ASAP members’ resignations, O’Keefe pledged to strengthen the panel by studying its original concept and determining how to help its successor panel best meet the needs of NASA.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Accepts Aerospace Safety Panel Resignation,” news release 03-301, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03301_asap_resign.html (accessed 28 January 2009); Paul Recer for Associated Press, “Nine NASA Safety Panel Members Resign,” 24 September 2003.)
 NASA announced the successful completion of the systems-requirement review for the OSP program, evaluating the contractor teams’ concept designs for providing crew rescue and transfer for the ISS according to Level 1 requirements. The Boeing Company, Lockheed Martin, and a team composed of members from Orbital Sciences Corporation and Northrop Grumman had conducted systems analysis, trade studies, and concept feasibility in preparation for the review. The review had also set Level 2 requirements, addressing guidelines for safety, launch, emergency-return and crew-transfer missions, mission frequency, on-orbit mission duration, contingency cargo requirements, and docking and interfacing with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Completes Orbital Space Plane Design Review,” news release 03-299, 23 September 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/sep/HQ_03299_orbital_plane.html (accessed 28 January 2009))
 NASA notified Resource21 LLC, a remote-sensing firm based in Englewood, Colorado, that NASA had rejected the company’s US$500 million bid to provide Landsat-type data for five years. NASA had managed the bidding process for the Landsat Data Continuity Mission on behalf of the USGS, which was responsible for archiving and distributing Landsat data. Resource21 was the only company to submit a final bid in the competition to commercialize the U.S. government’s satellite-based Landsat information program.(Brian Berger, “NASA Rejects Only Bid for Landsat Data Buy Contract,” Space News, 30 September 2003.)
 A Russian Cosmos-3M rocket launched from Plesetsk Cosmodrome in Russia carrying three 100-kilogram (0.1-tonne or 0.11-ton) satellites into orbit for Nigeria (NigeriaSat-1), Turkey (BILSAT-1), and the United Kingdom (UK-DMC). The satellites joined a similar satellite from Algeria, launched in November 2002, to form the Disaster Monitoring Constellation (DMC). The DMC’s purpose was to provide environmental information regarding floods, earthquakes, and fires. Surrey Satellite Technology Ltd. of Guildford, United Kingdom, which specialized in small satellites, had initiated the DMC project. The four craft had ground resolution of 32 meters (105 feet), and each image produced by the satellites showed 600 square kilometers (231.7 square miles). The Cosmos-3M also carried two military satellites for Russia. One of the satellites, Rubin-4 DSI, was a Russian communications experiment in transmitting telemetry data via standard e-mail, using Orbcomm communications satellites. Another, Mozheyets-4, built by students at the Mozhaisk Military Space Academy, tested hardware for future use on Russia’s GLONASS (Global Satellite Navigation System). The third was South Korea’s KAITSAT-4 scientific-research microsatellite, a demonstration platform to test new satellite systems, hosting five science experiments from an international team of researchers.(Peter B. de Selding, “Disaster Monitoring Satellites Launched,” Space News, 30 September 2003; Jim Banke, “Kosmos 3M Booster Carries Six Satellites to Earth Orbit,” Space News, 29 September 2003.)
 In its first mission to the Moon, ESA launched its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) spacecraft aboard an Ariane 5 rocket from Kourou, French Guiana. SMART-1 was the first spacecraft since NASA’s 1998 Lunar Prospector to attempt the journey to the Moon. ESA planned for the 770-pound (349.2-kilogram) craft, powered by an ion- propulsion engine, to reach the Moon in early 2005. SMART-1 carried 33 pounds (15 kilograms) of miniature instruments, which researchers from Finland, Germany, Italy, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom had provided, including a color camera the size of a human eye, a 4.4- pound (2-kilogram) infrared spectrometer, and an 11-pound (5-kilogram) x-ray spectrometer. The purpose of the SMART-1 mission was to solve certain mysteries about the Moon’s formation, its mineralogical composition, and the amount of water it has, if any. The Ariane 5 also carried into orbit two telecommunications satellites―the INSAT 3-E for India and the European e-BIRD. ESA had delayed the launch of e-BIRD since 28 August to allow the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) to make further checks on its satellite.(Frank D. Roylance, “Europe Finally Ready for Mission to Moon,” Baltimore Sun, 29 September 2003; Agence France-Presse, “European Rocket Places Lunar Explorer, Two Satellites into Orbit,” 29 September 2003.)
 A telecommunications satellite jointly owned by the United States and Japan―known as Horizons 1 or Galaxy 13―launched aboard a Sea Launch Zenit 3-SL rocket from a platform in the equatorial Pacific Ocean. Connecticut-based PanAmSat and Tokyo-based JSAT corporations launched the craft to provide digital video, Internet, and data transmission services to Hawaii and to Central America and North America. PanAmSat owned the satellite’s C-band payload Galaxy 13 and planned to use it as part of the company’s Galaxy cable constellation. President and CEO of PanAmSat Joseph R. Wright Jr. remarked that the addition of Galaxy 13 to the company’s fleet would create the first high-definition neighborhood and would help to meet the growing demand for high-resolution television. The two companies would jointly operate the satellite’s Ku-band payload Horizons 1, which would offer a variety of digital video, Internet, and data services, as well as creating new IP-based content-distribution networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600, 1 November 2003, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx600.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Justin Ray, “Communications Satellite Launched from Pacific Ocean,” Spaceflight Now, 2 October 2003.)
 Japan merged its three space agencies with the goal of saving US$89.8 million a year. According to the new configuration, the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) would manage the unified entities of the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science, NASDA, and the National Aerospace Laboratory. Modeled on NASA but about one 10th of the size of its American counterpart, JAXA had 1,800 employees and an initial annual budget of US$1.66 billion.(Reuters, “Japan Streamlines Its Space Effort: Three Agencies Merged into JAXA; Tokyo Keeps Its Eye on Beijing,” 2 October 2003.)
 NASA announced its selection of Allied Aerospace Industries of Tullahoma, Tennessee, to manufacture three flight-ready experimental demonstrator vehicles for the X-43C project, a NASA-led initiative. NASA’s LaRC had led the team, comprising members from the U.S. Air Force and from the aerospace industry, to design and develop the X-43C demonstrator vehicle and propulsion system. Following the example of the Hyper-X (X43-A), a vehicle designed to demonstrate short-duration, scramjet-powered flight at Mach 7 and Mach 10, the creators of the X-43C intended it to demonstrate free flight of a scramjet-powered vehicle, with acceleration capability between Mach 5 and Mach 7. Allied Aerospace Industries had also developed the X43-A vehicle. The Air Force had provided a dual-mode scramjet capable of operating as a ramjet or scramjet for the X-43C vehicles. The cost-plus-fixed-fee completion-type contract that NASA awarded to Allied Aerospace Industries was valued at US$150 million over 66 months, covering all work through completion of the Preliminary Design Review; options covered the final design, hardware fabrication, and all support activities. X-43C Project Manager Paul L. Moses remarked that the demonstrator vehicle would validate advanced technologies, design tools, and test techniques for designing reusable space-access vehicles in the future.(NASA, “NASA Selects Allied Team To Provide Hypersonic Vehicles,” contract release C03-ll, 8 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_c03ll_x43c.html (accessed 27 January 2009); Brian Berger, “Hypersonic Efforts Get an Extra Boost: NASA, Air Force Providing $150 Million for Test Program,” Space News, 21 October 2003.)
 NASA announced the appointment of Steven J. Dick as NASA’s Chief Historian, to succeed Roger D. Launius, who had departed in July 2002 to become Historian of the National Air and Space Museum. An astronomer and historian of science, Dick had served as the first Historian of the U.S. Naval Observatory and, just before his NASA appointment, had been Acting Chief of the Naval Observatory’s Nautical Almanac Office. As an expert in the field of astrobiology and its cultural implications, Dick had served on a panel examining the potential societal implications of the discovery of life in the Mars rock. He had received the NASA Group Achievement Award in recognition of his contributions to the establishment of the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), including the definition of the field of astrobiology. Dick had authored more than 100 works, including a history of the Naval Observatory, Sky and Ocean Joined: The U.S. Naval Observatory, 1830–2000, which had won the John Lyman Award of the North American Society for Oceanic History for best book in 2002 in Science and Technology and the U.S. Naval Observatory’s Captain James Melville Gilliss Award for extraordinary dedication and exemplary service. At the time of his appointment, Dick served on the editorial boards of several journals and was an associate editor of the International Journal of Astrobiology. From 1993 to 1994, Dick had served as Chairperson of the Historical Astronomy Division of the American Astronomical Society, and between 1997 and 2000, he had been President of the History of Astronomy Commission of the International Astronomical Union.(NASA, “NASA Names New Historian,” news release 03-327, 10 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03327_new_historian.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
 NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) commissioned the US$34 million NASA Space Radiation Laboratory (NSRL) at the DOE’s Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton, New York, where NASA biologists and physicists would perform thousands of experiments to measure the hazards of space radiation and to develop countermeasures to protect astronauts. Construction of the facility had begun in 1998. NASA and the DOE had cooperated in building the NSRL, which housed an accelerator producing beams of protons or heavy ions, like those that the Sun and other cosmic sources typically produce. The beams moved through a 328-foot (100-meter) transport tunnel to a 400-square-foot (37-square-meter) target hall, to hit a target composed either of a biological sample or of shielding material. Scientists planned to measure the interaction of specific particles with targets to determine the effectiveness of various materials in shielding against radiation and to develop and to test new materials. An NSRL health team would perform tests with biological samples to learn how radiation damages cells, how to predict risks, and to develop countermeasures to mitigate radiation effects.(NASA, “New NASA Facility Will Help Protect Space Crews from Radiation,” news release 03-326, 14 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03326_new_facility.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
 The People’s Republic of China launched Shenzhou 5 on a Long March 2F rocket, becoming the third nation after Russia and the United States to send a human into orbit. Veteran fighter pilot Yang Liwei expected to orbit Earth 14 times before landing. The launch was the culmination of the decade-long effort of China’s secretive, military-linked space program, undertaken with the hope of improving the communist nation’s image abroad, as well as among its own citizens. Chinese officials described the Shenzhou program as homegrown, but western analysts stated that Russia had provided China with important technology and training for its taikonaut (astronaut) corps. Western analysts described the Shenzhou craft as an improvement over the Russian Soyuz design, with new solar arrays enabling the front-end orbital module to remain in space after the taikonaut compartment had returned to Earth. In addition, the craft’s improved collision-avoidance systems provided Shenzhou with enhanced capacity to avoid dangerous space debris.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; David Lynch, “China Blasts Off into Space,” USA Today, 15 October 2003; Christopher Bodeen for Associated Press, “China Launches First Manned Space Mission,” 15 October 2003.)
 NASA released its Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) report, which identified four possible causes for the failure of the comet-rendezvous mission. The CONTOUR Missionintended to encounter at least two comets and to perform investigations and analyses of comet materialhad launched on 3 July 2002. NASA had lost contact with the craft on 15 August 2002, following a propulsive maneuver involving the solid rocket motor (SRM), and had been unable to reestablish contact as of 20 December 2002. On that date, NASA and Johns Hopkins University’s Applied Physics Laboratory had concluded that the spacecraft was lost. NASA had established the MIB on 22 August 2002. The CONTOUR MIB’s task was to examine the processes, data, and actions surrounding the events of 15 August; to search for proximate and root causes of the loss of the craft; and to develop recommendations for future missions. In its report, the CONTOUR MIB concluded that the probable cause of the mission’s failure was the structural failure of the spacecraft resulting from plume heating during the embedded SRM burn on 15 August. However, the lack of telemetry and observational data, immediately before and during the burn, as well as the lack of recoverable debris, left open the possibility that one of several other problems might have contributed to the loss of the spacecraft. The MIB report identified as other possible causes the catastrophic failure of the SRM; collision with space debris or meteoroids; and the loss of dynamic control of the spacecraft.(NASA, “Contour Mishap Board Completes Investigation,” news release 03-324, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03324_contour.html (accessed 27 January 2009); NASA, “Comet Nucleus Tour (CONTOUR) Mishap Investigation Board Report,” 31 May 2003; Associated Press, “Heat from Rocket Likely Broke Up Unmanned Spacecraft―NASA,” 16 October 2003.)
 NASA announced that astronaut Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz had won Discover Magazine’s Innovation Award for Space Science and Technology in the Space Explorer category. The annual awards, presented in the categories of Space Explorer, Communications, Space Scientists, Technology for Humanity, and Aerospace, honored scientists whose work had benefited the U.S. space program and all of humanity. A veteran of seven spaceflights, a record he shared with only one other astronaut, Chang-Dìaz was Director of the Advanced Space Propulsion Laboratory at NASA’s JSC in Houston, Texas, where he was leading a team to develop the Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma Rocket (VASIMR) Engine. The team was working on a conceptual engine that would eventually enable humans to explore distant regions of Earth’s solar system and, perhaps, regions beyond the solar system. A native of Costa Rica, Chang-Dìaz had earned undergraduate and advanced degrees in mechanical engineering and applied plasma physics from the University of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology before becoming an astronaut in 1981. He had first traveled to space in 1986 and, most recently, had participated in the ISS assembly and crew-exchange mission in June 2002, during which he undertook three spacewalks.(NASA, “Astronaut Chang-Diaz Wins Discover Magazine Award,” news release 03-335, 15 October 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/oct/HQ_03335_ChangDiaz_Award.html (accessed 27 January 2009).)
 Chinese taikonaut Yang Liwei successfully completed his 21-hour mission of 14 orbits around Earth aboard the Shenzhou 5, landing safely in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. From aboard the ISS, American astronaut Edward T. Lu, speaking in Chinese, had welcomed Yang to space and wished him a safe journey and success. Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko had told Mission Control in Houston that he was glad to have someone else in space besides himself and Lu, congratulating the great accomplishment of thousands of people in the People’s Republic of China who had worked together to send Yang into space. After emerging from his capsule, Yang stated that Shenzhou 5 had operated very well, that he felt well, and that he was “proud of the motherland.”(John Pomfret, “China’s First Space Traveler Returns a Hero: Craft Made 14 Orbits in 21-Hour Mission,” Washington Post, 16 October 2003; Ching-Ching Ni, “China Completes Spaceflight: Nation’s First Astronaut, Lt. Col. Yang Liwei, Returns from Earth Orbit,” Los Angeles Times, 16 October 2003.)
 Soyuz TMA-3/ISS-9S launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan transporting to the ISS the Expedition 8 crew―American Mission Commander C. Michael Foale, Russian Flight Engineer Alexander Y. Kaleri, and Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque. Foale and Kaleri were traveling to the ISS for a 200-day mission, replacing American Edward T. Lu and Russian Yuri I. Malenchenko who were completing a six-month stay aboard the orbiting station. Duque would conduct 10 days of scientific experiments on the ISS and would return to Earth with Lu and Malenchenko.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Dmitry Solovyov for Reuters, “ISS Crew Blasts Off at Baikonur,” 20 October 2003; Justin Ray, “New Station Residents Arrive at Their Orbiting Home,” Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
 The U.S. Air Force launched its Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) F16 craft aboard a Titan 2 rocket from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, marking the final launch of the Lockheed Martin launch vehicles. In keeping with its 1986 agreement with the U.S. Air Force, Martin Marietta had converted 14 Titan 2 intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) into space launch vehicles. The Air Force had used the converted missiles to launch weather and spy satellites into low Earth orbit; the first such converted missile launched in September 1988. The Titan 2 that launched the DMSP F16 satellite was the 13th of the 14 converted ICBMs to launch; the Air Force had no plans for the 14th converted ICBM except to hold it as a spare. The successful launch of the satellite marked the end of the 33 months of postponements of the US$450 million mission that had resulted from technical problems. The Air Force intended for the craft to track clouds, storm systems, and hurricanes, planning to use the data that the satellite collected to forecast weather and to monitor ice and snow coverage, pollution, and fires. The constellation of two primary DSMP satellites and older backups provided meteorologists with information for generating forecasts, which commanders and troops relied upon for strategic and tactical planning. DSMP F16 replaced DSMP F15, which had launched in December 1999, as the lead craft in the constellation’s mid-morning orbit.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Justin Ray, “US Weather Satellite Finally Escapes Grasp of Hard Luck,” Spaceflight Now, 14 October 2003; Roger Fillion, “Titan II Rocket Soars into Retirement,” Rocky Mountain News (Denver, CO), 21 October 2003.)
 CBERS 2, a China-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite (CBERS) launched aboard a Long March 4B rocket from the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in the People’s Republic of China’s Shanxi province. The 1.6-tonne (1.76-ton or 1,600-kilogram) CBERS 2 remote-sensing satellite, designed to collect data related to the environment, agriculture, urban planning, and water pollution, would be under Chinese control for 18 months before transferring to Brazilian control for a minimum of six months.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 600; Reuters, “China Launches Satellite Developed with Brazil,” 21 October 2003; Stephen Clark, “Earth Monitoring Satellite Launched by China and Brazil, Spaceflight Now, 21 October 2003.)
 NASA awarded a US$9.7 million grant to Colorado State University to study radiation and cancer. The grant was one of three that NASA awarded to institutions as part of a new initiative to establish national centers studying risks associated with deep space travel. The grant established the NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) at Colorado State University, which would investigate the risk of the development of cancer associated with radiation exposureparticularly with the development of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML), which has a direct correlation with radiation exposure. The research, which would study threats to astronauts from radiation in space, would directly benefit cancer patients who develop AML as a secondary cancer after radiation therapy treatments of the initial cancer.(Christiana Nelson, “NASA Grants CSU Almost $10 Million,” Rocky Mountain Collegian (Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO), 22 October 2003.)
 JAXA officials announced that mission controllers had lost contact with the Advanced Earth Observing Satellite 2 (ADEOS 2), nicknamed Midori 2. The environmental research satellite was conducting a joint mission of the United States and Japan designed to study ocean winds, sea surface temperatures, sea ice, and water vapor distribution in the atmosphere; to monitor plant life and vegetation in marine areas; and to monitor Earth’s ozone layer. The craft had launched 14 December 2002 to replace Midori 1, which had been lost in 1997 when a solar-array malfunction had left it with no power supply.(Justin Ray, “Earth Monitoring Satellite Goes Silent,” Spaceflight Now, 25 October 2003; Jason Bates, “Japan Loses Contact with ADEOS-2 Satellite,” Space News, 27 October 2003.)
 At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
 NASA released to the public five additional volumes of the CAIB’s report. The new volumes―including reports that NASA and other organizations had written; working documents the CAIB had produced; and findings or suggestions that the CAIB had, ultimately, not adopted―provided the full context of the technical reports and background information that the Board had used as the basis for its official 29 findings. The CAIB stated that conclusions and recommendations found in the new volumes did not necessarily reflect the Board’s official views; therefore, the Board emphasized that the first volume, containing its official findings and recommendations, should always take precedence over the other volumes in the event of a conflict in findings.(Jim Banke, “Columbia Accident Board Report Complete with New Volumes,” Space.com, 29 October 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/caib_report_031028a.html (accessed 23 February 2003).)
 The GAO presented testimony to the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space regarding the impact of the Shuttle fleet’s grounding on ISS construction and maintenance. Based on a GAO report published in September, a report that the full Senate committee had requested, GAO testified that the grounding of the Shuttle fleet would increase the cost of completing the ISS and could expose the station’s two-person crew to additional risk. NASA had originally estimated the cost of the ISS at US$10 billion, but since 1985, the U.S. Congress had appropriated US$32 billion to the project. The Bush administration had cancelled several planned ISS modules in 2001, to offset US$4 billion in cost overruns. Since the grounding of the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, several components of the station―completed and ready to launch―had reached their storage limit, necessitating their replacement or refurbishment. The inability to ferry heavy items to the ISS had hampered NASA’s ability to correct known safety concerns, such as the delivery of additional shielding to protect the ISS crew dormitory from orbital debris. Furthermore, NASA had estimated that the probability of space debris penetrating ISS living quarters increased by 1.6 percent for each year that the ISS partners postponed installing new shielding. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation had requested the report from GAO. Members of Congress had repeatedly asked NASA to provide financial details about the effect of the Columbia accident on the ISS program. However, GAO’s September report stated that neither NASA nor GAO could accurately estimate the costs associated with the grounded Shuttle fleet. GAO testified that it would be able to make such an estimate once NASA had identified precisely when Shuttle flights would resume. NASA officials agreed with GAO’s findings.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Shuttle Fleet’s Safe Return to Flight is Key to Space Station Progress” (report no. GAO-04-201T, Washington, DC, 29 October 2003), 1–11, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d04201t.pdf (accessed 8 May 2009); Marc Carreau, “Costs Up for Space Station, Report Says,” Houston Chronicle, 15 October 2003; Larry Wheeler, “Report: Shuttle’s Absence Hurts ISS, GAO Claims Station Is in ‘Survival Mode’,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 October 2003.)
 The FAA certified the ASDE-X (Airport Surface Detection Equipment) technology, a new airport surface–detection system for preventing runway and taxiway collisions, which would replace the expensive ASDE-3 system. General Mitchell International Airport in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, deployed the first ASDE-X system, and 25 other airports planned to install ASDE-X systems during the following four years. The ASDE-X system, which integrated several air traffic–control systems, used strategically placed sensors to report the location of aircraft and vehicles to controllers, giving them a real-time view of all aircraft and vehicles on airport grounds or flying in the area. A collaborative effort between a team of FAA employees, Sensis Corporation of Syracuse, New York, and Raytheon Corporation, the FAA had initially intended ASDE-X as a lower-cost alternative to the ASDE-3.(Don Phillips, “FAA Deploys System To Prevent Airport Runway Collisions,” Washington Post, 31 October 2003.)
 JAXA officials announced that the chances of restoring the operations of ADEOS 2, known as Midori 2 in Japan, were extremely slight. JAXA had lost contact with ADEOS 2 on 25 October and had been unable to restore communications with the US$654 million craft. Analyses of the malfunction had provided little hope for recovery. ADEOS 2 had replaced the ADEOS 1 mission of 1996, which Japan had abandoned after 10 months when its solar panel had broken down as a result of a design fault. Japanese officials stated that they believed ADEOS 2 had not suffered exactly the same fate as its predecessor but, rather, had experienced a problem with its power circuitry. A JAXA spokesperson suggested that recent solar flares might have affected the craftone of the solar flares had been the largest in three decades.(Agence France-Press, “Japan Bids Adios to ADEOS Earth Observation Satellite,” 31 October 2003; Justin Ray, “Hope of Salvaging Japanese Environmental Satellite Fades,” Spaceflight Now, 31 October 2003.)
 NASA filed a request for proposal with Federal Business Opportunities, inviting companies to define their schedules for Orbital Space Plane (OSP) design completion, development, testing, and delivery. NASA requested the completion of a crew-rescue vehicle by 2008 and a crew- transfer vehicle by 2012, despite congressional requests that NASA slow down its work on the OSP project. The Boeing Company and a Lockheed Martin–Northrop Grumman team had both been developing concepts for the OSP, a vehicle anticipated as the next space vehicle to ferry astronaut crews to and from the ISS. NASA had hoped to award the prime contract in August 2004 at the earliest. On 29 October, the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology, responsible for authorizing NASA programs, had restated its position that NASA should halt work on the OSP Program until the White House, Congress, and NASA had agreed on the direction the U.S. human spaceflight program would take after completion of the ISS. Congressional leaders had also questioned NASA’s funding profile for the program.(Jason Bates, “NASA Releases Request for Orbital Space Plane Plans Despite Congressional Concern About the Program,” Space News, 4 November 2003.)
 ESA’s Science Programme Committee (SPC) dropped the Eddington mission and scaled back the BepiColombo mission because of budgetary concerns―the SPC had determined that ESA would only have sufficient resources to fund one new mission in the next decade. For that mission, the Committee had selected the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) Pathfinder mission, which would launch in 2006 or 2007 and would test technologies and strategies for the planned 2012 LISA mission to detect gravitational waves. ESA had planned for the Eddington mission, scheduled for launch in 2008, to monitor the brightness of stars, study their interiors, and search for planetsof the size of Earth or smallerpassing in front of the stars. Japan and Europe had scheduled BepiColombo, their joint mission to Mercury, for launch in 2011 and had originally planned to send a lander to Mercury as part of that mission. Although the SPC had cancelled the lander portion of the mission, it still planned for ESA to launch two satellites to orbit the planet.(Vanessa Thomas, “ESA Axes Planet-Finding Mission and Mercury Lander,” Astronomy.com, 12 November 2003; Peter B. de Selding, “European Planet-Finding Mission Cancelled,” Space News, 10 November 2003.)
 NASA released an 84-page report, “Implementation Plan for the International Space Station Continuing Flight,” detailing NASA’s plans to improve exterior inspections of the ISS and to shield the station from debris strikes, while continuing to maintain a crew aboard the ISS during the disruption of Space Shuttle flights. Before the Columbia accident, Space Shuttle crews visiting the ISS had routinely photographed the exterior of the station; NASA expressed concern that in the absence of Shuttle flights, external damage would go undetected. The report outlined plans to conduct thorough inspections of external surfaces of the ISS using external cameras and classified satellite images, as well as to inspect more closely the wiring and equipment inside the station.(Patty Reinert, “Armed with Lessons, NASA Outlines Safer Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 7 November 2003; Marcia Dunn for the Associated Press, “NASA: Space Station Safety Can Be Better,” 7 November 2003.)
 The U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing transferred operation of Launch Complex 47 at Cape Canaveral Air Station to the Florida Space Authority (FSA) by means of a licensing agreement under the Commercial Space Transportation Act. J. Gregory Pavlovich, Commander of the 45th Space Wing, stated that the transfer of operations was a positive development, remarking that, although the Air Force had previously scheduled the launchpad for deactivation, licensing it to the FSA would enable Launch Complex 47 to remain available for educational use for years into the future. Under the agreement, Brevard Community College could offer as many as 200 educational launch opportunities over the following five years, allowing for hands-on technical education that would help motivate students to join the aerospace workforce.(Jim Banke, “Florida Space Authority Will Run Cape Launch Pad for Education,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/fsa_cx47_031107.html (accessed 17 March 2009).)
 NASA announced the successful test of a launchpad-abort test vehicle designed to support its OSP Program. Wind tunnel tests had demonstrated the Lockheed Martin–designed Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) vehicle’s stability and maneuverability under simulated conditions approximating escape from a catastrophic failure of a launch vehicle. The tests, which followed the completion of September’s PAD Preliminary Design Review, marked a significant success in the development of a safe and effective crew-escape system, clearing the way for the initial testing of the vehicle’s engine in November 2003 and the first set of parachute drop tests in December 2003. NASA had not pursued the PAD Project to integrate crew-escape capability into spacecraft design since the Apollo program ended.(NASA, “NASA Conducts Successful Pad Abort Demonstration,” news release 03-359, 6 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03359_pad_abort_demo.html (accessed 5 February 2009). 551 Agence France-Presse, “France, Russia Sign Deal for European Space Pad,” 7 November 2003.)
 Russian Deputy Prime Minister Boris Alyoshin and French Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin signed an agreement allowing Russian access to the ESA launch complex in French Guiana, beginning in 2006. The agreement provided for the construction of a new launchpad at Kourou for the launching of Russian Soyuz rockets. France agreed to contribute half of the cost of EUR 314 million (US$361 million), with other ESA member states providing the remainder. The agreement also allowed Arianespace to collaborate with the Russian company Starsem to use Soviet-era Soyuz rockets for launching medium-sized payloads, thereby closing a gap in Arianespace’s marketing range.
 The U.S. Senate confirmed the appointment of Gwendolyn S. Brown as NASA’s Chief Financial Officer. Before her nomination in July 2003, Brown had served as NASA’s Deputy Chief Financial Officer for Financial Management, and before joining NASA, she had served on the U.S. Senate staff and had held various positions within the DOD. Brown had come to NASA from the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), Directorate for Program and Financial Control, where she had been a senior program analyst.(NASA, “Senate Confirms Gwendolyn Brown as NASA Chief Financial Officer,” news release 03-346, 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03346_brown_confirmed.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
 NASA announced the names of three additional members of the crew of the Space Shuttle Program’s Return to Flight Mission STS-114. In 2001 NASA had named four astronauts to STS- 114―Mission Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialist Stephen K. Robinson, and Mission Specialist Soichi Noguchi of JAXA. The four were already training for the flight, scheduled to launch no earlier than September 2004. Astronauts Andrew S. W. Thomas, Wendy B. Lawrence, and Charles J. Camarda rounded out the mission’s crew of seven. NASA had originally planned for STS-114 to have a seven-member crew, but in the wake of the Columbia accident, NASA had changed the mission objective to focus on testing and evaluating new procedures for flight safety, rather than on ISS logistics and crew rotation. Thomas and Lawrence were veteran astronauts―Thomas was the second-highest-ranking member of NASA’s Astronaut Office, and Lawrence had flown on the Shuttle three times. Camarda was a rookie making his first orbital flight. NASA had assigned Robinson and Noguchi to conduct spacewalks on the flight.(NASA, “NASA Names Crew Members for Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” 7 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03360_STS_114_crew.html (accessed 5 February 2003); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Veterans, Rookie Fill Return-to-Flight Shuttle Crew,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 November 2003; Jim Banke, “NASA Names Additional Crew for Return to Flight Mission,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/sts114_ crew_)
 NASA announced the appointment of U.S. Navy Rear Admiral Thomas Q. Donaldson V as Director of its SSC in Mississippi, effective 5 January 2004. Since February 2000, Donaldson had served as Commander of the Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, one of 30 agencies at SSC. NASA appointed Deputy Director of SSC Michael Rudolphi, who had been acting as interim Director since May 2003, to manage the Space Shuttle Propulsion Office at NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, effective 1 December 2003.(NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Space Center Director,” news release 03-362, 12 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03362_stennis_director.html (accessed 5 February 2009); NASA, “Rudolphi Named NASA Space Shuttle Propulsion Manager,” news release 03-363, 12 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03363_rudolphi.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
 The Partnership for Public Service announced the results of the first survey measuring employee satisfaction in the federal government, conducted several months before the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. The survey results ranked NASA first, overall, among 28 major government agencies; NASA’s MSFC in Huntsville, Alabama, ranked first, and its JSC in Houston, Texas, ranked second, among 200 smaller divisions. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe attended a news conference to publicize the results of the survey, describing the findings as a “proud day” for NASA. O’Keefe remarked that, although NASA was in the midst of working through the tragedy of the Columbia accident, the survey results established that NASA had a “very good foundation upon which to work.”(Mark Carreau and Megh Duwati, “Federal Employees Rate NASA Tops,” Houston Chronicle, 13 November 2003; Jeffrey McMurray for the Associated Press, “Huntsville Space Center Named Best Federal Place To Work,” 12 November 2003; David Lerman, “Study: It’s Good To Be at NASA Langley,” Hampton Roads Daily Press (VA), 13 November 2003.)
 NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe announced the appointment of the team that would lead the new NASA Engineering and Safety Center (NESC), chartered in the wake of the Space Shuttle Columbia accident. NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance would assume oversight of the NESC. Based at NASA’s LaRC, the NESC would coordinate and conduct testing and safety assessments in support of critical NASA projects and programs. O’Keefe had charged Director of LaRC Roy D. Bridges Jr. with assembling a team to get the Center up and running. O’Keefe remarked that Bridges had “assembled a dynamic group of recognized experts in the fields of engineering analysis and risk mitigation.” The group comprised new Director of the NESC Ralph R. Roe Jr., formerly Manager of the Space Shuttle Vehicle Engineering Office at NASA’s JSC; new Deputy Director Paul M. Munafo, formerly Manager of Materials, Processes and Manufacturing at NASA’s MSFC; and new Deputy Director of Safety J. Larry Crawford, formerly Director of Research Engineering at NASA’s DFRC. Roe’s appointment as Director of
 031107.html (accessed 13 March 2009). the NESC drew criticism from the U.S. Congress because of his involvement in decisions regarding Columbia’s fatal mission. As Director of Shuttle Vehicle Engineering at the time of the Columbia accident, Roe had been one of several managers who dismissed concerns about possible damage to the Shuttle’s external tank when foam insulation struck the orbiter’s left wing after launch. Moreover, he and other mission managers had decided that it was unnecessary to obtain satellite images of the orbiting Columbia to check for damage.(NASA, “NASA Names Leaders for Engineering and Safety Center,” news release 03-352, 14 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03352_NESC_leaders.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Todd Halvorson, “NASA Promotes Criticized Manager,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 November 2003.)
 NASA announced the new charter and new members of its Aerospace Safety Advisory Panel (ASAP). All members of the previous ASAP, which the U.S. Congress had initially chartered in 1967 following the Apollo 1 fire, had resigned in late September 2003 in the wake of the Columbia accident investigation. The original charter had intended the panel to act as an independent body to advise NASA’s Administrator on safety issues, but over the years, additional administrative procedures had governed the panel’s work. In the new charter, NASA revoked those procedures to enable the panel to develop its agenda in accordance with CAIB findings. The ASAP’s original 1967 charter formed the foundation of the new charter, with the following revisions: 1) the ASAP would make quarterly reports, instead of annual; 2) new members would have two-year terms, extendable to a maximum of six years; 3) members would have staggered terms to ensure fresh perspectives at regular intervals; and 4) the ASAP would focus on industrial and systems safety, risk management, trend analysis, and management of NASA’s safety and quality systems. NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe named, as new members of the ASAP, Rear Admiral Walter H. Cantrell, Vice Admiral Joseph W. Dyer, Augustine O. Esogbue, Major General Francis C. Gideon Jr., Deborah L. Grubbe, Rosemary O’Leary, John C. Marshall, Steven B. Wallace, Rick E. Williams, and ex officio member, Brigadier General Joseph A. Smith. The new members represented academic, military, and industrial sectors; no member was a current or former NASA employee or contractor.(NASA, “NASA Names New Safety Advisory Panel,” news release 03-370, 18 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03370_asap.html (accessed 5 February 2009); Patty Reinert, “NASA Safety Panel Takes Flight Again with New Members,” Houston Chronicle, 19 November 2003.)
 Federal investigators concluded that a series of avoidable mistakes had caused the fatal crash of the chartered King Air A100 carrying Senator Paul D. Wellstone (D-MN) on 25 October 2002. The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that the two charter pilots had possessed inferior flying skills, they had twice failed to align the twin-engine turboprop on the proper course for an instrument landing, and they had subsequently permitted the airspeed to drop to dangerously low levels. The craft had stalled and plummeted into the woods, killing all eight on board. The NTSB recommended that the FAA improve inspections of on-demand charter companies in an effort to improve pilot training and in-flight procedures. The NTSB report also recommended that the FAA and NASA create a special technical panel to study the feasibility of “low airspeed alert systems,” which would automatically warn pilots, especially those of small aircraft, of conditions that could lead to a disastrous stall.(Ricardo Alonso-Zalvidar, “Pilots Are Blamed in Wellstone Crash,” Los Angeles Times, 19 November 2003. 173)
 NASA announced the successful test of a High Power Electric Propulsion (HiPEP) ion engine using commercial-utility electrical power, marking the first successful test of an engine that could “lead to revolutionary propulsion capabilities for space exploration missions throughout the solar system and beyond.” The test used the largest microwave ion thruster ever built. The test was also the first in a series, demonstrating the high-velocity and high-power thrust necessary for the new nuclear electric propulsion (NEP) applications. NASA’s Project Prometheus had been studying the HiPEP―one of several candidate propulsion technologies―for possible use on the Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter (JIMO). The JIMO Mission’s design included a small nuclear reactor as its power source and electric thrusters to provide propulsion. NASA planned for JIMO to study Jupiter’s three icy moons―Ganymede, Callisto, and Europa. Director of Project Prometheus Alan R. Newhouse remarked that the test represented a “huge leap in demonstrating the potential for advanced ion technologies.”(NASA, “NASA Successfully Tests Ion Engine,” news release 03-377, 20 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03377_ion_engine.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
 The ISS marked its five-year anniversary in space. Since the Russian Zarya control module had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 20 November 1998, the ISS had grown from an uninhabited module to a permanently staffed research facility the size of a three- bedroom house. After five years, the ISS was not completely constructed―NASA was preparing more than 80 tons (72,575 kilograms or 72.58 tonnes) of equipment and hardware, including solar arrays and support structures, for launch at the Space Station Processing Facility at its KSC. Also in launch preparation at KSC was the Node 2 module, which would connect the U.S., European, and Japanese research laboratories; and the Kibo Japanese Experiment Module. The eventual launch of the European Columbus laboratory under construction in Bremen, Germany, would expand the station’s volume to that of a five-bedroom house. The first crew to live aboard the orbiting facility had arrived on 2 November 2000, and since that date, eight successive crews―22 people―had staffed the ISS, conducting research in bioastronautics, physical sciences, fundamental space biology, space product development, and spaceflight disciplines.(NASA, “International Space Station Marks Five Years in Orbit,” news release 03-374, 19 November 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/nov/HQ_03374_iss_five_yrs.html (accessed 5 February 2009).)
 JAXA launched an H2-A rocket carrying two classified satellites intended to monitor North Korea, but aborted the launch when one of the vehicle’s two boosters failed to separate. Because the malfunction meant that the rocket would be unable to attain sufficient height and speed to achieve orbit, JAXA destroyed the rocket 10 minutes after launch. In March 2003, Japan had launched its first two spy satellites to monitor North Korea’s missile and nuclear programs.(Audrey McAvoy for the Associated Press, “Failed Launch Blamed on Rocket Booster Malfunction,” 30 November 2003.)
 NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance signed an agreement with the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) to participate in each other’s engineering investigations and technical analyses. The memorandum of agreement was the second that the two organizations had signed―the latest agreement between NASA and another organization managing high-risk operations. The previous agreement between NASA and NAVSEA had enabled the two to share information regarding critical supplier quality and performance.(NASA, “NASA Engineering Investigations Get Navy Input,” news release 03-393, 4 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03393_enginr_investgtns.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
 The U.S. Air Force launched an Atlas 2-AS rocket carrying a classified satellite for the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO), marking the final launch of the II-AS model from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The launch cleared the way for officials from the military and from Lockheed Martin to begin renovating Launch Complex 3 to accommodate the Atlas 5 rocket. Renovation plans included raising the mobile service tower 30 feet (9.14 meters) to accommodate the taller launch vehicles, building a fixed launch platform, modifying the umbilical tower, and enlarging the flame trench. The Lockheed Martin Atlas team planned to launch the first Atlas 5 from Vandenberg Air Force Base in 2005.(Associated Press, “Air Force Sends Spy Satellite into Space,” 2 December 2003; Justin Ray, “Atlas Soars on Secret Mission Under Cover of Darkness,” Spaceflight Now, 2 December 2003.)
 Scientists studying data from NASA’s Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) satellite and ESA’s four-satellite Cluster constellation published a study in the journal Nature reporting that solar wind creates large cracks in Earth’s magnetic field, allowing the wind to penetrate the magnetic field and causing geomagnetic storms. The leader of the study, Harald U. Frey of the University of California at Berkeley, stated that the data showed that the cracks do not open and close sporadically, as scientists had previously thought, but rather, that the cracks can remain open for several hours. Using this information, scientists would be able to create a better model of the affect of space weather on Earth, helping them to predict geomagnetic storms, which disrupt power, interfere with satellites, and endanger astronauts. IMAGE had monitored a spot in Earth’s upper atmosphere, revealing an area of heavy particles (ions) striking the ionosphere above the Arctic region, thereby creating an aurora with enough energy to power 75,000 homes. Unlike the auroras known as the northern and southern lights, this aurora was not visible to the human eye. Far above the IMAGE satellite, the Cluster constellation had flown through the opening created by the solar wind’s interaction with Earth’s protective magnetic field. The scientists estimated that the size of the crack was twice that of Earth. The crack occurred at the edge of the magnetic field, 38,000 miles (61,155 kilometers) above the planet.(H. U. Frey et al., “Continuous Magnetic Reconnection at Earth’s Magnetopause,” Nature 426, no. 6966 (4 December 2003): 533–537; Maggie Fox for Reuters, “Cracks Let Solar Wind Disrupt Earth’s Atmosphere,” 4 December 2003; Chris Kridler, “Protective Layer’s Cracks Make Earth Vulnerable,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 December 2003.)
 Russia successfully conducted its first test of a modified Soviet RS-18 Stiletto missile, launching the missile from an underground silo at Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The Stiletto, renamed Strela, or Arrow, carried a dummy satellite into low Earth orbit. Originally designed to carry six individually guided nuclear warheads, Russia planned for the modified Stiletto to become the world’s cheapest booster rocket for commercial satellite launches. Spokesperson for the Russian military Lieutenant-Colonel Igor Zatula stated that Russia would need to conduct several more test launches before the rocket would become available for commercial use.(Reuters, “Russia Tests New Role for Cold War Nukes,” 8 December 2003.)
 NASA announced the creation of the first detailed map of the water contained in Earth’s atmosphere, a map that would help scientists better understand the nature of atmospheric water vapor and its implications for climate change and ozone depletion. In July 2002, NASA had taken detailed measurements of water isotopes in the atmosphere using Alias, an aircraft laser infrared absorption spectrometer flying aboard NASA’s WB-57F high-altitude jet aircraft. The new laser technique had enabled scientists to map the water isotopes with sufficient resolution for researchers to use the map to study water transport, as well as to examine the detailed microphysics of clouds―key parameters necessary for understanding atmospheric composition, storm development, and weather prediction. The resulting map showed heavy hydrogen and heavy oxygen atoms, from Earth’s surface to 25 miles (40.2 kilometers) above the planet. NASA’s Earth Science Enterprise had funded the mission, which had used six aircraft provided by NASA and other federal agencies, to record observations above, in, and below the clouds.(NASA, “The Measure of Water: NASA Creates New Map for the Atmosphere,” news release 03-394, 5 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03394_water_map.html (accessed 23 March 2009).)
 NASA astronaut C. Michael Foale, living aboard the ISS, set a new U.S. space record―Foale had spent more time in orbit than any other American had achieved. During four Shuttle missions, an expedition aboard Russia’s former space station Mir, and his current residence at the ISS, Foale had spent more than 231 days in space, surpassing Carl E. Walz’s previous record for an American in space―230 days, 13 hours, 3 minutes, and 37 seconds. Walz had participated in four Shuttle missions and one ISS expedition in 2002. Along with astronaut Daniel W. Bursch, Walz continued to hold the U.S. record for the longest, single spaceflight―196 days.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Breaks U.S. Space Endurance Record,” news release 03-400, 9 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03400_Foale_record.html (accessed 23 March 2009); Todd Halvorson, “Astronaut Michael Foale’s 231 Days in Orbit Sets Record,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 December 2003; Associated Press, “Astronaut Sets Record for Time in Space,” 9 December 2003.)
 JAXA spokesperson, Junichi Moriuma, announced that JAXA had failed in its final effort to return the Nozomi craft to the correct trajectory for orbiting Mars. Insufficient fuel supplies had prevented the craft’s engines from firing. Nozomi―Hope―had been traveling toward Mars for five years and was schedule to arrive in one week. JAXA had planned for Nozomi to examine the Martian atmosphere’s interaction with the solar wind, to determine whether the planet has a magnetic field. During its journey from Earth to Mars, Nozomi had experienced several malfunctions that had altered its trajectory, placing it on a course that was too low and causing concern that the spacecraft would crash into Mars, possibly contaminating the surface. JAXA officials stated that, although they had failed to place the craft on the correct trajectory, they had greatly reduced the probability of the craft’s colliding with Mars. Instead, the craft would escape Mars’s gravitational field and enter a long-term orbit of the solar system. Moriuma remarked that Japanese scientists would continue to modify Nozomi, allowing it to carry out alternative missions, such as monitoring solar activity.(Kenji Hall for the Associated Press, “Japan Quits Mars Mission as Probe Strays,” 10 December 2003; Jason Testar for Canadian Press, “Japanese Fail To Salvage Mars Mission Carrying Canadian Research Instrument,” 10 December 2003.)
 NASA’s GRC and the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) signed a Space Act Agreement to collaborate in developing sealing technologies for the stacks of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFC), groups of thin ceramic cells separated by gas seals. A combustion-free electrochemical process generates electricity between these thin cells. NASA had been investigating SOFC technology to meet the need for high- efficiency, low-emission power capabilities for aviation and space applications. Prabhakar Singh, Director of PNNL Fuel Cell Development, commented that the agreement combined the two agencies’ complementary research―PNNL’s work in glass seals and NASA’s expertise in glass and glass-ceramic composites.(Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, “NASA and DOE Lab Team on Fuel Cell Research,” news release 03-46, 10 December 2003, http://www.pnl.gov/news/2003/03-46.htm (accessed 26 March 2009); Utility Automation and Engineering T&D, “NASA and DOE Lab Team on Fuel Cell Research,” 12 December 2003.)
 SpaceShipOne broke the sound barrier during its first powered flight, but a partial landing gear collapse caused the privately built supersonic aircraft to veer off its desert runway. Test pilot Brian Binnie was not injured during the landing. Scaled Composites LLC, which built the craft, stated that engineers could easily repair the damage the craft had sustained. The test flight represented a milestone―the first piloted supersonic flight of an aircraft developed by a small private company. SpaceShipOne’s specially designed jet aircraft, the White Knight, carried SpaceShipOne to an altitude of 48,000 feet (14.63 kilometers) before releasing it. Traveling near Mach 1.2, the rocket shut down after firing for 15 seconds. Binnie then placed the craft into a vertical climb to reach 68,000 feet (20.72 kilometers). Nine seconds into the climb, the craft broke the sound barrier. Binnie then reconfigured the craft to its conventional shape, and glided to touchdown, at which time the landing gear collapsed.(Associated Press, “Private Rocket Plane Breaks Sound Barrier,” 18 December 2003; Leonard David, “Privately Funded SpaceShipOne Breaks Sound Barrier,” Space.com, 18 December 2003, http://www.space.com/businesstechnology/technology/rutan_update_031217.html (accessed 30 March 2009).)
 NASA released the first pictures from its Space Infrared Telescope Facility and officially renamed the craft Spitzer Space Telescope. NASA had named the telescope for one of the 20th century’s most influential scientists, Princeton University astronomer Lyman Spitzer Jr., who in 1946 had first proposed placing telescopes in space. Spitzer had been a major force behind the 1990 launch of the HST, the first of NASA’s Great Observatories. With the release of the Spitzer Space Telescope’s first observations―a glowing stellar nursery; a swirling, dusty galaxy; a disc of planet-forming debris; and organic material in the distant universe―Project Scientist Michael Werner of NASA’s JPL remarked that the telescope was working extremely well. The fourth of its Great Observatories, NASA had designed the craft with powerful infrared detectors to capture never-before-seen cosmic features. Unlike its predecessor Great Observatories, which circle Earth, NASA had deployed the Spitzer Space Telescope in a novel trajectory that placed it in an orbit closely trailing that of Earth.(NASA, “NASA Releases Dazzling Images from New Space Telescope,” news release 03-411, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03411_newly_named_prt.htm (accessed 23 March 2009); Patty Reinert, “Stargazer’s Delight: NASA’s New Space Infrared Telescope Puts On a Dazzling Show,” Houston Chronicle, 19 December 2003.)
 NASA announced the successful completion of a series of engine and parachute tests, clearing the way for NASA to carry out integrated Pad Abort Demonstration (PAD) test flights to support its Orbital Space Plane (OSP) program. In November and December 2003, engineers had conducted a series of 14 hot-fire tests of a 50,000-pound-thrust (22,680-kilogram-thrust) RS-88 rocket engine, resulting in a total of 55 seconds of successful engine operation. The Rocketdyne Propulsion Power unit of the Boeing Company had designed and built the engine. On 9 December 2003, engineers had tested the parachutes at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Grounds in Yuma, Arizona, verifying the function, performance, and stability of an 80-foot (24.38-meter) drogue parachute and of four 156-foot (47.55-meter) main parachutes. Testers had dropped a 12.5-ton (11.34-tonne or 11,340-kilogram) pallet from 10,000 feet (3,048 meters) to simulate the size and weight of a vehicle and crew. The pallet had descended to a soft landing under nearly two acres of parachutes.(NASA, “Engine, Parachute Tests Pave Way for Launch Escape System,” news release 03-417, 18 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03417_escape_system.html (accessed 23 March 2003). 573 Chris Kridler, “Beagle 2 On Its Own,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 20 December 2003.)
 ESA announced that the Beagle 2, ESA’s Mars Lander, had separated from the Mars Express orbiting spacecraft. ESA had scheduled the Beagle 2 to land on Mars early on 24 December (EST), while, at approximately the same time, Mars Express would enter Martian orbit.
 NASA announced that a team of JPL engineers had successfully tested a new ion-propulsion engine design, marking the first performance test of the Nuclear Electric Xenon Ion System (NEXIS) engine at the high-efficiency, high-power, and high-thrust operating conditions needed for use in large-scale, nuclear-electric-propulsion applications. The NEXIS engine was one of several candidate propulsion technologies under review by NASA’s Project Prometheus, an initiative to make strategic investments in nuclear-fission power and electric-propulsion technologies for use in space travel. NASA intended for Project Prometheus to enable development and implementation of a new class of missions to the outer solar system. Lead Investigator for the JPL test, James E. Polk, remarked that the NEXIS thruster had demonstrated one of the highest efficiencies of any xenon-ion thruster ever tested, and that the research team expected the NEXIS design to meet the requirements for the proposed Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter Mission.(NASA, “Ion Engine Design Passes Key NASA Test,” news release 03-421, 23 December 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/dec/HQ_03421_passes_test.html (accessed 23 March 2003).)
 The People’s Republic of China and ESA launched Double Star 1 from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in southwest China. Double Star 1 was the first of two spacecraft in the Double Star mission to study Earth’s magnetic fields―the first joint project between China and ESA. Known in China as Tan Ce 1, Double Star 1 carried eight instruments for investigating Earth’s magnetosphere―five from ESA and three from the Chinese National Space Administration. ESA and China had designed the mission to study how magnetized and charged particles streaming off the Sun affect Earth. The space agencies had scheduled the second of the two craft to launch six months after the first.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 602, 1 January 2004, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx602.html (accessed 26 March 2009); United Press International, “China-EU Launch Space Project,” 30 December 2003.)
