 NASA’s Cassini spacecraft made a close pass of Saturn’s moon Iapetus, flying within 123,400 kilometers (76,677 miles) on its closest approach, and coming about 10 times closer to the moon than Voyager 2 had come in 1981. Cassini’s closest approach had occurred over the moon’s mysterious dark terrain, which scientists had never before seen at close range. Scientists described the dark coating, the origin of which was unknown, as rich in carbon-based molecules. The dark terrain blankets the side of Iapetus that leads in the direction of the orbital motion
 720Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 614, 1 January 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx614.html (accessed 5 June 2009). around Saturn. Voyager’s best images of Iapetus had a resolution of 8 kilometers (4.97 miles) per pixel, but Cassini had produced a resolution of about 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) per pixel.(BBC News, “Cassini Passes ‘Two-Faced’ Moon,” 3 January 2005.)
 NASA announced that the Chandra X-ray Observatory had detected the most powerful eruption measured in the universe to date, generating a supermassive black hole that is growing at a remarkable rate. The eruption in the galaxy cluster MS 0735.6+7421 had been in process for more than 100 million years, generating energy equal to that of hundreds of millions of gamma- ray bursts (GRBs). In the past, scientists had usually detected the rapid growth of supermassive black holes by observing very bright radiation from galaxies. However, MS 0735.6+7421 had no detectable bright, central radiation, and the galaxy cluster’s radio jets were faint. Chandra’s x-ray observations of the hot cluster gas had revealed the true nature of the black hole. Michael R. Wise of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology remarked that, until Chandra had captured this information, scientists had no idea that the black hole was “gorging itself.” Chandra’s discovery demonstrated that, to observe and understand some of the most violent events in the universe, astronomers need x-ray telescopes.(NASA, “Most Powerful Eruption in the Universe Discovered,” news release 05-004, 5 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05004_chandra.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
 The ISS Expedition 10 crew, comprising Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov, successfully reactivated the station’s Elektron oxygen generator, which had shut down on 1 January because of air bubbles in the system’s lines. Flight Engineer Sharipov made three unsuccessful attempts to repair the Russian-built unit. While the ISS crew continued to work on the problem, flight controllers in Russia used oxygen stores aboard the Progress 16 supply ship to repressurize the station. Russian engineers then instructed the crew to hook up a backup liquid unit to infuse fresh electrolytes into the oxygen generator’s system. The crew reactivated the Elektron generator without incident. Engineers planned to monitor the system’s performance to ensure that it continued to function properly.(Tariq Malik, “Repaired Oxygen Generator Fails Again Aboard ISS,” Space.com, 5 January 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_elektron_050104.html (accessed 18 August 2009); William Harwood, “Space Station’s Oxygen Generator Back in Action,” Spaceflight Now, 6 January 2005.)
 The White House Office of Science and Technology released the Vision for Space Exploration, the new policy for transportation in space and the first wholesale revision of space policy since 1994. The new policy detailed broad principles and national security goals for providing access to space for military satellites, spy spacecraft, and other government missions, emphasizing the creation of a robust program for space exploration. The policy called for astronauts to return to the Moon by 2020, planned for future human missions to Mars, and supported the commercialization of large parts of the space industry. Under the new policy, the government would fund Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation rockets to launch government satellites through the end of the decade. At that time, the White House expected that the private sector would have developed launchers that were less costly and more flexible. The policy also reiterated President George W. Bush’s plan for the retirement of the Space Shuttle at the completion of ISS constructionestimated to occur at the end of the decade. The projected retirement of the fleet required that the DOD and NASA recommend the best option for replacing the Space Shuttle. According to the new policy, the two agencies would work closely to determine long-term funding plans. In addition, the agencies would use heavy-lift rockets, which the military was developing, for satellites and other robotic missions.(U.S. Office of Science and Technology Policy, “U.S. Space Transportation Policy Fact Sheet,” 6 January 2005, http://www.spaceref.com/news/viewsr.html?pid=15010 (accessed 18 August 2009); Gwyneth K. Shaw, “Space Policy Goes Private,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 7 January 2005; Amy Pasztor, “White House Releases New Space Strategy,” Wall Street Journal, 7 January 2005.)
 NASA announced the completion of the most extensive global topographic map ever created, using data collected during Endeavour’s Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) in February 2000. NASA and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) had processed the collected data for more than four years, creating digital elevation maps that encompassed 80 percent of Earth’s landmass and revealed, for the first time, large, detailed swaths of topography previously obscured by persistent cloud cover. The data covered Australia and New Zealand in unprecedented, uniform detail, as well as the more than 1,000 islands comprising much of Polynesia and Melanesia in the South Pacific and the islands in the South Indian and Atlantic oceans, including many that geographers had never topographically mapped. The low topography typical of the islands makes them vulnerable to tidal effects, storm surges, and long- term rise in sea level. Mission Project Scientist at NASA’s JPL, Michael Kobrick, remarked that the maps would help mitigate the effects of future disasters of the magnitude of the Indian Ocean tsunami, because scientists would now be able to see where rising waters would go. Kobrick also commented that the SRTM was among the most significant missions the Shuttle had performed and, probably, the most significant mapping mission of any single type.(NASA, “NASA Goes ‘Down Under’ for Shuttle Mapping Mission Finale,” news release 05-007, 6 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05007_srtm_update.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
 James D. Wetherbee, the only U.S. astronaut to command five Space Shuttle flights, announced his plans to retire from NASA. Wetherbee had participated in six Space Shuttle missions since becoming an astronaut in 1984, serving as pilot aboard Mission STS-32 in 1990 and commanding STS-52 in 1992, STS-63 in 1995, STS-86 in 1997, STS-102 in 2001, and STS-113 in 2002. His missions had included flights both to the Russian Mir space station, including the first Shuttle–Mir rendezvous, and to the ISS. Just before retiring, Wetherbee had worked as Space Shuttle Lead in the Independent Technical Authority at NASA’s JSC, a group responsible for identifying and analyzing possible hazards and determining launch readiness. Wetherbee had also served for two years as Director of Flight Crew Operations at JSC and for five years as Deputy Director of JSC.(NASA, “Veteran NASA Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” news release 05-017, 11 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/audience/formedia/archives/2005-all-archives.html (accessed 13 August 2009); Associated Press, “Veteran Space Shuttle Commander Retires,” 12 January 2005.)
 The NASA probe known as Deep Impact launched aboard a Delta 2 rocket from Cape Canaveral in Florida, on its mission to Comet Tempel One. The craft carried an impactor, intended to collide with the comet to create a crater about 100 meters (328 feet) wide and 28 meters (92 feet) deep, as well as two instruments designed to observe the impact and its aftermath in visible and infrared wavelengths. NASA planned for the craft to launch the impactor into the comet on 4 July 2005. Mission scientists hoped the data collected from the impact would reveal information about the birth of the solar system.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 615, 1 February 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx615.html (accessed 13 August 2009).)
 ESA announced that its Huygens probe, which had undertaken a seven-year journey through the solar system, aboard NASA’s Cassini spacecraft, had successfully landed on the surface of Saturn’s moon Titan. ESA intended Huygens to provide the first direct and detailed sampling of Titan’s atmospheric chemistry, the first photographs of its surface, and a detailed weather report of the moon. ESA had selected Titan as the probe’s destination because Titan’s nitrogen atmosphere is rich in methane, and scientists believe its surface may contain chemicals similar to those that existed on the young Earth, before life evolved. Before the landing of Huygens, scientists had been unable to see Titan’s surface, because the methane in the atmosphere reacts with sunlight, creating a permanent blanket of smog. ESA had designed the Huygens probe specifically to breach that shroud.(ESA, “Europe Reaches New FrontierHuygens Lands on Titan,” ESA news release PR 03-2005, 14 January 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_3_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 14 August 2009); NASA JPL, “NASA Salutes Successful Huygens Probe,” news release 2005-017, 14 January 2005, http://saturn.jpl.nasa.gov/news/newsreleases/newsrelease20050114-3/ (accessed 14 August 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Probe Lands on Moon of Saturn: A First Glimpse of Smog-Covered Titan,” Washington Post, 15 January 2005. 731 Agence-France Presse, “Russia and Europe Sign Space Agreement,” 20 January 2005.)
 Russian Space Agency Chief Anatoly N. Perminov and ESA Director General Jean-Jacques Dordain signed an agreement allowing Russia to use ESA sites for space launches and enabling Russia and Europe freely to exchange research and development information. Specifically, ESA would permit Russia to conduct Soyuz launches from Kourou, French Guiana. In addition, the two would share information on the design of new launchers and fuelsinformation once closely guarded by both sideswith the intention of developing new launchers jointly. For example, Russia and Europe had studied the option of developing new reusable launchers and new propulsion systems.
 In the journal Geophysical Research Letters, researchers studying data from the Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX) reported their determination that a strange flash over the Indian Ocean, which had occurred on 20 January 2003, was not related to lightning. The researchers named the mysterious reddish glow Transient Ionospheric Glow Emission in Red, or TIGER. Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon, a crew member of the ill-fated STS-107, had recorded the glow while aboard Space Shuttle Columbia, using an infrared video camera. During the Shuttle flight, Ramon had collected data about dust particles in the atmosphere for the MEIDEX Sprite campaign at the Open University in Ra’anana, Israel. Researchers for MEIDEX had analyzed Ramon’s video, including a single frame that showed a mysterious reddish glow 150 kilometers (93.2 miles) above the ocean near Madagascar. Like blue jets and elves, sprites are emissions―transient luminous events (TLEs)―that occur above thunderstorms. Airline pilots had first reported TLEs several decades ago. The TIGER phenomenon contrasted with typical TLEs because of its shape and its lack of any direct relationship to thunderstorm activity.(Maggie McKee, “Columbia Crew Saw New Atmospheric Phenomenon,” New Scientist, 20 January 2005; Michael Schirber, “High-Altitude Mystery Flash Recorded by Space Shuttle,” LiveScience.com, 19 January 2005, http://www.livescience.com/environment/050118_tiger_flash.html (accessed 18 August 2009).)
 NASA announced that the NASA-led Swift mission had detected and captured its first image of a GRB. On 17 January, the craft had turned, autonomously, to focus on the burstquickly enough to capture an image with its X-ray Telescope (XRT), while its Burst Alert Telescope (BAT) continued to detect gamma rays. The event marked the first time that an x-ray telescope had imaged an in-process GRB. Previous images had captured the burst’s afterglow, but never the burst itself. The event had also marked the first time that BAT had detected a burst, and an XRT detection had autonomously followed it. Swift had carried a third instrument, the Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), which was still in its testing phase. UVOT had not been collecting data when the other two telescopes detected the burst. John A. Nousek, Swift’s Mission Operations Director at Pennsylvania State University in State College, Pennsylvania, remarked that Swift had successfully achieved, early in its mission, its primary purposeto detect the fleeting bursts and to focus telescopes on them autonomously within a minute.(NASA, “Swift Mission Images the Birth of a Black Hole,” news release 05-019, 21 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05019_swift_blackhole.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
 Northrop Grumman Corporation announced that it had finalized an agreement with the Boeing Company to compete as a team to develop NASA’s new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) and related human lunar-exploration systems, in anticipation of NASA’s formal request for proposals (RFPs). NASA intended the CEV to serve as the central human space-transportation system within the Project Constellation, which would incorporate human and robotic space systems, ferrying astronauts to the Moon and beyond. According to the agreement, Northrop Grumman’s Integrated Systems sector would serve as team leader and prime contractor during the initial development phase, Spiral 1. During the Spiral 1 phase, the team hoped to demonstrate the CEV’s ability to operate safely in low Earth orbit with astronauts aboard. Boeing NASA Systems, an operating unit of Boeing Integrated Defense Systems, would serve as principal subcontractor. The two companies’ roles would reverse to implement the second phase, Spiral 2. During the Spiral 2 phase, NASA intended to begin to expand human space exploration to the Moon and beyond.(Northrop Grumman, “Northrop Grumman, Boeing Finalize Space Exploration Teaming Agreement,” news release, 24 January 2005, http://www.irconnect.com/noc/press/pages/news_releases.html?d=71298 (accessed 17 August 2009); Los Angeles Business Journal, “Northrop, Boeing Finalize Deal To Team for NASA Contract,” 25 January 2005.)
 NASA announced its selection of the Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) as part of NASA’s Small Explorer Program (SMEX). Scheduled for launch in 2008, IBEX was the first mission designed to detect the edge of the solar system. IBEX planned to use two neutral atom imagers to detect the particles created from the termination shock that occurs at the boundary between the solar system and interstellar space. IBEX would also study galactic cosmic rays, which pose a health and safety hazard for humans exploring beyond Earth’s orbit. Since 1992, NASA had successfully launched six SMEX missions.(NASA, “NASA Selects Small Explorer Mission,” news release, 26 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05026_exp_mission.html (accessed 11 May 2009).)
 ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov successfully carried out a spacewalk to install a universal work platform at the station’s Zvezda module. The excursion was Chiao’s fifth spacewalk and Sharipov’s first. Over a period of 5 hours and 28 minutes, the crew attached a German-built test robot, ROKVISS (Robotic Components Verification on the ISS), to the newly installed work platform. The two-jointed robot, with an on-board camera and manipulator arm, would test the application of the lightweight robotic systems that may help support the ISS and other spacecraft in the future. Chiao and Sharipov encountered some difficulty fastening the power cables of the robot’s antenna, but they succeeded in their second attempt. ISS crews would be able to operate the robot using a computer, but flight controllers in Germany would operate the robot remotely, relying on the antenna. Sharipov also inspected and photographed three vents, which the station’s Elektron oxygen generator and other systems used to expel waste matter. He reported white residue resembling honeycomb, on the Elektron generator’s vent, and brownish residue on the other two vents. Engineers on the ground planned to analyze the photographs to determine whether the residue had caused the repeated shutdowns of the main oxygen generator of the ISS.(Tariq Malik, “First Spacewalk a Success for Space Station Crew,” Space.com, 27 January 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva1_050126.html (accessed 18 August 2009); Reuters, “Station Crew Leaves Outpost for Spacewalk,” 26 January 2005; Todd Halvorson, “Spacewalkers Spy Clue in Oxygen Generator Breakdowns,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 27 January 2005.)
 NASA announced that one of its scientific balloons had broken the balloon flight record for duration and distance, soaring for nearly 42 days and making three orbits around the South Pole, thereby exceeding the previous record of nearly 32 days and two orbits. The flight of the balloon, which carried the Cosmic Ray Energetics and Mass (CREAM) experiment, demonstrated the capabilities of NASA’s Ultra-Long Duration Balloon (ULDB) support system. NASA had designed the CREAM experiment to study the supernova acceleration limit of cosmic rays―the relativistic gas of protons, electrons, and heavy nuclei arriving at Earth from outside the solar system. The ULDB system, which NASA was developing, would extend flights up to 100 days.(NASA, “NASA Research Balloon Makes Record-Breaking Flight,” news release 05-031, 28 January 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/jan/HQ_05031_balloon_record.html (accessed 13 August 2009).)
 NASA announced it had accepted an invitation to join the National Invasive Species Council (NISC), a cabinet-level council established in 1999 to coordinate federal responses to harmful invasive species. As a member of the council, NASA would provide data acquired using Earth- observation spacecraft and predictive models to assist 12 other federal agencies’ efforts to combat invasive species nationwide. The council had extended the invitation because of NASA’s previous work monitoring invasive species: NASA had provided data, predictive models, and systems engineering to the USGS, information that had helped the USGS build predictive maps of invasive species in Utah’s Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument. With NASA’s assistance, USGS had converted data from the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectrometer aboard NASA’s Terra satellite, as well as other data, to create predictive maps of plant species distribution. USGS had used the National Invasive Species Forecasting System to help improve the nation’s response to invasive species.(NASA, “NASA Research to Aid Federal Invasive Species Council Efforts,” news release 05-035, 2 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05036_Invasive_Species.html (accessed 19 August 2009). 739 Warren E. Leary, “Repair Costs for Hubble Are Vexing to Scientists,” New York Times, 3 February 2005; Deborah Zabarenko for Reuters, “Hubble Repair Could Hinge on Who Pays at NASA,” 3 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Options for Hubble Science, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 2 February 2005.)
 The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to examine options for the HST. Astronauts had serviced the HST four times since its entry into orbit in 1990. NASA had scheduled a fifth servicing mission for 2004, planning to make repairs and upgrades. However, because it had grounded the Shuttle fleet following the Columbia disaster in February 2003, NASA had not performed the scheduled servicing mission. The decision about whether to service or to decommission the telescope hinged upon the expense of the mission and on NASA’s budgetary allocation of funds for the mission. Joseph H. Taylor of Princeton University, head of the National Academy of Sciences committee that set priorities for planning astronomy missions for the first decade of the 21st century, testified that his committee had identified the servicing mission to the HST as a priority for NASA’s space program, but only if the cost of the mission did not exceed US$400 million. Taylor stated that he would not support the mission if it would delay other programs or if NASA would have to rearrange its priorities to fund the mission. Newly revised NASA estimates placed the total cost of a fifth servicing mission at US$1 to US$2 billion, a cost that NASA’s Space Science Division could not sustain on its own. Experts testifying before the committee agreed that, if the Office for Human Space Flight and the Space Sciences Division could share the expense, the mission would be well worth it.
 ESA and the government of the United Kingdom (UK) officially published the report of the investigation into the circumstances and possible reasons for the failure of the Beagle 2 mission. Beagle 2, the Mars lander that had “piggybacked” aboard ESA’s Mars Express Orbiter, had failed to communicate after its landing date of 25 December 2005. The UK government and ESA had commissioned the report in February 2004, and the commission had completed the report in April 2004. Initially, ESA and the UK government had refused to publish the report, citing details of confidential intergovernmental agreements, as well as commercially sensitive information. Instead, they had issued a set of recommendations for future missions. However, the New Scientist had requested the report’s publication under the UK’s new Freedom of Information Act, in force since the beginning of 2005. Colin Pillinger, the planetary scientist who had first proposed the Beagle 2 project, and Mark Sims, the mission’s project managerboth at the Open University in the UKagreed that the report contained little, if any, commercially sensitive information. However, the report concluded that ESA and the UK government should never have approved the project. ESA committee investigating the loss of the probe had found several fundamental errors, such as classifying the lander as an instrument aboard Mars Express, instead of as a separate spacecraft, and making inaccurate estimates about the characteristics of the Martian atmosphere. The committee also determined that ESA and the UK had underfunded the mission from the start. Moreover, the committee found that the mission’s logistics were too complex for Pillinger’s team.(British National Space Centre, “Beagle 2”; Justin Mullins, “Beagle 2 ‘Should Never Have Been Built’,” New Scientist, 4 February 2005; BBC News, “Report Scorns Beagle 2 Decision,” 4 February 2005.)
 The U.S. Air Force successfully launched two military satellites aboard an Atlas 3B, the last of Lockheed Martin’s Atlas 3 rockets. The launch marked the 145th and final launch from Complex 36 at Cape Canaveral, Florida, after 43 years of operation. NASA had built the complex in the early 1960s, specifically for its Atlas-Centaur program, which included the launches of NASA’s historic Surveyor, Mariner, and Pioneer missions. Launches from the site had proved highly successful; the launch of the last Atlas 3B marked the 75th consecutive successful Atlas rocket launch, including all six Atlas 3 flights. Launch Complex 36 was one of the United States’ oldest continuously operating launch sites and the last of the U.S. launch sites to use a traditional blockhouse to control the launch. The final Atlas 3B carried a pair of formation-flying, classified satellites, which analysts believed were part of the Naval Ocean Surveillance System (NOSS) of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO). Satellites in the NOSS, a network for monitoring ships around the globe, were reportedly capable of detecting radio transmissions from ships to pinpoint their locations precisely.(Justin Ray, “Last Atlas 3 Rocket Launches a Pair of Spy Satellites” and “Atlas Rocket Workers Say Goodbye to Complex 36,” Spaceflight Now, 4 February 2005; Todd Halvorson, “Atlas 3 Climbs Through Fog to Final Successful Mission,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 4 February 2005.)
 NASA announced the inauguration of SERVIR, an innovative regional monitoring system designed to provide early warnings to Central American decision makers about various ecological and climatic changes. SERVIR, Spanish for “to serve,” is the acronym for the Spanish phrase, Sistema Regional de Visualización y Monitoreo (Regional Visualization and Monitoring System). The purpose of the system was to aid the governments and industries of the seven countries of Central America and the southern Mexican states. NASA scientists had developed the system to track weather, climatological, and ecological eventsfor example, to monitor wildfires, red tides, and toxic algae bloomsusing NASA’s research in Earth sciences and space-based observations. Daniel E. Irwin, SERVIR Project Manager at NASA’s MSFC, remarked that the system was an excellent tool for gauging slow or periodic shifts in climate that could lead to drought or other long-term problems, in addition to identifying quick-forming weather phenomena that threaten human lives.(NASA, “NASA Develops Central American Monitoring System,” news release 05-038, 4 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05038_panama.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
 Officials of the Personal Spaceflight Federation announced the newly formed organization’s establishment. The Federation’s stated purpose was to design and uphold the standards and processes necessary to ensure public safety, while promoting the growth of the private spaceflight industry. Pursuant to landmark legislation signed by President George W. Bush in December 2004Pub. L. No. 108-492, the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004the industry group planned to work with federal regulators to draft rules and standards for suborbital space tourism. The new federation brought together visionary space entrepreneurs, including SpaceShipOne designer Burt Rutan, whose team had won the US$10 million X Prize in October 2004 for conducting the first private suborbital spaceflight, and video-game developer John D. Carmack II, whose Armadillo Aerospace team had been among the leading contenders for the X Prize. Executive Director of the X Prize Foundation Gregg E. Maryniak, serving as the Federation’s spokesperson, remarked on the law’s new mandate that government and industry work together to develop safety standards. Maryniak stated that the Federation believed strongly that private industry must devise a suborbital product considerably safer than that of the current civil space program.(Personal Spaceflight Federation, “Space Entrepreneurs Resolve To Create Industry Group To Promote Safety Standards and Growth of the Personal Spaceflight Industry,” news release, 8 February 2005, http://www.commercialspaceflight.org/pressreleases/PSF%20Press%20Release%20- %20Original%20Announcement.pdf (accessed 27 August 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Racers Unite in Federation: Industry Group Will Follow Up on New Law,” MSNBC.com, 9 February 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/6936543/ (accessed 28 August 2009).)
 The U.S. House Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee on Aviation held a hearing to explore the regulation of the nascent commercial spaceflight industry. Members of the newly formed Personal Spaceflight Federation and its Industry Consensus Standards Organization voiced their concern that the government would attempt to implement additional regulations, thereby overregulating the new industry and stifling innovation. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 required the FAA to issue licenses for the launches of privately built spacecraft and had given the FAA three years to issue rules for licensing. However, the Act also prohibited the FAA from issuing safety regulations for passengers and crew for eight years, unless specific design features or operating practices had resulted in serious or fatal injuries. U.S. Representative James L. Oberstar (D-MN), ranking member of the Transportation Committee, objected to that approach and had introduced his own bill (H.R. 656), requiring the FAA to include in its licensing rules minimum safety and health standards for spacecraft passengers and crew. FAA Administrator Marion C. Blakey agreed with regulation of private spaceflight in principle but suggested that such oversight needed to develop alongside the industry, emphasizing the difficulty in stipulating regulations for vehicles that did not yet exist.(Leslie Miller for the Associated Press, “Space Entrepreneurs Fret Over Federal Regulation,” 10 February 2005; Kelly Young, “Fledgling ‘Space Federation’ Fears Over-Regulation,” New Scientist, 11 February 2005; Beth Dickey, “FAA Proposes Rules for Future Spaceliners,” Government Executive, 15 February 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, Subcommittee on Aviation, Commercial Space Transportation: Beyond the X Prize, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 9 February 2005.)
 ESA successfully launched from its base in Kourou, French Guiana, an Ariane 5 ECA rocket, the world’s most powerful commercial launcher, more than two years after its inaugural flight in December 2002 had ended in disaster. Capable of carrying up to 10 tons (9,071 kilograms or 9.07 tonnes) into space, the rocket lifted a 7.3-ton (6,623-kilogram or 6.62-tonne) payload consisting of two satellitesthe U.S.-Spanish XTAR-EUR satellite and the Dutch experimental SLOSHSAT-FLEVO microsatellite. Fitted with 12 wideband, X-band transponders, the XTAREUR geostationary satellite would provide military communications for the United States and Spain. For 10 days, the Netherlands’ microsatellite SLOSHSAT-FLEVO, weighing just 127 kilograms (0.127 tonnes or 0.139 tons), would test the dynamics of de-ionized water in orbit. FLEVO was the acronym for Facility for Liquid Experimentation and Verification in Orbit, as well as the name of the latest Dutch province that the Netherlands had reclaimed from the sea. ESA also sent aloft a monitor, MAQSAT, which remained attached to the rocket to gather data about the rocket’s dynamic behavior, from launch through the release of the two satellites. In its inaugural launch, the rocket had veered off course, prompting Mission Control to destroy it. An inquiry board had determined that the cooling system of the rocket’s Vulcain engine had malfunctioned.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616, 1 March 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx616.html (accessed 26 August 2009); Associated Press, “European Rocket Delivers Payload,” 14 February 2005; Laurent Marot for Reuters, “Upgraded Ariane-5 Rocket Orbits Satellites,” 13 February 2005.)
 NASA awarded a US$9.8 million, five-year research grant to the University of Texas’s Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas to study the cancer risks of radiation exposure during space travel, adding another NASA Specialized Center of Research (NSCOR) to NASA’s space radiation program. The name of the newest NSCOR was NASA Specialized Center of Research for the Estimation of Solid Tumor Cancer Risks from Space Radiation. The grant enabled researchers to study the relationship of lung cancer pathogenesis and exposure to HZE-particles (high-energy charged particles) at the cellular and molecular level, using data collected from animal models and tissues.(NASA, “NASA Satellite Observes Mysterious Earth Energy,” news release 05-054, 22 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05045_cancer_grant.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Associated Press, “NASA Awards UT Southwestern $9.8 Million Grant to Study Radiation,” 25 February 2005.)
 The U.S. House Committee on Science held a hearing to discuss NASA’s FY 2006 budgetary request and priorities. Committee Chair Sherwood L. Boehlert (R-NY) expressed doubt that NASA would receive the full US$16.45 billion it had requested. Committee members questioned Deputy Administrator Frederick D. Gregory on several topics: NASA’s long-term plan to return to the Moon and to send a human mission to Mars; its projected cuts to science and astronautics programs; its decision not to fund a servicing mission to the HST; and its plans for its workforce. The committee also questioned the US$858 million NASA had designated for Mars and lunar exploration, while reducing spending in other space science programs, including that of the HST. The committee questioned budgetary proposals based on plans for 28 Shuttle flights to the ISS and no flights to repair the HST. Representative Vernon J. Ehlers (R-MI) remarked that that the HST was capable of conducting more and better scientific research in one week than the ISS could produce in its entire lifetime. Boehlert reminded NASA officials that the U.S. Congress had never endorsed or even discussed the President’s January 2004 declaration urging NASA to return humans to the Moon within 15 years and, ultimately, to launch human missions to Mars and beyond. Representative Bart Gordon (D-TN) remarked that Congress had no consensus regarding the proposed changes in NASA’s priorities, changes that he described as “almost staggering in terms of magnitude.”(James Janega, “House Science Panel Questions NASA Officials about Budget,” Chicago Tribune, 18 February 2005; Jim Abrams, “Lawmakers Question White House on NASA,” Kansas City Star (MO), 18 February 2005; U.S.)
 NASA officially refuted news reports that had circulated on 16 February claiming that NASA scientists affiliated with ARC had found strong evidence that life might exist on Mars. According to the news reports, during a private meeting in Washington, DC, two astrobiologists from Ames had told a group of space officials that they had found strong evidence, in the form of methane signatures, that life currently exists on Mars, hidden in caves and sustained by pockets of water. NASA stated that it did not have any observational data from any current Mars missions to support the claim. NASA further stated that the work the scientists had conducted did not directly support any conclusion regarding the existence of life on Mars but, rather, that the scientists’ research could help formulate a strategy for searching for such life. The scientists had not submitted any research papers asserting the existence of Martian life to any scientific journal.(NASA, “NASA Statement on False Claim of Evidence of Life on Mars,” news release 05-052, 18 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05052_mars_claim.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Bloomberg News, “NASA Says Claims of Evidence of Current Life on Mars Are False,” 19 February 2005; Brian Berger, “Exclusive: NASA Researchers Claim Evidence of Present Life on Mars,” Space.com, 16 February 2005, http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/mars_life_050216.html (accessed 28 August 2009).)
 The Boeing Company announced that it had reached an agreement to sell its Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power business to Pratt & Whitney, a United Technologies Corporation unit, for about US$700 million in cash. Rocketdyne, primarily a rocket engine developer and builder that provided booster engines for the Space Shuttle and the Delta series of expendable launch vehicles, had helped pioneer space exploration in the 1950s and1960s. The sale reflected Boeing’s struggle to make a profit in the space-launch business and marked the company’s latest move toward focusing on large-scale weapons and aerospace systems. United Technologies intended the acquisition to broaden the product line at Pratt & Whitney, which, in recent years, had lost market share in its core business of providing jet engines.(The Boeing Company, “Boeing To Sell Rocketdyne Propulsion Unit to Pratt & Whitney; news release, 22 February 2005, http://www.boeing.com/news/releases/2005/q1/nr_050222o.html (accessed 19 August 2009); Los Angeles Times, “Maker of Rocket Engines Is Sold,” 23 February 2005.)
 NASA announced the completion of its pioneering Advanced Air Transportation Technologies (AATT) project, which, since 1996, had focused on developing technologies to improve the capacity of transportation aircraft operations at and between the major airports of the National Airspace System. The AATT project had collaborated with the FAA and the airline industry to develop decision-support tools for air-traffic controllers, airline pilots, and air-operations managers. Tools developed and implemented through the AATT project included: the Traffic Management Advisor, operational at eight Air Route Traffic Control Centers, which helped controllers manage air traffic by sequencing aircraft as the craft approached their destinations; the Surface Management System, scheduled for transfer to the FAA, which helped airport controllers and company traffic managers coordinate aircraft departures from the gate, preventing delays at the runway; other technologies, which helped aircraft fly the most direct
 Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, NASA’s Fiscal Year 2006 Budget Proposal, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 17 February 2005. route to their destination and assisted traffic managers in managing in-flight aircraft collaboratively; and new communication and visualization technologies, which helped airline industry personnel better understand air-traffic patterns and future trends. Michael R. Landis, Manager of the AATT project, remarked that NASA would incorporate many of the technologies and concepts developed by the AATT project into the Next Generation Air Transportation System, the initiative of the government and industry to modernize the National Airspace System.(NASA, “NASA Developed Tools for Successful Air Travel Program,” news release 05-058, 24 February 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/feb/HQ_05058_Improving_Air_Travel.html (accessed 19 August 2009).)
 Japan successfully launched a geostationary weather satellite MTSAT-1R aboard an H-2A rocket from Tanegashima Space Center in Kagoshima prefecture, after a glitch in communications between the rocket and ground systems had caused a 76-minute delay. The launch was Japan’s first launch of a heavy-lift vehicle since November 2003, when one of the H-2A’s solid boosters had failed to jettison as expected after completing its burn, causing the launch to fail. In the failed launch, Japan had lost the second pair of the four spy satellites that it had built after North Korea had fired a missile into Japanese territory in 1998. The other pair of the four satellitesone optical and one radar-sounding satellitewere all Japan had left to monitor its threatening neighbor. Furthermore, the launch failure had dashed Japan’s plans to enter the commercial satellite-launch business and had caused Japan to lose its international credibility. The successful launch of the MTSAT-1R restored morale to Japan’s rocketry program. A second mission of the MTSAT-1R was to replace a satellite lost in November 1999 when the final H-2 rocket, the predecessor of H-2A, had failed to reach orbit. Japan had designed the MTSAT-1R to service the Japan Civil Aviation Bureau and the Japan Meteorological Agency, fulfilling the two missions of facilitating air-traffic management and obtaining satellite imagery for meteorologists.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 616; James Brooke, “After Failures, Space Effort in Japan Gets a Lift,” New York Times, 28 February 2005; Justin Ray, “Beleaguered H-2A Rocket Roars Into Orbit,” Spaceflight Now, 26 February 2005.)
 NASA’s Exploration Systems Mission Directorate issued a request for proposals (RFP) for the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) that NASA intended to use to transport astronauts beyond low Earth orbit and to the Moon by 2020. NASA had set the deadline for submissions for 2 May 2005 and planned to select two contractors in September 2005. The two contractors would develop competing prototypes with a December 2008 completion date, at which time NASA would select the prime contractor. NASA stipulated that the minimum specifications for the CEV were that the craft weigh 20 tonnes (18.14 tons) or less; house as many as four astronauts, for as long as 16 days; have the ability to rendezvous and dock with future lunar landers and interplanetary modules; and allow a safe abort throughout all phases of its flight. NASA stipulated that it would permit contractors to design spacecraft that exceeded these specifications. For instance, the RFP permitted the design of craft that could maintain a crew in space for longer than 16 days or accommodate a crew of six. The RFP also gave contractors the flexibility to decide whether the CEV would be able to dock with the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Issues Solicitation for Crew Exploration Vehicle,” news release 05-063, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05063_crew_exploration.html (accessed 2 September 2009); Robert Zimmerman for United Press International, “Space Watch: Spacefaring by Bureaucrats,” 18 March 2005. 753 NASA, “NASA Research Aids UNESCO Global Conservation Efforts,” news release 05-061, 1 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05061_unesco-global.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
 NASA signed a memorandum of agreement (MOA) with the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in an effort to improve global conservation through increased use of NASA’s Earth science research and remote-sensing data. Under the agreement, UNESCO would use NASA-generated data to share scientific information about how Earth functions. In addition, the MOA would further an existing partnership between the NASA- supported Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) education program and UNESCO’s World Heritage Centre. NASA and UNESCO would train teachers in UNESCO-member states to work with UNESCO’s Natural World Heritage Site managers on collaborative conservation program activities.
 J. Stephen Fossett landed the Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer experimental aircraft in Salinas, Kansas, after flying the first solo, nonstop, non-refueled, around-the-world airplane trip. The flight had lasted three days, during which Fossett had not slept and had only consumed 12 milkshakes. The craft, designed by X Prize–winning SpaceShipOne creator Burt Rutan, carried NASA’s advanced experimental Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS) transceiver, the Low Power Transceiver (LPT) that NASA researchers believed would provide a flexible and inexpensive option for relaying information between spacecraft. NASA had placed the new transceiver on board GlobalFlyer to test the device’s function during a real flight, especially its performance in delivering a constant video feed. NASA had loaned GlobalFlyer a modified version of its Personal Cabin Pressure Monitor to alert the pilot of potentially dangerous or deteriorating cabin pressure. Because the background noise in GlobalFlyer’s cockpit was too loud for the pilot to hear an alarm, the modified monitor vibrated to signal a problem. The mission had successfully overcome periodic failures of GlobalFlyer’s navigation system. Furthermore, while passing through Japanese airspace, the aircraft had appeared to be running out of fuel too quickly, but a solid tailwind had helped Fossett avoid making a landing in Hawaii.(NASA, “NASA Technology Supports Virgin Atlantic GlobalFlyer,” news release 05-068, 3 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05068_globalflyer_congrats.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “NASA Helps Record Flight,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 9 March 2005.)
 Aera Corporation, which had competed as American Astronautics in the X Prize private spaceflight competition, signed a five-year launch support agreement with the U.S. Air Force, securing access to Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. Although Aera had yet to launch a single test vehicle, the company planned to launch paying customers by the end of 2006. Aera’s President and Chief Operating Officer Lewis Reynolds explained that the company had used computer-based modeling for most of its testing and had done very little testing of actual physical components for the spacecraft. The company intended to apply for a FAA launch license within 30 days and to secure a manufacturing facility for its seven-seat spaceship, the Altairis, by the end of April.(Alan Boyle, “Dark Horse Makes Bold Claims in Space Race,” MSNBC.com, 8 March 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7121988// (accessed 2 September 2009).)
 NASA-funded researchers reported that they had discovered that lightning in clouds a few miles above the ground clears a safe zone in the Van Allen Beltthe radiation belt located thousands of miles above Earth. Without this zone, satellites would have no safe area in which to orbit. The discovery, which NASA described as unexpected, resolved a 40-year debate about how the safe zone forms and how the region clears after magnetic storms fill it with radiation. Previously, the prominent theory held that turbulence in the zone generates radio waves in space, which clear the radiation. However, lightning also generates radio waves. The research team had confirmed the lightning theory using a global map of lightning activity created from data that the Micro Lab 1 spacecraft had collected. The team had also collected radio-wave data from the Radio Plasma Imager aboard the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft, combining that data with archival data from the Dynamics Explorer spacecraft. These two data sets showed that radio-wave activity in the safe zone closely follows terrestrial lightning patterns; if the radio waves had originated in space rather than Earth, no such correlation would exist. Therefore, the team had concluded that lightning clears radiation within a few days following magnetic storms. According to NASA, engineers could eventually design spacecraft that generate radio waves at the correct frequency and location to clear radiation belts around other planets, enabling humans to explore planets and moons such as Jupiter’s Europa.(NASA, “NASA Finds Lightning Clears Safe Zone in Earth’s Radiation Belt,” news release 05-070, 8 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05070_radiation_belt.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Agence-France Presse, “Lightning Cuts Safe Zone Between Earth Radiation Belts: NASA,” 9 March 2005.)
 The GAO published a report warning that the lack of a detailed, long-term strategy regarding NASA’s workforce could threaten the safety of Space Shuttle operations and delay implementation of the Bush administration’s 2004 directive to return astronauts to the Moon. The U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation had tasked GAO with tracking NASA’s efforts to develop a strategy for sustaining the Space Shuttle workforce until the Shuttle’s retirement and identifying factors that impeded those efforts. GAO reported that NASA had made limited progress toward this goal. GAO found that NASA had taken preliminary steps: identifying lessons learned from the retirement of programs comparable to the Space Shuttle, such as the Air Force Titan 4 Rocket Program; enlisting the assistance of human capital experts; and revising its acquisition strategy for updating specific prime contracts. However, GAO concluded that NASA’s failure to make decisions regarding contractor requirements during the remainder of the Shuttle program would hinder its progress. Moreover, GAO stated that NASA must develop a detailed strategy for retiring the Shuttle program, to enable it to protect agency-wide goals from the potential impact of workforce problems. GAO cited several factors hampering NASA’s ability to accomplish this, such as NASA’s near-term focus on returning the Shuttle to flight, a focus that had caused a delay in assessing hardware and facility needs. Furthermore, program officials remained uncertain about how to implement future aspects of the President’s Vision for Space Exploration.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Space Shuttle: Actions Needed To Better Position NASA To Sustain Its Workforce Through Retirement” (report no. GAO-05-230, Washington, DC, March 2005), 1–19, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05230.pdf (accessed 3 September 2009).)
 International Launch Services (ILS) successfully launched the European satellite Inmarsat 4-F1 from Cape Canaveral, Florida, aboard a stretched version of the Atlas 5 rocket. Weighing 13,138 pounds (5,959 kilograms or 5.96 tonnes), the EADS Astrium-built Inmarsat 4 was the largest commercial satellite ever to launch. As part of a three-satellite constellation comprising the new Broadband Global Area Network, the spacecraft would provide wireless, broadband connections to ships, planes, and remote areas that had not previously had reliable access to ground-based, high-speed networks.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 617, 1 April 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx617.html (accessed 31 August 2009); Associated Press, “Atlas 5 Rocket Hauls Satellite into Space,” 12 March 2005.)
 NASA and the FAA brought a demonstration of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) to Foley Square in downtown New York City. SATS represented one aspect of a public- private partnership focused on developing technology that would enable more people to fly directly to their destinations at their own convenience. The ultimate goal of the SATS project was for people to be able to access air travel in much the same way that they hail a cab. NASA’s SATS Project Manager Jerry N. Hefner described a scenario in which a person would board a plane in his or her neighborhood to fly to a destination 500 miles away, without changing planes and without going through a hub. Instead, SATS would fly into and out of underused rural and suburban airports, reducing congestion at larger airports and easing traffic on interstate highways across the country. SATS Project Manager for the FAA Peter C. McHugh commented that those involved in the project believed that, as the travel population using SATS aircraft grew, minimal interference or intersection with the larger airline system would occur.(Roger Clark for NY1 Cable TV, “NASA Tries To Change the Way Americans Fly,” 16 March 2005. 234)
 NASA selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation of Broomfield, Colorado, to develop, manufacture, and provide prelaunch and postlaunch support for the Global Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager (GMI) instrument. The total contract value was approximately US$100.2 million over a period of seven years and nine months. The GMI, a conical-scan microwave radiometer, would fly on the GPM Core spacecraft as part of a multinational collaborative effort to measure global precipitation. The spacecraft, which NASA had not yet built, would be the first in a constellation of spacecraft deployed under NASA’s GPM mission. The GMI instrument would make calibrated, radiometric measurements from space at multiple microwave frequencies and polarizations. NASA’s Deputy Associate Administrator for the Science Mission Directorate Ghassem R. Asrar remarked that scientists need to know the amount and distribution of precipitation worldwide so that they can assess the quantity and quality of fresh water resources for food and fiber production, human consumption, and other societal needs. Experts in water resource management, agriculture, transportation, forestry, weather forecasting, and other fields, would be able to use future research findings based on GMI data.(NASA, “NASA Selects Firm To Provide GPM Microwave Imager Instrument,” news release c05-g, 15 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_c05g_gpm_imager.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Matt Branaugh, “Ball Gets In On NASA Mission,” Boulder Daily Camera (CO), 16 March 2005.)
 The U.S. House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics held a hearing to examine NASA’s proposal to reduce spending on aviation research by 20 percent over five years, which would necessitate the closure of some wind tunnels and other centers. Overall, the Bush administration had proposed a 2.4 percent increase in NASA’s budget, with most of that increase directed toward funding travel to the Moon and Mars, initiatives requiring NASA to eliminate or reduce its other programs, such as aviation research. NASA’s Associate Administrator for Aeronautics Research J. Victor Lebacqz defended the program, remarking that the United States remained a global power in aviation and had developed technologies to improve safety, reduce environmental impact, and increase efficiency of aviation operations. However, Lebacqz stated that NASA needed a clearer vision for the goals of the program. John M. Klineberg, a retired NASA official and industry executive, who had headed a National Research Council (NRC) study group in 2004, testified before the committee. The NRC study group had published a review of NASA’s aeronautics programs. Klineberg warned against using the group’s recommendations out of context to justify major cuts in programs. He testified that NASA’s proposed aviation-research budget was a disaster, putting the program at risk of becoming irrelevant to the future of aeronautics in the United States and throughout the world. In an interview following the hearing, Klineberg emphasized that the study group had suggested consolidating and focusing programs but did not support budgetary cuts eliminating entire areas of research.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Proposal To Reduce Spending for Aviation Research by 20% Dismays Experts,” New York Times, 17 March 2005; Malia Rulon for Associated Press, “Lawmakers Question Proposed NASA Cuts,” 17 March 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, The Future of Aeronautics at NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 16 March 2005.)
 The U.S. Air Force announced the findings of its investigation into the December 2004 inaugural launch of Boeing’s Delta 4 Heavy Rocket, which had failed when engines shut down prematurely. The Air Force and Boeing had intended the launch of the rocket, which was transporting a dummy payload, as a full dress rehearsal. The plan had been to test the newest and largest member of Boeing’s next-generation rocket series before critical national security satellites began using it. Boeing had designed the rocket with three Common Booster Cores, each with a cryogenic main engine. The three cores, secured together, formed a craft capable of launching large cargo into space. The investigation had determined that each booster’s engines had undergone premature shutdown during the launch, after internal sensors incorrectly determined that the engines had exhausted their liquid-oxygen fuel supply. Investigators had concluded that cavitationbubbles in the liquid oxygen plumbinghad caused the glitch. Major Rodney Houser, the lead investigator for the Air Force, stated that the investigating team would focus on determining the cause of the cavitation within the liquid-oxygen feed system and on implementing corrective measures to prevent the problem’s repetition.(Justin Ray, “Delta 4-Heavy Investigation Identifies Rocket’s Problem,” Spaceflight Now, 17 March 2005. 235)
 NASA announced the successful completion of flight tests above a virtual forest fire to evaluate new flight-control software on board two small UAVs. The software experiment had sought to guide the UAVs simultaneously around obstacles, using principles derived from studies of the movements of fish and birds. Engineers and technicians from NASA’s ARC and DFRC had conducted the flight tests over a remote area of Edwards Air Force Base in California, to investigate cooperative flight strategies for atmospheric sampling and for airborne monitoring and surveillance of natural disasters. John E. Melton of ARC, Principal Investigator for the Networked UAV Teaming Experiment, explained that his team had used two autopilot-equipped APV-3 UAVs, each with a 12-foot wingspan, to flight-test several novel approaches for assisting wildfire-suppression crews. The two craft had flown along computer-generated paths to demonstrate their ability to avoid obstacles in a cooperative and synchronized manner, without the assistance of flight personnel. Melton commented that the technology could eventually enable swarms of aircraft to move safely from one area to another as a group, collecting air samples on scientific missions or helping ground personnel monitor natural disasters.(NASA, “New Software Allows UAVs to Team Up for Virtual Experiments,” news release 05-078, 17 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05078_UAV_Software.html (accessed 6 June 2009).)
 NASA announced that the Spitzer Space Telescope had captured the light from two known planets that are orbiting stars other than the Sun, enabling scientists to measure and compare extrasolar planets directly. This event marked the beginning of a new era in planetary science. Previously, scientists had confirmed the existence of extrasolar planets using one of two techniques of indirect discoverythe “wobble” technique or the “transit” technique. The wobble technique detected the gravitational tug that a planet exerts on its parent star, and the transit technique inferred the presence of a planet when the planet passed in front of its star, causing the star to dim. Both techniques depended on visible-light telescopes. By contrast, Spitzer observed infrared light, enabling astronomers to contrast a planet against the glow of its parent star. If detected using the transit technique, the glow of the parent star would have overwhelmed the glimmer of light reflected by the planet.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Marks Beginning of New Age of Planetary Science,” news release 05-082, 22 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05082_Spitzer_First_Light.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 NASA announced findings from research exploring the impact of black carbon or soot on Earth’s climate, findings that provided new and additional evidence that pollution generated through the process of incomplete combustion contributes to the accelerated melting of sea ice and snow, as well as to the changing atmospheric temperatures in the Arctic region. Dorothy M. Koch, of Columbia University and NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS), and James E. Hansen, also of GISS, coauthored the study, using satellite data and computer models to recreate the climate and to track pollution. In addition to confirming past findings regarding the relationship between pollution and climate change in the Arctic region, the study had found that most of the pollution in the environment and the atmosphere of the Arctic did not originate in the developed world, but rather in southern Asia, which had the highest level of industrial soot emissions in the world. Using the GISS General Circulation Model (GCM) to locate the origins of Arctic soot, Koch and Hansen had found that one-third of the pollution originated in southern Asia, one-third was the result of burning vegetation and natural materials around the world, and the remainder originated in Russia, Europe, and North America.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Soot May Be Changing the Arctic Environment,” news release 05-084, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_05084_arctic_soot.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Miguel Bustillo, “Airborne Soot Adds To Arctic Melting, Study Finds,” Los Angeles Times, 24 March 2005.)
 NASA and its partner the Spaceward Foundation, a publicly funded, nonprofit organization dedicated to advancing the cause of space access, announced prizes totaling US$$400,000 for four competitions. The competitions would be the first under NASA’s Centennial Challenges program, designed to promote technical innovation in support of the Vision for Space Exploration and NASA’s goals. The first two competitions, the Tether Challenge and the Beam Power Challenge, would challenge innovators to focus on developing lightweight, yet strong, tether materials and wireless power transmission technologies. Winners of each of the initial 2005 challenges would receive a prize of US$50,000. The Tether Challenge would require teams to make the strongest tether of a specified diameter. Competing in a tournament-style bracket system, the tethers would be stretched until they broke, with the overall winner competing against NASA’s “house tether” to win the cash. The Beam Power Challenge would require teams to use wireless technology to lift a weight off the ground. NASA planned a second set of Tether and Beam Power challenges, with a greater degree of difficulty, for 2006.(NASA, “NASA Announces First Centennial Challenges’ Prizes,” news release M05-083, 23 March 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/mar/HQ_m05083_Centennial_prizes.html (accessed 2 September 2005); Robert Roy Britt, “NASA Details Cash Prizes for Space Privatization,” Space.com, 24 March 2005, http://www.space.com/news/050323_centennial_challenge.html (accessed 2 September 2009).)
 ISS Expedition 10 Commander Leroy Chiao and Flight Engineer Salizhan S. Sharipov completed the second and final spacewalk of their mission 1 hour ahead of schedule, returning into the ISS after 4.5 hours. To help in navigation, Chiao and Sharipov installed a set of space-to- space antennas around a section of Zvezda, the Russian service module that would aid in the docking operations of Europe’s Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) during a future cargo mission. The crew also attached a GPS unit to the Zvezda module to help the ATV. The ATV, scheduled to arrive during the next year, had the capability to deliver up to 8.5 tons (7,711 kilograms or 7.71 tonnes) of cargo, including 10,000 pounds (4,536 kilograms or 4.54 tonnes) of propellant. After the crew finished connecting the antennas, Sharipov returned to the Pirs docking compartment to retrieve a small satellite called NanoSputnik. The satellite, which weighed just 11 pounds (5 kilograms) and measured only 1 foot (0.31 meter) long, carried a transmitter designed to test control and orientation systems for small spacecraft during its 100- day mission. Sharipov released the satellite into a retrograde orbit by hand, while Chiao photographed the launch.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalking Astronauts Outfit ISS for New Cargo Ship,” Space.com, 29 March 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/exp10_eva2_050328.html (accessed 3 September 2009); Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Two Astronauts Complete Spacewalk Work,” 29 March 2005.)
 NASA announced that scientists analyzing images from the its Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellite (POES) and from the Imager for Magnetopause to Aurora Global Exploration (IMAGE) spacecraft had discovered that Earth’s northern and southern auroras are not mirror images of each other, as previously thought. Images from the two spacecraft showed that auroras move and change, depending on the tilt of Earth’s magnetic field toward the Sun and on solar wind conditions. Knowing more about how auroras react to the solar wind could help scientists predict space weather. Timothy J. Stubbs of the Laboratory for Extraterrestrial Physics at NASA’s GSFC remarked that the analysis was the first to track the locations of the auroras using simultaneous observations, in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, of the auroras in their entirety.(NASA, “NASA Study Finds Earth’s Auroras Are Not Mirror Images,” news release 05-089, 5 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05089_aurora_images.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 NASA announced that it had approved the extension of operations for the twin Mars Rovers, Spirit and Opportunity, for up to 18 months. The robotic craft had already surprised engineers and scientists, having completed 11 months of extended activity beyond their successful three- month primary missions. Opportunity had driven more than three miles since arriving at Mars, eight times the distance originally planned, and, in March 2005, had set a new record of 722 feet (220 meters) in a single day’s drive. Spirit had driven a shorter distance but was working in a much rougher terrain than Opportunity. Both rovers were exhibiting signs of wear and exposure, and scientists recognized that either mission could end suddenly because of a random part failure. James K. Erickson, Project Manager for the rovers at NASA’s JPL, remarked that, despite the wear and the effects of exposure, both rovers remained in exceptional shape. Erickson said that NASA would work to get as much benefit as possible for as long as the craft were capable of producing worthwhile scientific results. Director of NASA’s Mars Exploration Program J. Douglas McCuistion added that the rovers’ successes had strengthened NASA’s commitment to achieving the ambitious goals of returning samples from Mars and eventually sending a human expedition to the planet.(NASA, “Durable Mars Rovers Sent into Third Overtime Period,” news release 05-091, 6 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05091_mer_extension.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 NASA announced that Space Shuttle Discovery had reached a major milestone, arriving at Launch Pad 39B at NASA’s KSC in preparation for its Return to Flight Mission, scheduled for 15 May. Over more than two years, Discovery had undergone 41 major modifications in response to the Columbia accident, including the addition of the new sensor system at the far end of the orbiter boom; cameras and laser systems to inspect its thermal protection system while in space; sensors in the leading edge of its wings to monitor for debris impacts; and a new digital camera for viewing the external tank during launch.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Discovery at Launch Pad for Return to Flight,” news release 05-095, 7 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05095_Discovery_Roll_Out.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 Russian space officials and officials from the French rocket company Arianespace signed an agreement in Moscow allowing Russia to launch medium-weight satellite payloads from ESA’s spaceport in Kourou, French Guiana. Under the agreement, Europe would provide 344 million euros to build a launchpad for Russian Soyuz rockets, and Russia would erect a tower for the launchpad, ship the rockets from Russia, and make any changes to the rockets necessary for them to operate in the equatorial climate. Locating launches at the equator would allow Russia to increase the weight of its payloads from 1.6 tonnes (1,600 kilograms or 1.7 tons) to about 3 tonnes (3,000 kilograms or 3.3 tons). The arrangement also filled a niche that Arianespace’s two rocket fleets did not. Arianespace Vega rockets launched small scientific satellites weighing no more than 1.5 tonnes (1,500 kilograms or 1.65 tons) into a low orbit. The two models of Ariane 5 rockets could launch payloads weighing 6.6 tonnes (6,600 kilograms or 7.3 tons) or 10 tonnes (10,000 kilograms or 11 tons), respectively, into geostationary transfer orbit. Expecting to launch three or four Soyuz rockets per year, beginning in 2008, Arianespace had already booked three launches from Kourou using the Russian Soyuz rocket―launches of one Australian telecommunications satellite and two French scientific satellites.(Maggie McKee, “Russian Rockets To Launch from South American Base,” New Scientist, 13 April 2005. 772 Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618, 1 May 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx618.html (accessed 8 September 2009); Peter B. de Selding, “Apstar 6 Launched from China,” Space News, 13 April 2005.)
 The Apstar 6 satellite launched aboard a Chinese Long March 3B rocket from Xichang Satellite Launch Center in China’s Sichuan Province. The 4.8-tonne (4,800-kilogram or 5.3-ton) satellite carried 38 C-band and 12 Ku-band transponders. Replacing the ageing Apstar 1A, the craft would provide digital, multimedia transmissions to Australia, India, and countries in eastern Asia. The satellite was the first Western-built, commercial telecommunications spacecraft to carry almost no U.S.-made components, as well as the first commercial Chinese satellite with an antijamming payload. Hong Kong–based APT Satellite Company had requested that Alcatel Space include the antijamming technology in response to the threat of satellite-signal piracy, which had occurred several times over the previous two years. The new Alcatel Spacebus 4000 C1 satellite platform selected for Apstar 6 included no U.S. parts subject to the export controls of the U.S. Department of State. Because the U.S. government had refused to grant export licenses for U.S. satellite parts destined for launch in China, Alcatel Space had substituted European, Russian, and other non-U.S. components.
 NASA announced that the U.S. Senate had confirmed the nomination of Michael D. Griffin as NASA’s 11th Administrator. Griffin replaced Sean O’Keefe, who had resigned in February to become Chancellor of Louisiana State University. Since 2004, Griffin had served as the Space Department Head at Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory in Baltimore, Maryland. Before holding that position, he had served as President and Chief Operating Officer of In-Q-Tel and had held several positions within Orbital Sciences Corporation. Earlier in his career, he had served as Chief Engineer at NASA and as Deputy for Technology at the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization. Griffin held a doctorate in aeronautical engineering and five master’s degrees, credentials that had led Senator Barbara A. Mikulski of Maryland, ranking Democrat on the Appropriations Subcommittee, which oversees NASA, to introduce Griffin as the ideal person to lead NASA. During his confirmation hearing before the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, Griffin had stated that, as Administrator, he would reevaluate NASA’s decision not to send astronauts to repair and service the HST. He had named his priorities for NASA, including the Space Shuttles’ safe return to flight. Furthermore, he had stated that he planned to speed up NASA’s development of a replacement craft for the Shuttle, so that the United States could continue to send humans into space. Griffin had stated that the United States’ dependence on other nations to ferry astronauts to space was unacceptable in terms of national security. Griffin had also testified that he supported President George W. Bush’s Vision for Space Exploration, which included returning humans to the Moon and, ultimately, sending human explorers to Mars and beyond.(NASA, “Michael D. Griffin To Become NASA Administrator,” news release 05-250, 13 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05250_griffin_confirmed.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Warren E. Leary, “NASA Nominee Says He’ll Reassess Decision Not To Send Astronauts To Fix Hubble Telescope,” New York Times, 13 April 2005.)
 NASA’s Space Shuttle Program reached another milestone: filling a 154-foot-high (47-meter- high) external tank with fuel and oxygen. The test, intended to assure engineers that all changes to the tank operated as expected, marked the first time since Columbia’s accident that NASA had prepared an external tank for flight. The foam was necessary to keep the liquid fuel cool and to reduce ice build-up on the tank, but NASA and Lockheed Martin had redesigned the tank to reduce the amount of foam debris during launch. Changes to the tank design included removing the foam from the bipod ramp and replacing the foam with heaters. The designers had also added a “drip-lip” to reduce ice accumulation on the joints that permit the adjustment of the tank’s fuel line. In a dress rehearsal for Discovery’s upcoming launch, engineers pumped more than 500,000 gallons of fuel into the tank, monitoring the tank and the Shuttle’s systems down to the T-minus 31-second mark in a mock countdown. N. Wayne Hale Jr., Deputy Manager of the Space Shuttle Program and Chair of NASA’s Mission Management Team, remarked on the outstanding performances of the newly modified external tank, the Shuttle, and the launchpad.(Philip Chien, “NASA Tests Tank on Space Shuttle,” Washington Times, 15 April 2005; William Harwood, “NASA Managers Elated with Shuttle Fueling Test,” Spaceflight Now, 15 April 2005; Kelly Young, “Shuttle’s External Fuel Tank Tested Successfully,” New Scientist, 15 April 2005, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn7270-shuttles-external-fuel-tank-tested-successfully.html (accessed 25 November 2009); Physorg.com, “NASA Puts Space Shuttle External Tank to the Test,” 15 April 2005, http://www.physorg.com/news3738.html (accessed 25 November 2009).)
 Soyuz TMA-6 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan carrying the Expedition 11 crew of three to the ISS. Russian Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American Flight Engineer John L. Phillips would replace Leroy Chiao and Salizhan S. Sharipov. Italy’s Roberto Vittori, also aboard, would conduct scientific experiments at the ISS before returning to Earth with Chiao and Sharipov.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Soyuz Rocket Blasts Off to Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 15 April 2005.)
 The Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) spacecraft, a NASA technology demonstrator, launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, aboard a Pegasus-XL HAPS rocket released from an L-1011 cargo aircraft. NASA intended the launch to test the 360-kilogram (793.76-pound or 0.4-ton or 0.36-tonne) satellite’s video-guidance-system technology, which would enable DART to rendezvous with an experimental military communications satellite and maneuver around it. The technology would allow future spacecraft to approach and dock with another craft automatically.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
 The Soyuz TMA-6 crew arrived at the ISS. After greeting the new arrivals, the Expedition 10 crew held a safety briefing to familiarize the Expedition 11 crew and Roberto Vittori, the Italian astronaut visiting the ISS, with emergency escape procedures. The mission was Commander Sergei K. Krikalev’s third long-term space assignment and his second aboard the ISS. Krikalev was the first person to serve more than one tour at the station.(NASA, “11th Crew Arrives at Space Station” (International Space Station Status Report SS05-020, 17 April 2005), http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); John Kelly, “New Crew Arrives at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 April 2005.)
 NASA announced that it had awarded Rice University’s Carbon Nanotechnology Laboratory (CNL) an US$11 million contract to produce a prototype power cable constructed of carbon nanotubes. The engineers expected the so-called quantum wires to conduct electricity up to 10 times better than copper, at 1/6th the weight. NASA anticipated that the technology would help return humans to the Moon and enable travel to Mars and beyond. Richard E. Smalley, the project’s Lead Investigator, explained that the Space Shuttle’s primary power-distribution system accounted for almost 7 percent of its weight. However, NASA’s next generation of human and robotic spacecraft would need far more power to support additional instrumentation and broadband communications, requiring a copper power-distribution system that would account for up to 25 percent of the craft’s weight. Under the contract, CNL would provide NASA with a 1- meter (3.2-foot) prototype of quantum wire by 2010, a task requiring major breakthroughs in the production of nanotubes. To date, scientists had succeeded in producing wires no longer than several centimeters. At the time NASA awarded the contract, only armchair nanotubesa type comprising 2 percent of all nanotubes were suitable for use as quantum wires. Researchers at CNL planned to grow these nanotubes like crystals, placing “seeds” in a laboratory reactor and pumping in a source of carbon, such as carbon monoxide, with the hope of creating perfect, long armchair nanotubes each time. The researchers would then twist the tubes together to produce a quantum wire according to NASA’s specifications.(NASA, “NASA Awards $11 Million “Quantum Wire” Contract to Rice,” news release J05-018, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/J05-018.html (accessed 9 September 2009); Amit Asaravala, “NASA Funds ‘Miracle Polymer’,” Wired News, 28 April 2005.)
 NASA announced the establishment of the DART Mishap Investigation Board to determine why the DART spacecraft had failed to complete its mission on 15 April. Initially, NASA had believed that DART had come within 300 feet (91.4 meters) of the target satellite before low fuel readings prompted it to abort its mission. However, NASA spokesperson Kimberly D. Newton later explained that new data had indicated that DART had bumped the satellite, boosting its orbit by as much as 5.75 miles (9.3 kilometers). However, DART had abandoned its target approximately halfway through its 24-hour mission. The Board consisted of seven voting members from NASA’s MSFC, NASA’s GSFC and ARC; the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency; and the U.S. Air Force Space Command. NASA assigned eight federal employees to serve as advisors to the Board―six from MSFC, and one each from NASA’s JSC and NASA Headquarters. NASA selected Scott D. Croomes of MSFC to chair the Board and Kerry L. Remp of GRC to serve ex officio, to assure that board activity conformed to NASA’s procedural requirements.(NASA, “NASA Announces Dart Mishap Investigation Board Members,” news release 05-105, 22 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05105_DART_mishap_board.html (accessed 29 June 2009); NASA Engineering and Safety Center, NESC Review of Demonstration of Autonomous Rendezvous Technology (DART) Mission Mishap Investigation Review Board (MIB) (NESC Request No. 05-020-E, NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA, December 2006), http://klabs.org/richcontent/Reports/Failure_Reports/dart/ 167813main_rp-06-119_05-020-e_dart_report_final_dec_27.pdf (accessed 18 November 2009); Chris Kridler, “Failed DART Spacecraft Bumped Its Satellite Target,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 26 April 2005.)
 The Expedition 10 crew, American astronaut Leroy Chiao and Russian cosmonaut Salizhan S. Sharipov, returned to Earth from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-5 after almost 193 days in space. Together with Italian astronaut Roberto Vittori, who had conducted scientific experiments at the ISS after his arrival on 17 April with Expedition 11, the crew landed on target in north-central Kazakhstan. Although the crew and recovery team encountered no major problems, weeks of heavy snow and rain had caused flooding in the steppes, complicating the recovery. Only three of the 10 recovery helicopters were able to land in the wet conditions. During their mission, Chiao and Sharipov had maintained ISS systems and conducted scientific research. They had replaced critical hardware in the Joint Quest Airlock, repaired U.S. spacesuits, completed two spacewalks to prepare the ISS for the arrival of a new European cargo spacecraft during the next year, and submitted a scientific research paper on the use of ultrasound in space. Chiao had voted in the U.S. presidential election the previous November, the first astronaut to do so in space. Vittori had spent 10 days in space, eight of them aboard the ISS, and had performed 22 experiments, including tests of astronaut fatigue, research on the durability of components of microsatellites, research into the electromagnetic waves that emanate from Earth and may be related to earthquakes, and experiments growing shoots as a potential food source for people in orbit.(NASA, International Space Station Status Report SS05-020a, 24 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/ home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_ss05020a_ISS_status_report.html (accessed 29 June 2009); Shamil Zumatov for Reuters, “Russian, U.S., Italian Space Crew Return to Earth,” 25 April 2005; Agence-France Presse, “Astronauts Home Safely from International Space Station,” 26 April 2005.)
 NASA celebrated the HST’s 15th anniversary with the release of new images of the Eagle Nebula and the Whirlpool galaxy (spiral galaxy M51), two of the most well-known objects that the Hubble had observed to date. The new images, made with the HST’s newest camera, the Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS), were among the largest and sharpest the Hubble had yet captured, so sharp that, even if enlarged to billboard size, the image would preserve the stunning details. The new image of the Eagle Nebula revealed ultraviolet light originating from a group of massive hot stars and sculpting a tall, dense tower of gas. The new image of the Whirlpool galaxy, in addition to displaying its classic features, revealed a companion galaxy located at the end of one of the Whirlpool galaxy’s arms. The launch of the HST in 1990 had ushered in a new era in astronomy. Before the existence of the HST, no telescope had viewed the universe in visible light from above Earth’s atmosphere, which blurs light and causes images to appear fuzzy. Among its many achievements, the HST had helped astronomers calculate the precise age of the universe; helped confirm the existence of dark energy; detected small protogalaxies; proved the existence of supermassive black holes; provided sharp views of a comet hitting Jupiter; and demonstrated that the process of planetary system formation is common throughout the galaxy.(NASA, “Hubble Celebrates 15th Anniversary with Spectacular New Images,” news release 05-104, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05104_HST_anniversary.html (accessed 29 June 2009). 782 NASA, “NASA Establishes Exploration Systems Advisory Committee,” news release 05-106, 25 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05106_esac_meeting.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 NASA announced the establishment of the Exploration Systems Advisory Committee (ESAC), composed of leading experts from government, academia, and industry. NASA named Lester L. Lyles, a former commander of the U.S. Air Force Materiel Command to chair ESAC. Lyles had extensive experience managing large, high-technology organizations involving aeronautical and astronautical research, development, acquisition, and logistics. The committee would provide advice and recommendations to NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, including input regarding plans, policies, programs, and other matters pertinent to the directorate’s responsibilities.
 Spaceway 1, a DirecTV satellite, launched from Sea Launch’s Odyssey floating platform at the equator aboard a Zenit-3SL rocket. Sea Launch used a self-propelled launch platform and a command ship that had sailed from Long Beach, California, to the equator. At the equator, the physics of Earth’s rotation make it possible to launch heavier payloads than elsewhere. Sea Launch announced that the 13,376-pound (6,067.3-kilogram or 6.1-tonne) satellite was the heaviest commercial satellite ever launched.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Associated Press, “DirecTV Satellite Launched from Sea Launch Ocean Platform,” 27 April 2005.)
 NASA announced that on 25 April its Deep Impact spacecraft had successfully photographed comet Tempel 1, Deep Impact’s target destination. The craft’s Medium Resolution Instrument had captured the image on its first attempt. The image was the first of thousands that NASA planned for the craft to capture over the following 10 weeks. The images would aid Deep Impact’s navigators, engineers, and scientists, as they plotted the craft’s final trajectory toward its encounter with Tempel 1, scheduled for 4 July.(NASA, “NASA’s Deep Impact Spacecraft Spots Its Quarry, Stalking Begins,” news release 05-108, 27 April 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/apr/HQ_05108_Deep_Impact_Image.html (accessed 29 June 2009).)
 USA 182, a National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) classified military satellite, launched atop a Titan 4B rocket from Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. The rocket was the last Titan to launch from the Florida coast, signaling the end of the historic program after five decades and 168 launches. Only one Titan remained, scheduled for a July launch from Edwards Air Force Base in California. The United States was retiring the Titan, which had begun as a two-stage intercontinental ballistic missile in the 1950s and had made its first launch from Cape Canaveral in 1959, in favor of the less-expensive and more modular Atlas 5 and Delta 4 rocket series, which could fulfill the need for heavy-lifting to space. Titan 2 missiles had served as the boosters for NASA’s Gemini missions, and various Titan 3 and Titan 34D rockets had launched satellites, as had Titan 4, the largest and most powerful version in the program. Titan rockets had also launched space probes―Viking to Mars, Voyager to the outer planets, and Cassini to Saturn.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 618; Justin Ray, “Reality Realized: Titan Has Left Cape Canaveral,” Spaceflight Now, 30 April 2005.)
 Lockheed Martin and the Boeing Company announced the formation of a joint venture called United Launch Alliance, combining the production, engineering, testing, and launch operations associated with U.S. government launches of Boeing Delta and Lockheed Martin Atlas rockets. The merger ended a two-year legal battle between the two largest government contractors, in which Lockheed Martin had accused Boeing of cheating to win rocket-launch work. The venture eliminated market competition for launching weather satellites for NOAA, scientific satellites for NASA, spy satellites for the National Security Agency, and communications satellites for the U.S. Air Force. According to the agreement, the joint venture would produce both Boeing’s Delta and Lockheed’s Atlas rockets, consolidating production at Boeing’s Decatur, Alabama, facility. Lockheed’s Denver, Colorado, office would serve as headquarters, housing the engineering and administrative functions. Lockheed Martin’s Vice President of Financial Strategies Jeffrey D. MacLauchlan remarked that the preservation of the two separate rocket families was the crux of the venture’s appeal to the federal government.(Lockheed Martin, “Boeing, Lockheed Martin To Form Launch Services Joint Venture,” news release, 2 May 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/BoeingLockheedMartin FormLaunchServi.html (accessed 17 September 2009); Renae Merle, “Boeing, Lockheed Join Rocket Division,” Washington Post, 3 May 2005.)
 The National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) in Hampton, Virginia, released a report commissioned by the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science, which had concluded that, to keep pace with Europe, the U.S. government would need to spend more on aeronautics, not less. The report, “Responding to the Call: Aviation Plan for American Leadership,” recommended that, over the next five years, the U.S. government should restore NASA’s aeronautics funding to 1998 levels, a goal that implied a spending level approximately twice that of President George W. Bush’s proposal for FY 2006. The study team comprised more than 250 of the nation’s top aviation experts representing industry and academia. NIA President and Executive Director Robert Lindberg remarked that the United State’s aviation capabilities had eroded, despite the position of aviation as a critical component in the U.S. balance of trade. The report of more than 1,000 pages provided detailed investment plans, budgets, and needs assessments for seven aeronautics sectors: airspace systems, aviation safety and security, subsonic aircraft, supersonic aircraft, hypersonic technologies, rotorcraft, and workforce and education.(National Institute of Aerospace, “NIA Releases Congressionally-Requested Aviation Plan,” 3 May 2005, http://www.nianet.org/pressreleases/AviationPlan_050305.php (accessed 16 September 2009); Allison Connolly, “Survey: NASA Can’t Afford To Fall Behind in Aeronautics,” Virginian Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 4 May 2005. 788 BBC News, “First Marsis Radar Boom Deployed,” 6 May 2005; Maggie McKee, “Mars Express To Deploy ‘Divining Rod’ at Last,” New Scientist, 4 May 2005.)
 After a delay of more than one year, ESA’s Mars Express deployed the first of three booms that form the craft’s Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionosphere Sounding (MARSIS). The MARSIS booms would search for evidence of water under the surface of Mars. The deployment marked the beginning of a 10-day sequence, originally scheduled for April 2004. NASA’s JPL had conducted an investigation that had warned of the possibility that one or more of the antenna components could swing back and hit the spacecraft, a risk that had caused ESA to delay the deployment. Although an ESA review board had concluded that, even if such an event were to occur, the risk of damaging Mars Express remained low, scientists had voiced concerns that a strike from any of the booms could damage delicate instruments on board the orbiter. According to Mars Express Mission Manager Fred Jansen, engineers had analyzed the problem over the past year to assure themselves that any existing risks would not affect the spacecraft. As deployment commenced, telemetry data indicated that the first boom, which formed half of MARSIS’s primary antenna, had deployed successfully. ESA had scheduled the second half of the antenna to deploy four days later.
 The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched its Cartosat-1 Earth- mapping and remote-sensing satellite aboard a Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle-C6 (PSLV-C6) from the newly built launchpad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India. The 1.56-tonne (1,560-kilogram or 1.72-ton) Cartosat-1, the heaviest payload that the PSLV had ever ferried to space, carried two f/4.5 Panchromatic cameras, which together would enable the production of a stereoscopic image at a resolution of 2.5 meters (8.2 feet). ISRO planned to use the images to generate digital terrain-elevation maps, which would aid in assessing and monitoring land use, forest cover, and river flow. The launch vehicle also carried into orbit HAMSat, a 43-kilogram (0.043-tonne or 0.047-ton) microsatellite designed to relay amateur VHF radio communications.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619, 1 June 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx619.html (accessed 17 September 2009); K. S. Jayaraman, “India Launches Cartosat-1 Satellite,” Space News, 6 May 2005.)
 Alliant Techsystems announced the successful completion of the first in a series of ground tests for solar-sail technology, developed to enable solar-powered interplanetary probes and solar observatories. At NASA’s GRC’s Plum Brook Station in Ohio, NASA engineers fully deployed a 20 x 20 meter (65.6 x 65.6 feet) version of the solar-sail system, in a 100-foot-diameter (30.5- meter-diameter) vacuum chamber, to test the system’s functional deployment and attitude control. The test marked a critical milestone in the development of in-space propulsion technology using the Sun’s energy, instead of fuel propellant, to provide thrust. The In-Space Propulsion Program of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate was developing the solar-sail propulsion system.(Alliant Techsystems, “ATK and NASA Successfully Test First Solar Sail Propulsion System,” news release, 6 May 2005, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=447 (accessed 16 September 2009).)
 NASA launched a 40 million-cubic-foot (12.2 million-cubic-meter) balloon, the Deep Space Test Bed facility, from Fort Sumner, New Mexico, carrying an automobile-sized aluminum gondola containing scientific experiments prepared by university and elementary school students. NASA had collaborated with the students to carry out research to analyze characteristics of Earth’s atmosphere from the unique laboratory traveling 30 miles (48.3 kilometers) above Earth. The primary payload was the High Energy Replicated Optics (HERO), a hard x-ray–focusing telescope. Engineers from NASA’s MSFC had designed HERO to create images from high- energy x-ray light. Undergraduate students from Pennsylvania State University, Montana State University, the University of Alabama, and Auburn University in Alabama had prepared experiments for the new laboratory. The experiments would identify pollution-related aerosols in the atmosphere, measure radiation and its impact on the integrity and behavior of the balloon, measure the external temperature of the balloon material, and gather magnetic-field data. Students from eight grade schools had prepared experiments to observe the effect of the flight environment on microscopic organisms and seeds, placing their experiments in brick-size plastic containers inside two large containers on board the balloon.(NASA, “NASA and Students Partner for High Altitude Research,” news release 05-121, 11 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05121_Student_Experiments.html (accessed 14 September 2009). 792 Richard M. Jones for the American Institute of Physics, “New NASA Administrator Appears Before Senate Appropriators,” FYI Bulletin 69, 17 May 2005, http://www.aip.org/fyi/2005/069.html (accessed 17 September 2009).)
 NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin, who had been in his new position for only one month, appeared as the sole witness before the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, and Science, to testify regarding NASA’s FY 2006 budget request. Key issues that the panel discussed with Griffin included several related to the Space Shuttle Program: the four-year gap between the planned decommissioning of the Space Shuttle in 2010 and the first scheduled flight of the new Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) in 2014; the United States’ obligation to complete the ISS before the retirement of the Space Shuttle; and servicing the HST. In his responses, Griffin stated that, in mid-July, he would release a plan for the first flight of the new CEV. He suggested that, if the ISS partners postponed some scheduled on-board scientific research, they could complete the ISS before the Shuttle’s retirement, without cancelling any research programs. Regarding the HST, Griffin stated his opposition to a robotic servicing mission and said that he wished to assess the first two Shuttle flights before making a decision. The panel also discussed recommended cuts in Earth Science research. Griffin responded that NASA had listened to the concerns of the scientific community and was reexamining that area. Griffin clarified that NASA would not cut science programs to fund the spaceflight program.
 President of Canadian Arrow Geoff Sheerin and Indian-American entrepreneur Chirinjeev Kathuria joined forces to create a new corporation called PlanetSpace. The company’s goal was to make spaceflight available to the public within two years. Canadian Arrow was creating a rocket based on the German World War II V-2 rocket. Although the company had not completed its rocket in time to compete for the US$10 million X Prize in 2004, it had successfully completed a drop test of the vehicle in August 2005 and expected to complete the rocket within one year. PlanetSpace planned to charge US$250,000 per person for a suborbital flight that would include 14 days of training and 15 minutes of flight time. The rocket would launch from a Canadian site with a pilot and two passengers and would reach a maximum velocity of four times the speed of sound. The rocket would coast to a maximum height of 70 miles (112 kilometers), providing a few minutes of weightlessness and a view of the curving Earth with a black sky above. Finally, a crew capsule would separate from the rocket during its descent and would parachute down to a water landing.(PlanetSpace, “Canadian Arrow Partners with Leading American Entrepreneur To Launch First Commercial Passengers to Space,” news release, 17 May 2005, http://www.planetspace.org/pdf/ps-press-rel-001.pdf (accessed 17 September 2009); Alan Boyle, “Space Partners Plan Flights in 2007,” MSNBC.com, 18 May 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7879142/ (accessed 17 September 2009).)
 NASA’s JPL released a series of images that Mars Global Surveyor (MGS) had captured on 20 and 21 April, which showed, for the first time, NASA’s Mars Odyssey and ESA’s Mars Express spacecraft orbiting Mars. MGS had orbited the planet since 1997, Mars Odyssey had arrived in 2001, and Mars Express had arrived in late 2003. MGS and Mars Odyssey followed similar near- polar orbits, sometimes passing within 9 miles (15 kilometers) of each other, but Odyssey orbited higher than MGS to prevent collision. MGS had captured two images of Odyssey 7.5 seconds apartthe first from a distance of 56 miles (90 kilometers) and the second from 84 miles (135 kilometers). The following day, MGS had captured an image of Mars Express from a distance of 155 miles (249 kilometers).(Tariq Malik, “New Photos Are First of Spacecraft Orbiting Mars,” Space.com, 20 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050519_mgs_orbiters.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
 NASA and the Florida Space Research Institute (FSRI) announced the third Centennial Challenges competition: the Moon Regolith Oxygen (MoonROx) challenge. The MoonROx challenge would require teams to develop hardware, within mass and power limits, able to extract a minimum of 5 kilograms (0.005 tonnes or 0.006 tons) of breathable oxygen from simulated lunar soila volcanic ash called JSC-1within a period of 8 hours. The first team to accomplish the oxygen-production goal before June 2008 would win US$250,000. Existing state-of-the-art technologies were incapable of extracting oxygen from simulated lunar soil. FSRI Executive Director Samuel T. Durrance remarked that oxygen-extraction technologies would be critical for robotic and human missions to the Moon.(NASA, “NASA Announces New Centennial Challenge,” news release 05-128, 19 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05128_Centennial_Challenge.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Jeremy McGovern, “Astro Bytes: Extracting Oxygen from ‘Lunar’ Soil,” Astronomy News, 24 May 2005.)
 NASA launched a new environmental satellite for NOAA, aboard a Boeing Delta 2 7320-10 expendable launch vehicle, from Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. The NOAA-18 (N), the fourth in the series of five Polar Orbiting Environmental Satellites (POES) carrying improved imaging and sounding capabilities, would improve weather forecasting and monitor environmental events globally, collecting data about Earth’s surface and atmosphere. The craft also carried instruments used in COSPAS-SARSAT, the international Search-and-Rescue Satellite-Aided Tracking System (COSPAS is the Russian acronym for “Cosmicheskaya Sistema Poiska Avariynyh Sudo,” which means “Space System for the Search of Vessels in Distress”). Established in 1982, COSPAS-SARSAT had saved 5,000 lives in the United States and 18,000 worldwide.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 619; NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Environmental Satellite,” news release 05- 129, 20 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05129_ NOAA_)
 A California Launch Vehicle Education Initiative (CALVEIN) research team successfully launched and recovered the Prospector 6 (P6) test vehicle at the Mojave Test Area owned and operated by the Reaction Research Society. The test was part of a joint industry/academic effort to develop a low-cost Nanosat Launch Vehicle, a booster capable of delivering 22-pound (10- kilogram) payloads to low Earth orbit. Researchers at Garvey Spacecraft Corporation of Long Beach, California, and California State University at Long Beach had designed and built the partially reusable 27-foot (8-meter) P6 test vehicle, which had flown to just under 3,000 feet (914 meters), a milestone toward the team’s goal. P6 had also carried student payloads from across the country: a mini-DV camera to capture on-board video of the entire flight sequence; a real-time telemetry system that adapted off-the-shelf Wi-Fi technology to relay key propulsion- system parameters; and a measurement-logging package to record acceleration, pressure, and temperature data that the research team would use to assess the vehicle’s performance.(Leonard David, “High Hopes for Low-Cost Rocket After Successful Launch Test,” Space.com, 27 May 2005, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/050526_prospector6_test.html (accessed 16 September 2009).)
 NASA announced results of the Cassini probe’s first radio occultation observations of Saturn’s rings, atmosphere, and ionosphere, which had taken place on 3 May. Scientists had labeled the seven main rings in the order of discovery; however, from the planet outward, the rings are labeled D, C, B, A, F, G, and E. During the experiment, Cassini had been occulted―hidden―behind the planet’s rings. The craft had simultaneously transmitted Ka, X, and S, three radio signals of different frequencies―the first occultation experiment to do so. NASA’s ground-based Deep Space Network had received the signals, but their passage through Saturn’s ring material had affected their strength―the denser the ring, the weaker the signal. Cassini’s radio signals had revealed Saturn’s ring structure with clarity never before seen, in particular the structure of ring B, which had eluded previous robotic explorers. Cassini had revealed ring B’s composition as a thick, 5,000-kilometer-wide (3,100-mile-wide) core, containing several bands of material nearly 4 times as dense as that found in ring A, and nearly 20 times as dense as ring C. Cassini had also shown that the structure of ring B varies dramatically, contrasting sharply with the relatively flat structure of ring A and the wavy structure of ring C.(NASA, “Cassini Radio Signals Decipher Structure of Saturn’s Rings,” news release 05-130, 23 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05130_Cassini.html (accessed 14 September 2009); David Whitehouse, “Cassini Makes Detailed Ring Map,” BBC News, 25 May 2005.)
 success.html (accessed 14 September 2009).
 NASA announced that scientists had finally agreed that Voyager 1, launched in 1977, had reached the solar system’s final frontier, passed through the termination shock region―the point at the edge of the solar system where the solar wind slows abruptly, and entered the heliosheath―a frontier of unknown thickness defining the border with interstellar space. In November 2003, the Voyager team had announced unusual events in the mission’s history, signaling that Voyager 1 had reached the edge of the solar system. However, scientists disagreed as to whether the craft had actually encountered termination shock or was merely approaching the region at the edge of interstellar space. NASA explained that scientists had based the evidence that Voyager 1 had encountered termination shock on the craft’s measurement of a sudden increase in the strength of the magnetic field carried by the solar wind, combined with an inferred decrease in speed, which happens when the solar wind slows down. Additionally, Voyager had observed an increase in the number of high-speed, electrically charged electrons and ions, as well as a burst of plasma-wave noise, which scientists had expected to occur when Voyager 1 passed the termination shock. Eric Christian, Discipline Scientist for the Sun-Solar System Connection Research Program at NASA Headquarters, remarked that Voyager’s observations over the past few years had shown that termination shock is far more complicated than previously thought. When Voyager 1 entered the heliosheath, the craft was 8.7 billion miles (14 kilometers) away from Earth, the farthest any human-made object had traveled.(NASA, “Voyager Spacecraft Enters Solar System’s Final Frontier,” news release 05-131, 24 May 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05131_Voyager_agu.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Guy Gugliotta, “Voyager at Edge of Solar System,” Washington Post, 25 May 2005.)
 Khrunichev Center announced that it had signed a contract with Russia’s defense ministry, valid through 2010, to research, develop, and flight-test the Angara launch vehicle. The Angara project included a series of liquid oxygen/kerosene expendable launch vehicles. The Khrunichev Center intended for Angara 5 to have greater capabilities than the company’s existing Proton rocket and to be far more environmentally friendly. In addition, the Angara 5 would launch exclusively from Plesetsk, rather than from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. According to the contract, near the end of 2006, the Khrunichev Center would launch the first vehicle carrying a Russian government payload.(Dmitry Pieson, “Khrunichev, Defense Ministry To Build Angara Jointly,” Aerospace Daily and Defense Report, 27 May 2005.)
 NASA returned Discovery to the Vehicle Assembly Building from its launchpad, to attach a newer fuel tank and booster set to the Space Shuttle. While Discovery was sitting on the launchpad, NASA had determined that ice could break off the outside of its external fuel tank and could prove as lethal as the falling foam insulation that had led to the demise of Columbia. To minimize the risk of such debris striking the orbiter’s fragile heat shield, NASA had decided to install an additional heater on the fuel tank. Ice forms on the external tank when the fuel is extremely cold, and a heater would reduce the amount of ice build-up on the tank.(Irene Mona Klotz, “Shuttle Heads Back to Workshop,” BBC News, 27 May 2005; “Shuttle Rolls Back to Hangar,” Washington Post, 27 May 2005.)
 France and the United States agreed to establish a Space Shuttle landing site in southern France. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin and French Ambassador Jean-David Levitte signed the agreement, which covered NASA’s Space Shuttle support for the ISS. Under the agreement, France would permit Shuttles encountering problems during launch to land at Istres Air Base 125, near Marseilles, and allow the U.S. government to conduct additional support activities for Space Shuttles on French soil, such as weather monitoring and search-and-rescue operations.(NASA, “U.S. and France Agree To Establish NASA Shuttle Landing Site,” news release 05-143, 7 June 2005. 803 Mark Carreau, “Shuttle Safety Issues Unresolved,” Houston Chronicle, 9 June 2005; Warren E. Leary, “NASA Near to Meeting Safety Requirements for Launching in July,” New York Times, 9 June 2005.)
 The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) provided an update on NASA’s efforts to comply with the Columbia Accident Investigation Board’s (the CAIB’s) recommended safety and operational practices for Shuttle launches. The Task Group stated that it had approved NASA’s efforts regarding five of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, bringing the total number of CAIB recommendations with which NASA had complied to 12. Among the five recommendations that NASA had implemented were the installation of cameras on the Shuttle to observe critical events and steps to ensure that budgetary issues and other outside pressures would not influence flight schedules in the future. The Task Group stated further that, although NASA had not yet complied with three of the CAIB recommendations, it saw no circumstances that might prevent NASA’s planned launch of Space Shuttle Discovery in July 2005. The three CAIB recommendations that NASA had not yet implemented were establishing in-orbit repair techniques for the orbiter, preventing catastrophic debris from falling off the orbiter’s fuel tank during launch, and fortifying the orbiter against debris impacts.
 Scientists announced that they had found the most Earth-like planet ever before observed. Experts described the discovery as a milestone in efforts to find extraterrestrial life. Scientists led by Eugenio J. Rivera of the University of California, Santa Cruz, had discovered the planet, called GJ 876 d, orbiting the star GJ 876, which is 15 light-years from Earth. The planet, with a mass seven times that of Earth, is mostly composed of silicates, iron, and nickel―compositional matter more similar to that of Earth than the material of any other planet yet discovered. However, the planet is unlikely to support life, because estimated temperatures on the side of the planet facing the star are around 400° to 700°F―temperatures too hot for liquid water. Experts described the scientists’ method of discovering the planet as a significant demonstration of the state-of-the art technologies for finding exoplanets―planets outside the solar system―that are as small as Earth. The scientists had used a spectrometer to discover GJ 876d, which is the smallest exoplanet yet found. Using the spectrometer had enabled them to observe changes in the exoplanet’s reflected light. They had used the data to measure the planet’s gravitational effects on the movements of its accompanying star.(John Johnson Jr., “Distant Object May Be a Planet Similar to Ours,” Los Angeles Times, 14 June 2005; Eugenio J. Rivera et al., “A ~7.5 Earth-Mass Planet Orbiting the Nearby Star, GJ 876,” Astrophysical Journal 634, no. 1 (20 November 2005): 625–640.)
 During a hearing of the House Science Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics―Live from Space: The International Space Station―NASA astronaut John L. Phillips became the first person to provide congressional testimony while in space. The Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics had convened the hearing to gather information on numerous topics concerning the ISS, such as current activities on the ISS, scientific and research accomplishments resulting from ISS operations, and long-term human spaceflight. At the time of the hearing, Phillips was aboard the ISS serving as a member of Expedition 11, along with Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev. Former ISS crew members E. Michael Fincke and Peggy A. Whitson also provided testimony at the hearing.(NASA, “NASA Astronaut Gives First Congressional Testimony from Space,” news release 05-152, 14 June 2005; U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics, Live from Space: The International Space Station, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 14 June 2005, 3.)
 The Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios launched Cosmos 1, the first solar-powered spacecraft, at 3:46 p.m. (EDT), on a Volna rocket from a Russian submarine in the Barents Sea. Russian Space Agency officials, however, were not certain that the spacecraft had attained orbit. The spacecraft’s sponsors, the Planetary Society and Cosmos Studios, are U.S. nonprofit organizations that seek to increase the public’s knowledge of and involvement in space exploration. The late American scientist Carl Sagan had helped found the Planetary Society, and Ann Druyan―Sagan’s widow―had founded Cosmos Studios. The two organizations had designed the craft and launched the mission to demonstrate the feasibility of solar power technology as an effective means of space travel. The pressure of solar light particles―photons―on the spacecraft’s large, triangular, mirror-like “solar sails” were to propel the engineless, fuel-free Cosmos 1.(John Antczak for Associated Press, “Solar Sail Spacecraft Launched from Russian Submarine,” 21 June 2005; The Planetary Society, “Projects: Solar Sailing,” http://planetary.org/programs/projects/ solar_sailing/ (accessed 10 August 2009).)
 The Russian Space Agency announced that the launch of Cosmos 1 had failed. According to the agency, the rocket that had launched the spacecraft had experienced failure 83 seconds after ignition. Consequently, the experimental solar-powered spacecraft had crashed soon after its launch.(David Holley and Alex Raksin, “Solar Craft Falls Short of Cosmos,” Los Angeles Times, 23 June 2005. 808 ESA, “German Chair for ESA Council,” ESA news release 35-2005, 22 June 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_35_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 11 August 2009); ESA, “What is ESA?” http://www.esa.int/SPECIALS/About_ESA/ SEMW16ARR1F_0.html (accessed 11 August 2009).)
 During its 179th meeting, held at the European Space Operations Centre in Darmstadt, Germany, the ESA Council elected Sigmar Wittig as its Chair, effective 1 July 2005. Wittig, head of the German delegation to ESA and the Chair of the Executive Board of the German Aerospace Center (Deutsche Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt), replaced Per Tegnér of Sweden, whose term of office was ending on 30 June 2005. The ESA Council is ESA’s governing body and provides policy guidelines for ESA’s space programs.
 The American Academy of Arts and Sciences released “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities,” a research paper highly critical of the Vision for Space Exploration. In the paper, former Director of NASA’s JSC George W. S. Abbey and former White House science advisor Neal F. Lane stated that the Vision for Space Exploration does not address major obstacles to the United States’ progress in space exploration and science. Those problems include predicted shortfalls in the U.S. engineering and science workforce and declining international cooperation on existing and planned space missions. Abbey and Lane also stated that the United States would be unlikely to realize the Vision’s objectives because of the diminishing U.S. commitment to the country’s commercial space industry and the declining role of basic science in the U.S. space program and in the national economy. NASA officials did not comment on the paper, stating that they had not yet seen it.(John Schwartz, “Report Says Space Program Is Lacking Money and Focus,” New York Times, 23 June 2005; George W. S. Abbey and Neal F. Lane, “United States Space Policy: Challenges and Opportunities” (Occasional Paper, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Cambridge, MA, 2005), 1–2.)
 NASA-funded physicists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology announced that they had created the first superfluid, a form of matter that flows without internal mechanical resistance or viscosity. The scientists had created the superfluid by cooling a gas of lithium atoms to nearly absolute zero (approximately -459°F), applying a magnetic field, to get the atoms of the gas to form pairs without creating molecules, and then using a laser to stir the gas. The last step produced vortexes―or microscopic whirlpools―throughout the resulting fluid. The vortexes provided conclusive evidence of superfluidity because, whereas rotating a container of normal fluid causes the fluid to spin, rotating a container of superfluid does not cause the frictionless superfluid to spin but, instead, produces vortexes in the superfluid that continue to spin as long as the fluid remains a superfluid. Experts described the research as a major breakthrough in physics. The findings could lead to the development of products such as room-temperature superconductors, which could help in other applications, such as transporting energy and assisting in medical diagnostics.(NASA, “Whirling Atoms Dance into Physics Textbooks,” news release 05-163, 24 June 2005; M. W. Zwierlein et al., “Vortices and Superfluidity in a Strongly Interacting Fermi Gas,” Nature 435, no. 7045 (23 June 2005): 1047– 1051.)
 The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) announced that it considered the Space Shuttle Discovery safe enough to fly again, even though NASA had not undertaken some steps recommended by the CAIB to ensure the Shuttle’s safe launch. NASA had planned to launch Discovery as the first Shuttle flight since the Columbia accident in 2003 and had established the Task Group to review NASA’s compliance with the CAIB’s critical recommendations. Task Group members stated that, although NASA had not complied with all of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations, the Space Shuttle was ready to resume flight, and NASA was responsible for making the final decision to launch the Shuttle. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin was unclear about how the Task Group’s findings would influence Shuttle launch plans.(Traci Watson, “Safety Panel: NASA Failed To Fix Critical Issues with Shuttle,” USA Today, 28 June 2009. 252)
 The House Committee on Science held a hearing entitled The Future of NASA in preparation for a subcommittee to consider, on the following day, legislation reauthorizing NASA’s aeronautics, human spaceflight, and science programs through FY 2006 (H.R. 3070). President George W. Bush had requested US$16.5 billion in funding for NASA for FY 2006. NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin provided testimony to the committee about NASA’s intentions regarding issues contained in the President’s budget request, including NASA’s plans for human and robotic space exploration, the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), and Space Shuttle safety. Griffin told the committee that, despite the fact that NASA had not yet complied with all 15 of the CAIB’s critical recommendations, NASA was preparing to launch Shuttle Discovery on 13 July 2005, pending the results of NASA’s own inspection. Furthermore, Griffin discussed President Bush’s intention to amend the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which had effectively prevented NASA from purchasing or bartering for space on Russian spacecraft. The amendment of the act would permit NASA to send astronauts to the ISS after April 2006.(U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Science, The Future of NASA, 109th Cong., 1st sess., 28 June 2005, 3–5; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Says Shuttle Should Be Ready on July 13,” Washington Post, 29 June 2009. 813 NASA, “NASA Researchers Discover Planet with Largest Solid Core,” news release 05-169, 30 June 2005; Bun’ei Sato et al., “The N2K Consortium. II. A Transiting Hot Saturn Around HD 149026 with a Large Dense Core,” Astrophysical Journal 633, no. 1 (1 November 2005): 465–473.)
 An international group of astronomers led by Debra A. Fischer of San Francisco State University announced that they had discovered the largest solid core yet found in an exoplanet. The planet, called HD 149026b, has a solid core that is approximately 70 times larger than Earth’s mass. The discovery was the first observational evidence of the core accretion theory of planetary formation, which posits that planets begin as small rock-ice cores and acquire additional mass through gravitational attraction of gas and other matter. The competing gravitational instability theory holds that planetary formation occurs after the rapid gravitational collapse of large gas clouds. Fischer and the other astronomers reported that they had determined that the mechanism of gravitational instability was unlikely to have produced the large, rocky core of HD 149026b.
 NASA’s Deep Impact spacecraft, created to analyze the comet Tempel 1, successfully completed a planned crash into Tempel 1, becoming the first mission to probe beneath the surface of a comet. Astronomers believe that analyzing comets can help them better understand the solar system’s formation and evolution, because comets are composed of materials from distant regions of the solar system, which formed 4.5 billion years ago. The Deep Impact spacecraft―one of a series of low-cost space science ventures developed under the NASA Discovery Mission―consisted of two vehicles: an impactor and a flyby vehicle. NASA had designed the impactor to crash into Tempel 1, thereby exposing the comet’s internal material, and to capture images of the comet until just seconds before impact. NASA intended the flyby vehicle to capture images of Tempel 1’s substrata, the internal material of the comet that the impactor’s crash would expose, and to conduct chemical analyses of comet debris ejected during the crash.(Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Succeeds in Crashing Craft into Comet,” Washington Post, 5 July 2005; NASA, “Deep Impact: Mission to a Comet, Spacecraft and Instruments,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/ deepimpact/mission/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
 NASA scientists announced the first measurements ever taken of changes in sea level that were unrelated to changes in land height. Although researchers believed that rising sea levels were related to global warming, they were unsure of how much sea levels had changed, the degree to which sea-level changes were attributable to upward and downward land movements, and the causes of those changes. However, using data from numerous satellites, NASA scientists had discovered that global sea levels had increased during the previous 50 years, at an estimated rate of 1.8 millimeters (0.07 inches) annually, and that the rate of increase had accelerated to 3 millimeters (0.12 inches) annually in the previous 12 years. The scientists attributed half of the rise in sea levels to the expansion of water from warmer ocean temperatures and the remainder to various other sources, such as the melting of ice covers in Antarctica, Greenland, and elsewhere.(Juliet Eilperin, “NASA Able To Pinpoint Changes in Sea Levels,” Washington Post, 8 July 2005; NASA, “NASA Satellites Measure and Monitor Sea Level,” news release 05-175, 7 July 2005.)
 JAXA launched its Suzaku astronomy satellite at 3:30 a.m. (GMT) from Uchinoura Space Center (formerly called the Kagoshima Space Center) on an M-5 rocket. Suzaku, known as Astro-E2 before the launch, was JAXA’s replacement for its first Astro-E satellite, which had been lost during launch in 2000. JAXA and the Japanese Institute of Space and Astronautical Science had built the satellite to monitor space in conjunction with NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory and ESA’s XMM-Newton. The Suzaku satellite was equipped with three telescopes: a Hard X-ray Detector, an X-ray Spectrometer, and an X-ray Imaging Spectrometer.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 621, 1 August 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx621.html (accessed 12 June 2009); NASA, “Suzaku: Mission Overview,” 3 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/ mission_pages/astro-e2/ main/index.html (accessed 12 June 2009).)
 Maciej Konacki of the California Institute of Technology reported the first discovery of a planet occupying an orbit among three stars. The planet, dubbed HD 188753, has a mass that is slightly larger than Jupiter. HD 188753 closely orbits a primary star, along with a pair of similarly sized stars. According to scientists, Konacki’s findings challenged conventional scientific understanding of the architecture of planetary systems. Scientists had believed that other planetary systems have a structure like Earth’s solar system, in which only planets―and not stars―orbit a star. Konacki’s research cast doubt on conventional theories of planetary system development, because his findings provided the first evidence that a planet could develop and survive in a gravitationally complex stellar system. According to conventional scientific theory, HD 188753’s two companion stars would have burned away the primary star’s surrounding gas and dust, which would have provided the materials to form the new planet. In addition, although other existing theories had suggested that a planet of HD 188753’s size could have migrated to the massive star from elsewhere, those theories had posited incorrectly that the secondary pair of stars would have prevented HD 188753 from orbiting the primary star as closely as does. HD 188753 completes a single orbit in 3.4 Earth days.(John Noble Wilford, “Discovery of a First: A World with 3 Suns,” New York Times, 15 July 2005; Maciej Konacki, “An Extrasolar Giant Planet in a Close Triple-Star System,” Nature 436, no. 7048 (14 July 2005): 230– 233.)
 Researchers at NASA’s GRC successfully tested a new type of fire detector, which could significantly reduce false alarms in the baggage and cargo compartments of commercial aircraft. Whereas most fire detectors only detect smoke particles, the GRC-developed sensor system―called the MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS)―could compare gas concentrations and smoke-particle dimensions in the environment to those commonly found in fires. The MEMS was equipped with carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide sensors, a smoke- particle detector, and integrated software, elements that, collectively, rendered it less vulnerable to false alarms than smoke-sensing detectors, which can give false alarms when sensing dust and other airborne particles. According to the FAA, the ratio of false alarms to actual fires on aircraft was around 100 to 1.(NASA, “New NASA Design Concept Smokes Out False Alarms,” news release 05-191, 20 July 2005.)
 NASA’s Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from NASA’s KSC in Florida at 10:39 a.m. (EDT) in NASA’s first Space Shuttle launch since the February 2003 Columbia tragedy. Although officially designated STS-114, NASA had frequently referred to the Discovery mission as the Return to Flight Mission. In addition, STS-114 was the first step toward implementation of the Vision for Space Exploration, the U.S. space policy calling for human and robotic missions to the Moon, Mars, and other planets in the solar system. The primary objectives of STS-114 were to test and evaluate new safety procedures at the ISS and to conduct construction and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Mission crew members were Commander Eileen M. Collins, Pilot James M. Kelly, Mission Specialists Charles J. Camarda, Wendy B. Lawrence, Stephen K. Robinson, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, and Japanese astronaut Soichi Noguchi, also a Mission Specialist.(NASA, “NASA Launches Space Shuttle Return to Flight Mission,” news release 05-203, 26 July 2005; NASA, “STS-114: Return to Flight,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/main/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009); NASA, “Return to Flight: Mission Overview,” http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/crew/index.html (accessed 19 June 2009). 820 Michael Cabbage and Robyn Shelton, “NASA Grounds Shuttles,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 July 2005.)
 NASA announced that it would once again ground the Space Shuttle fleet, because mission personnel had discovered that Shuttle Discovery had experienced a problem similar to the one that had fatally damaged Columbia. Specifically, analysts had discovered that, during launch, Discovery’s external fuel tank had shed portions of foam insulation. At least one of the pieces of insulation had come from the same area of the tank as the foam that had ended the Columbia mission. Although the problem did not affect Discovery’s launch, the Shuttle’s crew had spent much of their first full day in orbit closely examining the orbiter’s exterior to determine the extent of the problem.
 A group of astronomers led by Michael E. Brown of the California Institute of Technology announced the discovery of a new planet in the solar system. The scientists had temporarily called the planet 2003 UB313 until the International Astronomic Union could formally approve the name that the scientists had proposed, but had not yet disclosed to the public. Although the scientists did not yet know the planet’s exact size, they believed it was larger than Pluto, which astronomers estimate is 1,400 miles (2,300 kilometers) in diameter. In addition, the newly discovered planet, which the scientists believed to be composed of rock and ice, was the furthest known object in the solar system, with a 560-year elliptical orbit around the Sun at distances ranging from 3.3 to 9 billion miles (5.3 to 14 billion kilometers) from the Sun. By comparison, Pluto’s orbit ranges from 2.7 to 4.6 billion miles (4.3 to 7.4 billion kilometers) from the Sun. The astronomers had also discovered that the orbit of 2003 UB313 is quite different from that of most planets in the solar system―it possesses an orbit skewed at an angle 44o from Earth’s orbit, whereas most planets orbit in planes that are close to that of Earth.(Kenneth Chang and Dennis Overbye, “Planet or Not, Pluto Has Far-Out Rival,” New York Times, 30 July 2005; NASA, “World Book at NASA: Pluto,” http://www.nasa.gov/worldbook/pluto_worldbook.html (accessed 2 July 2009); Richard A. Kerr, “Newfound ‘Tenth Planet’ Puts Pluto Behind the Eight Ball,” Science 309, 5736 (5 August 2005): 859.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts, Stephen K. Robinson of NASA and Soichi Noguchi of JAXA, completed a spacewalk during which they tested new prototype methods to repair heat- resistant tiles on the orbiter’s exterior. Robinson applied an experimental compound inside cracks in damaged panels, and Noguchi applied a thick, dark-colored paint to thermal protection tiles, to replace cracked or missing black surface coatings. NASA had developed the repair techniques in response to recommendations from the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. During the spacewalk, the two astronauts also performed several tasks to upgrade the ISS, such as replacing a broken GPS antenna and installing a bracket designed to hold a toolbox and parts kit for use during future spacewalks.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Test Repair Methods on Heat Tiles,” New York Times, 31 July 2005; Guy Gugliotta, “NASA Adds One Day to Shuttle’s Mission,” Washington Post, 31 July 2005.)
 Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi of JAXA and Stephen K. Robinson of NASA performed the second of three scheduled spacewalks for STS-114. The two astronauts conducted tests on materials designed to service the orbiter’s heat-shielding tiles and replaced a 600-pound (272.2-kilogram) gyroscope on the exterior of the ISS. The device was one of four gyroscopes that help maintain the station’s orientation in space.(NASA, “STS-114 MCC Status Report #13,” 1 August 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/returntoflight/ news/STS-114- 13.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
 Space Shuttle Discovery astronauts Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson completed a final spacewalk during which Robinson performed an unprecedented maneuver to complete a critical operation of the orbiter’s thermal protection system. The principle objective of the spacewalk was to remove two pieces of protruding heat shielding―called gap fillers―from the bottom of the orbiter. NASA was concerned that the fillers might add extra heat to the orbiter’s heat- shielding tiles upon reentry into Earth’s atmosphere, thereby threatening the mission. Astronauts James M. Kelly and Wendy B. Lawrence used the robotic arms of the Shuttle and those of the ISS to lower Robinson to the underside of Discovery, while Noguchi monitored the operation. Despite concerns that Robinson might lose communication with the other astronauts, the operation was a success. The maneuver was the first time that an astronaut had worked on the underside of an orbiter while in space. During the spacewalk, Noguchi and Robinson also installed an external stowage platform and a new iteration of an experiment to test materials in the environment of space.(NASA, “NASA’s Spacewalking Astronaut Completes Unique Repair,” news release 05-212, 3 August 2005; NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-114.html (accessed 24 June 2009).)
 Astronomers using NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST) detected, for the first time, a large population of black holes known as type-2 quasars. Quasars―supermassive black holes―are the universe’s brightest objects. Although scientists had observed the light from type-1 quasars, they had never before been able to detect type-2 quasars because, despite the brightness of type-2 quasars, the gas and dust rings that surround them obscure the quasars’ visible light and block their emission of x-rays. Space telescopes and other scientific instruments rely on x-ray emissions to detect and to analyze these celestial phenomena. However, Alejo Martínez-Sansigre of the University of Oxford led a team of astronomers who used the SST to detect infrared light emitted by type-2 quasars, thereby capturing evidence of 21 quasars. The research also indicated that the growth of black holes has been concentrated in obscure regions of the universe and has tended to occur in the cores of forming galaxies during brief, highly productive periods. The new data suggested that thousands more such quasars might exist in the universe.(NASA, “NASA’s Spitzer Finds Hidden, Hungry Black Holes,” news release 05-211, 3 August 2005; Alejo Martínez-Sansigre et al., “The Obscuration by Dust of Most of the Growth of Supermassive Black Holes,” Nature 463, no. 7051 (4 August 2005): 666–669.)
 The Space Shuttle Discovery returned to Earth, landing at California’s Edwards Air Force Base at 5:11 a.m. (PDT). The mission―officially designated STS-114―was NASA’s first Shuttle mission since the February 2003 loss of Columbia. The Shuttle’s successful reentry was particularly important, because the Columbia accident had occurred during the reentry phase of its mission. The mission’s primary objectives were to test and evaluate new safety procedures for Shuttle missions and to continue construction and maintenance of the ISS. Soichi Noguchi and Stephen K. Robinson had performed some of the ISS and Shuttle maintenance tasks during three spacewalks on 30 July, 1 August, and 3 August. The total duration of STS-114 was 13 days, 21 hours, and 32 minutes.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-114.” 257)
 NASA launched its Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) at 7:43 a.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida on an Atlas 5 launch vehicle. The occasion marked the first time that NASA had used an Atlas 5 to launch an interplanetary mission. NASA had designed the MRO to conduct highly detailed analyses of Mars’s atmosphere, surface, and subsurface. From low orbit, the MRO would evaluate landing sites for future Mars missions and search for sites where water might have previously existed. NASA planned to examine the MRO data to seek evidence of previous life on the planet and to study planetary climate change. After two years of gathering data, the MRO would relay the information to Earth, using two robotic probes scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2008 and 2010.(NASA, “NASA’s Multipurpose Mars Mission Successfully Launched,” news release 05-218, 12 August 2005; Thomas H. Maugh II, “New Mars Orbiter Embarks on Ambitious Fact-Finding Mission,” Los Angeles Times, 13 August 2005.)
 Russian cosmonaut and ISS crew member Sergei K. Krikalev set a world record of 748 days for total time spent in space. Krikalev had begun his cosmonaut training in 1985 and had first served as a crew member of Russia’s Mir space station in 1988. Krikalev had served on the Mir crew again in 1991 and had later become a member of the first ISS crew comprising both Russian cosmonauts and U.S. astronauts. In addition, he had been the first Russian to travel on a NASA Space Shuttle, achieving that distinction on Shuttle Discovery in 1994. The ISS partners had scheduled Krikalev’s return to Earth for October 2005―by then he would have spent 814 days in space.(Mark Carreau, “Russian Cosmonaut Sets a World Record of 748 Days in Space,” Houston Chronicle, 17 August 2005.)
 NASA scientists led by Karel J. Schrijver announced the results of their research on the development of better methods of forecasting solar storms. Radiation from solar storms―extremely powerful explosions in the Sun’s atmosphere―can affect unprotected astronauts and airplane passengers, as well as satellites. In the past, scientists had usually analyzed changes in solar magnetic fields to forecast solar storms (also called solar flares), but this method had demonstrated limited reliability. However, a team of NASA scientists using NASA’s Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) had found that strong electrical currents in the solar atmosphere―currents associated with changes in solar magnetic fields―are the primary drivers of solar flares. Therefore, observing the electrical currents is a more reliable method of forecasting solar flares than the method previously used. The researchers had also discovered that solar flares are strongest and most likely to occur in regions of the Sun where electrical currents accumulate until they have reached an explosive threshold. According to Schrijver and the other researchers, these findings would enable scientists better to forecast periods of potentially hazardous space weather.(NASA, “NASA Scientists Closer to Timely Space Weather Forecasts,” news release 05-226, 16 August 2005; Carolus J. Schrijver et al., “The Nonpotentiality of Active-Region Coronae and the Dynamics of the Photospheric Magnetic Field,” Astrophysical Journal 628, no. 1 (20 July 2005): 501–513.)
 The Stafford-Covey Return to Flight Task Group (SCTG) released its final report on NASA’s efforts to meet the CAIB’s recommendations for resuming piloted Shuttle flights. Former NASA Administrator Sean O’Keefe had established the task group to provide an independent assessment of NASA’s implementation of the CAIB’s 15 critical recommendations. In the final report, the CAIB concluded that NASA had met or exceeded 12 of the 15 recommendations and had made substantive progress on the remaining three. The task group explained that the final three recommendations were of a type that would be nearly impossible to complete. However, major media highlighted an appendix of the document in which seven of the 28-member task group provided a highly critical assessment of NASA’s management. These seven task force members claimed that some of the same organizational behaviors of NASA managers that had contributed to the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia had also jeopardized the July 2005 Space Shuttle Discovery mission. They stated further that NASA had failed to address the problem of Discovery’s loss of foam insulation from its fuel tank and had failed to take steps to protect the Space Shuttles from the damage caused by such debris.(Return to Flight Task Group, Final Report of the Return to Flight Task Group (Washington, DC, July 2005); John Schwartz, “Minority Report Faults NASA as Compromising Safety,” New York Times, 18 August 2005.)
 A group of scientists led by David N. Burrows of Pennsylvania State University announced that they had found evidence of black holes behaving in a manner previously unknown. Using observations from NASA’s Swift satellite, the scientists had discovered newly formed black holes that were simultaneously consuming matter while propelling away other material. They also observed that, after the black holes had emerged from large star explosions, the energy from the black holes’ initial formative activities had caused several subsequent explosions during the following minutes, with a gamma-ray burst (GRB) from the first explosion followed by x-ray flares from later explosions. Previously, scientists had believed that black holes and GRBs were only associated with single explosions of collapsing stars, rather than with a rapid succession of explosions. The scientists had been able to conduct their analyses because NASA’s Swift satellite could observe GRBs within minutes after their occurrence, whereas other satellites had only been able to observe GRBs hours after they had occurred.
 NASA and NOAA announced their joint development of procedures to improve the accuracy of medium-range weather forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere. NASA and NOAA scientists had incorporated into weather prediction models the data from the Atmospheric Infrared Sounder (AIRS) on NASA’s Aqua satellite, improving the accuracy range of experimental six-day weather forecasts of the Northern Hemisphere by 6 hours. Observers called this improvement of 4 percent a significant development in weather forecasting. NASA had launched Aqua on 4 May 2002, enabling the AIRS to produce three-dimensional maps of air and surface temperature, cloud properties, and water vapor. Moreover, the instrument had a spectral resolution more than 100 times greater than that of other infrared sounders.(NASA, “NASA/NOAA Announce Major Weather Forecasting Advancement,” news release 05-231, 24 August 2005; NASA JPL, “AIRS: Overview,” http://airs.jpl.nasa.gov/overview/ overview/ (accessed 2 July 2009).)
 Scientists published the first research findings from NASA’s Deep Impact mission, which had revealed important and unexpected findings about comets. On 4 July 2005, a probe from the Deep Impact spacecraft had performed a planned crash into the comet Tempel 1, while various observatories and the spacecraft’s observational vehicle analyzed the impact. One of the most
 831D. N. Burrows et al., “Bright X-ray Flares in Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglows,” Science 309, no. 5742 (16 September 2005): 1833–1835; NASA, “NASA’s Swift Satellite Finds Newborn Black Holes,” news release 05-229, 18 August 2005. important findings was the presence of organic material in the comet, a discovery that supported theories that comets may have seeded Earth with the chemical precursors to life. However, scientists were surprised to find that the frozen comet contained minerals that require liquid water, not frozen water, to form. Scientists also puzzled over the presence of minerals that form in warmer temperatures than those present in the outer margins of the solar system, where they believed that comets had originated. Just as surprising to researchers was the discovery that the comet was not composed of solid ice, but that, instead, it had a fragile shell of ice covering a highly porous interior composed largely of dust.(Kenneth Chang, “Composition of a Comet Poses a Puzzle for Scientists,” New York Times, 7 September 2005; John Johnson Jr., “Snowy Dirtball Is Melting Old Theories,” Los Angeles Times, 7 September 2005.)
 NASA Deputy Administrator and former astronaut Frederick D. Gregory announced his resignation from NASA. Gregory, who had become Deputy Administrator in 2002, stated that he was leaving the post so that a younger and more motivated individual could have the experience of serving. During his 31-year career with NASA, Gregory had served as Associate Administrator for Space Flight and Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Safety and Mission Assurance. Gregory also had logged 455 hours in space as an astronaut, and in 1989 he had become the first African American to command a Space Shuttle mission. In his resignation letter to President George W. Bush, Gregory stated that he would remain Deputy Administrator until NASA had a confirmed successor.(NASA, “NASA Deputy Administrator Frederick Gregory Resigns,” news release 05-258, 9 September 2005; Mark Carreau, “NASA Deputy Administrator Resigns,” Houston Chronicle, 10 September 2005.)
 The GAO issued a report detailing numerous problems with NASA’s financial management operationsproblems that could threaten NASA’s major programs. The report addressed
 NASA’s implementation of its Integrated Financial Management Program (IFMP)NASA had begun implementing the IFMP in 2000 as a single accounting system to replace 11 separate accounting systems. At the request of the U.S. Congress, in 2003 GAO had examined NASA’s progress on IFMP implementation and had recommended that NASA make 45 changes to the program. In its assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement those recommended changes, GAO stated that NASA had made slow progress and still needed to implement most of the recommendations. The report also stated that NASA’s financial management problems were in danger of threatening its capacity to manage its programs and to allocate its budget to projects and programs. NASA responded that it had made significant improvements under the IFMP and had made progress on more of GAO’s recommendations than GAO had indicated in its report.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Business Modernization: Some Progress Made Toward Implementing GAO Recommendations Related to NASA’s Integrated Financial Management Program” (report no. GAO-05-799R, Washington, DC, 9 September 2005); Tamara Lytle, “NASA Still Can’t Balance Its Books, Auditors Say,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 October 2005.)
 Astronomers announced the detection of the most distant explosion ever observed, at approximately 12.6 billion light-years from Eartha gamma-ray burst (GRB) occurring after a massive star’s collapse and transformation to a black hole. The explosion, which astronomers had named GRB 050904, had occurred nearly 1.1 billion years after the Big Bang, which itself had happened 13.7 billion years ago. The astronomers used ground-based telescopes and NASA’s Swift satellite to detect GRB 050904’s emitted infrared light. Because the event had occurred so far away, the infrared light had just begun to reach Earth. However, the explosion was not the most distant object or event that astronomers had ever observed. Scientists had detected a quasar and a galaxy located 12.7 billion light-years from Earth.(Guy Gugliotta, “Satellite Detects Massive Explosion,” Washington Post, 13 September 2005; NASA, “Most Distant Explosion Detected, Smashes Previous Record,” news release 05-259, 12 September 2005.)
 Scientists announced that NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had detected water vapor on Enceladus, one of Saturn’s moons. Scientists described this as one of the most important findings in planetary science, because the discovery suggested that liquid water might exist on Enceladus. Liquid water is a prerequisite for the formation of life. Scientists had already known that Enceladus has a crystalline ice covering, the most reflective type of surface in the solar system, making Enceladus the brightest object in the solar system with the exception of the Sun. In addition, scientists had already known that diminutive Enceladus, which is only 310 miles (500 kilometers) in diameter, is the smallest object in the solar system to have volcanic activity. However, scientists were surprised to discover water vapor over Enceladus’s south pole, and they were unable to explain the finding. NASA and ESA had launched Cassini in 1997 to survey Saturn and its moons.(Guy Gugliotta, “Water Vapor Discovered on Tiny Moon of Saturn,” Washington Post, 19 September 2005. 838 NASA, “NASA Releases Plans for Next Generation Spacecraft,” news release 05-226, 19 September 2005; NASA, “NASA’s Exploration Systems Architecture Study,” November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/exploration/news/ESAS_report.html (accessed 10 July 2009).)
 NASA Administrator Michael D. Griffin released to the public NASA’s detailed master plan for meeting goals established under the Vision for Space Exploration, including transporting humans to the Moon, Mars, and elsewhere in the solar system. The US$104 billion plan, called the Exploration System Architecture Study, addressed the technologies and strategies that NASA planned to use to transport crews to the ISS, the Moon, and Mars. NASA proposed to replace the Space Shuttles with a Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) similar in design to the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, but incorporating new fuels and technologies.
 William W. Parsons replaced Thomas Q. Donaldson as Director of NASA’s SSC. Parsons had served as Director of SSC from August 2002 to May 2003 before leaving SSC to serve as Space Shuttle Program Manager from May 2003 to September 2005. Donaldson had left SSC to serve on a Federal Emergency Management Agency special assignment concerning recovery efforts for areas affected by Hurricane Katrina in August 2005.(NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/ director.html (accessed 9 July 2009); NASA, “NASA Names New Stennis Center Director,” news release 05-260, 13 September 2005.)
 The U.S. Air Force launched the most technologically advanced GPS satellite ever developed, the GPS IIR-14, on a Delta-2 rocket at 11:37 p.m. (EDT) from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The GPS IIR-14 was the first of eight satellites planned for the new GPS, which the Air Force had created to provide improved encryption and GPS antijamming capabilities for the U.S. military, as well as an improved GPS signal for civilian users. At the time of the launch, the GPS constellation consisted of 28 satellites, which the Air Force was operating for both civilian and military users.(Lockheed Martin, “First Modernized GPS Satellite Built by Lockheed Martin Launched Successfully by the U.S. Air Force,” news release, 26 September 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2005/ FIRSTMODERNIZEDGPSSATELLITEBUILTBYL.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
 The FAA issued the first airworthiness certificate for a civil UAVthe General Atomics Altair. The UAV had a wingspan of 86 feet (26.2 meters), could fly to an altitude of 52,000 feet (9.8 miles or 15.8 kilometers), and could remain airborne for more than 30 hours. General Atomics and NASA had jointly built the Altair to perform scientific and commercial research.(FAA, “FAA Certifies First Civil Unmanned Aerial Vehicle,” news release AOC 34-05, 28 September 2005, http://www.faa.gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5780&print=go (accessed 28 January 2010).)
 The Russian Space Agency launched the crew of ISS Expedition 12 in a Soyuz spacecraft at 11:55 p.m. (EDT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 12 were American astronaut Commander William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev. The two men would replace the crew of Expedition 11, comprising Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The ISS partners planned for the new crew to remain at the station for nearly six months. The launch also included American executive Gregory Olsen, who would conduct scientific experiments under a commercial contract with the Russian Space Agency. Olsen planned to return to Earth with the Expedition 11 crew on 10 October 2005.(NASA, “Expedition 12 on the Way to International Space Station,” news release 05-292, 30 September 2005. 843 NASA, “Langley Center Director Lesa B. Roe,” 3 October 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/langley/ about/roe_bio.html (accessed 13 July 2009); NASA, “Gen. Roy D. Bridges Named Langley Center Director,” news release 03-042, 13 June 2003.)
 Lesa B. Roe replaced the retiring Roy D. Bridges Jr. as Director of NASA’s LaRC. Roe, who had begun working with NASA in 1987, had served as LaRC’s Deputy Director since June 2004. Before that, she had been LaRC’s Associate Director for Business Management since August 2003. Bridges had served as Director of LaRC from June 2003 until his retirement from NASA.
 Astronomers announced that they had discovered the source of short gamma-ray bursts (GRBs), which had been an enigma for decades. Gamma rays are the most energetic and deadly form of electromagnetic radiation. Although scientists had already discovered that supernovas cause long GRBs, which last for approximately 2 seconds, they had remained uncertain of the causes of short GRBs, which last less than 1 second. Using data from numerous NASA satellites, 130 astronomers from around the world found that short GRBs originate from neutron stars and not―as some theories had suggested―from supernovas. More specifically, satellite data showed that short GRBs originate from collisions involving a neutron star and either another neutron star or a black hole. However, the data was not conclusive regarding the exact type of collision that causes short GRBs, because the brevity of these events makes them difficult to observe directly.(Luigi Pir, “Short-Burst Sources,” Nature (London) 437, no. 7060 (6 October 2005): 822–823; Dennis Overbye, “Scientists Trace Gamma Rays to Collision of Dead Stars,” New York Times, 6 October 2005.)
 ESA’s CryoSat spacecraft was destroyed during a failed launch from Russia’s Plesetsk Cosmodrome. ESA had intended CryoSat as one of a series of Earth-observation spacecraft called Earth Explorers. ESA had built CryoSat to monitor the thickness of land and sea ice, to determine whether climate change is reducing Earth’s ice masses. Initial assessments of the launch failure indicated that the rocket launching the satellite had experienced a problem with its on-board flight-control system, a problem that had prevented the rocket’s upper stage from separating from its second stage.(ESA, “CryoSat Mission Lost Due to Launch Failure,” ESA news release 44-2005, 8 October 2005. http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMR3Q5Y3EE_index_0.html (accessed 14 July 2009); New York Times, “Arctic Study Satellite Crashes into Ocean,” 9 October 2005.)
 JAXA successfully tested an experimental aircraft capable of flying at Mach 2, which is twice the speed of sound. JAXA launched the aircraft, formally known as the Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport (SST), on a rocket from Australia’s Woomera Test Range at 7:06 a.m. (local time). After its release from the rocket, the SST flew for nearly 15 minutes at speeds of Mach 1.9 to 2 (1,446 to 1,522 miles per hour or 2,327 to 2,449 kilometers per hour) and at altitudes ranging from 12 to 19 kilometers (7.5 to 11.8 miles). Mitsubishi Heavy Industries had developed the SST as part of a US$10 million program to create an aircraft capable of transporting 300 passengers between Los Angeles and Tokyo in approximately 4 hours.(Meraiah Foley, “Flying High: Speedy Japanese Jet Passes Test,” Houston Chronicle, 11 October 2005; JAXA, “Flight Trial Result of Scaled Experimental Supersonic Transport,” news release, 10 October 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/10/20051010_sst_e.html (accessed 15 July 2009).)
 The crew of Expedition 11 returned to Earth aboard a Russian Soyuz spacecraft, landing at 9:09 p.m. (EDT) in Kazakhstan. The members of Expedition 11 were Russian cosmonaut Commander Sergei K. Krikalev and American astronaut John L. Phillips. The two men had spent 179 days in space, during which time they had performed a variety of scientific experiments and maintenance tasks at the ISS. Accompanying Krikalev and Phillips on their return was American contractor Gregory Olsen, who had spent eight days on the ISS performing research under a commercial agreement with the Russian Space Agency.(NASA, “Expedition 11 Safely Returns from International Space Station,” news release 05-340, 10 October 2005.)
 The China National Space Administration (CNSA) launched its second piloted spacecraft, the Shenzhou 6, on a Long March 2F rocket from Jiuquan, China, at 1:00 a.m. (GMT). The Shenzhou 6 carried taikonauts Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng. The CNSA planned for them to remain in low Earth orbit for five days. The CNSA provided few details about the mission and declined to publicize information, such as the taikonauts’ names and the spacecraft’s scheduled return date, until hours before the launch. According to a CNSA spokesperson, Junlong and Haisheng would conduct scientific experiments while in orbit.(Howard W. French, “On Live Television, 2 Chinese Astronauts Begin 5 Days in Low Orbit of Earth,” New York Times, 12 October 2005; China National Space Administration, “Shenzhou-6 To Take Off Wednesday Morning,” news release, 11 October 2005.)
 Scientists published research based on data from NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, which provided the first observational evidence that black holes not only destroy stars, but also create them. Sergei Nayakshin of the University of Leicester in the United Kingdom and Rashid A. Sunyaev of the Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics in Garching, Germany, compared x-ray emissions from stars in the Orion nebula with x-ray emissions from stars orbiting within one light-year of the central Milky Way’s black hole Sagittarius A*. According to current scientific theories, a black hole’s immense gravity is able to pull millions of stars close to the black hole and to destroy stars. However, Nayakshin and Sunyaev had discovered that Sagittarius A* is not consuming its surrounding stars. Furthermore, the number of stars near the black hole is around 10,000, far less than scientists would expect if the black hole’s gravity had drawn the stars toward it. Therefore, the scientists had concluded that the Chandra data supports an alternative theory of why stars are near black holes. This theory holds that dust around a black hole creates dense gas clouds. The gravity of the clouds counteracts the gravity of the black hole, thereby creating an environment in which stars form.(NASA, “NASA’s Chandra Reveals New Star Generation,” news release 05-344, 10 October 2005; Sergei Nayakshin and Rashid Sunyaev, “The ‘Missing’ Young Stellar Objects in the Central Parsec of the Galaxy: Evidence of Star Formation in a Massive Accretion Disc and a Top-Heavy Initial Mass Formation,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters 364, no. 1 (13 October 2005): L23–L27.)
 NASA announced findings from its investigation into the causes of the foam loss on Discovery’s external tank during the Space Shuttle’s launch in July 2005, a problem similar to the one that had caused the destruction of Space Shuttle Columbia in February 2003. A team of NASA investigators stated that they had uncovered several possible factors that may have caused a 3- foot (0.9-meter) portion of insulating foam to separate from Discovery during launch. They reported that the most likely cause was inadequate methods of applying and repairing the foam on Discovery’s external tank. The investigators stated that workers might have sprayed the foam in a manner that introduced fissures into it and might have crushed the foam while standing on it in the course of conducting the repairs on Discovery. Although the foam debris had not damaged Discovery, the incident had prompted NASA to suspend Shuttle launches until May 2006, so that engineers could identify the problem and correct it.(Guy Gugliotta, “Discovery Launch Is Still On for May,” Washington Post, 15 October 2005. 264)
 The crew members of China’s Shenzhou 6 returned to Earth safely, landing at 8:33 p.m. (GMT) at Siziwang Banner in China’s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region. During the five-day mission, which was China’s second piloted space mission, the Shenzhou 6 had flown 3.25 million kilometers (2 million miles) in low Earth orbit. Although the CNSA provided few details about the mission, Chinese news outlets reported that crew members Fei Junlong and Nie Haisheng had practiced several procedures that astronauts must perform when living in the environment of space, such as changing their spacesuits, testing their blood pressure, and moving about the spacecraft.(China National Space Administration, “Shenzhou-6 Spacecraft Lands Safely,” news release, 17 October 2005, http://www.cnsa.gov.cn/n615709/n620682/n639462/54429.html (accessed 16 July 2009); Xinhua News Agency, “China’s Shenzhou-6 Spacecraft Lands Safely After Successful Mission,” 17 October 2005.)
 NASA researchers announced the possible discovery of oxygen sources on the Moon, which astronauts might be able to use in future human explorations. Using NASA’s HST, the researchers had examined the first high-resolution ultraviolet images of the Moon ever captured. The images had revealed high concentrations of a mineral called ilmenite in an area called the Aristarchus Plateau. Human visitors to the Moon could conceivably use ilmenite―composed of iron, oxygen, and titanium―as a source of oxygen, by extracting the oxygen from the mineral through chemical or heating processes. However, the NASA scientists stated that they would continue evaluating the findings, as well as their potential usefulness for future lunar missions.(Warren E. Leary, “Hubble Telescope Turns to Moon and Sees Possible Oxygen Source,” New York Times, 20 October 2005; Mark Carreau, “Lunar Observations Yield Signs of Oxygen-Bearing Minerals,” Houston Chronicle, 20 October 2005.)
 Scientists using the HST announced that they had discovered two additional moons orbiting Pluto, increasing the number of Pluto’s known moons to three. Planetary scientists with the Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Laboratory had found two moons, of approximately 30 to 100 miles (48 to 161 kilometers) in diameter, orbiting Pluto at distances of 30,000 miles (48,000 kilometers) and 40,000 miles (64,000 kilometers), respectively. Because of Pluto’s diminutive size, elliptical orbit, and compositional material, scientists continued to debate whether or not Pluto is a planet. Some experts believed that the discovery of the two additional moons, provisionally named P1 and P2, supported the classification of Pluto as a planet.(Dennis O’Brien, “Hubble Spots Two Moons Orbiting Smallest Planet,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 1 November 2005. 854 Mac Daniel, “FAA Is Set to Improve Ground Radar at Logan,” Boston Globe, 3 November 2005; FAA, “Major Airports to Receive New Runway Safety System,” news release AOC 38-05, 2 November 2005, http://www.faa. gov/news/press_releases/news_story.cfm?newsid=5784 (accessed 28 January 2010).)
 The FAA announced that it would install a new runway safety system at the nation’s airports to reduce the likelihood of runway collisions between aircraft. The system―Airport Surface Detection Equipment, Model X (ASDE-X)―combined data from radar and airplane transponders to provide air traffic controllers with a continuously updated map of airport-surface operations, even during conditions of poor visibility, such as night and bad weather. Previously, most airports had relied on radar-based systems, which were susceptible to providing poor or false information during darkness and inclement weather and were unable to detect near collisions on intersecting runways. The FAA stated that it would begin installing the ASDE-X at 14 of the nation’s busiest airports in January 2006.
 Both crew members of the ISS, NASA astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. and Russian cosmonaut Valery I. Tokarev, performed a spacewalk to prepare the ISS for the first assembly work since the 2003 accident of Space Shuttle Columbia, which had led to the suspension of construction on the station. The two removed broken and disused equipment and installed a new television camera, designed to aid in the assembly of additional truss segments for the ISS. McArthur and Tokarev were performing these tasks to prepare the ISS for the future installation of a new solar power module, planned for 2006.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-051,” status report SS05-052, 8 November 2005, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/nov/HQ_SS05052_station_status-html (accessed 19 July 2009); Mark Carreau, “Camera Installed, Despite a Few Snags,” Houston Chronicle, 8 November 2005.)
 ESA successfully launched the Venus Express on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 4:33 a.m. (CET). ESA had created the spacecraft to analyze Venus’s atmosphere, chemistry, and structure, while the craft was orbiting the planet. ESA planned to use the analysis of Venus’s surface and its hot, stormy atmosphere to study climate change on Earth, as well as to help determine why Venus had evolved so differently from Earth, despite numerous structural similarities between the two planets. The spacecraft was ESA’s second probe designed to orbit a specific planet, the first being Mars Express, which ESA had launched in 2003.(ESA, “Venus Express En Route To Probe the Planet’s Hidden Mysteries,” ESA news release 50-2005, 9 November 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEM56Q638FE_index_0.html (accessed 19 July 2009); Melissa Eddy for Associated Press, “European Space Agency Launches Venus Probe,” 9 November 2005.)
 ISS Expedition 12 crew members William S. McArthur Jr. and Valery I. Tokarev left the ISS temporarily unoccupied so that they could relocate the orbiting station’s Soyuz spacecraft from the Pirs module’s docking compartment to the Zarya module’s docking port. The Soyuz spacecraft had remained docked at the ISS to serve as a return vehicle to Earth and an emergency escape vehicle. McArthur and Tokarev were relocating the Soyuz so that Pirs could serve as an airlock for future spacewalks.(NASA, “International Space Station Status Report: SS05-054,” status report SS05-054, 18 November 2005. 858 H.R. Rep. 109-272, at 169 (2005) (Conf. Rep.); NASA, “NASA Administrator’s Statement of Passage of FY 2006 Budget,” news release 05-407, 16 November 2005.)
 President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-108, legislation that provided US$16.5 billion in appropriations to NASA for FY 2006. In the bill’s conference report, Congress noted some specific programs that it wanted NASA to pursue. For example, Congress specified that NASA use the funds to develop the Crew Exploration Vehicle and Crew Launch Vehicle, as described in the Exploration Systems Architecture Study, NASA’s master plan for meeting the goals of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, Congress also directed NASA to make more effective use of NASA Television―NASA’s own television station, which it had primarily used for internal communications―to promote public knowledge about and interest in space exploration.
 President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-112, the Iran Nonproliferation Act, which effectively allowed U.S. astronauts to continue flying on Russian spacecraft, thereby maintaining the United States’ access to the ISS. The terms of the original act, passed in 2000, did not permit U.S. government agencies to make “extraordinary payments” to Russia, including purchasing space on Soyuz spacecraft, unless the President of the United States had certified that Russia was not exporting missile and nuclear technologies to Iran. However, at the time that Congress had passed the original act, Russia had an agreement with the United States to provide 11 free voyages on Soyuz spacecraft to U.S. astronauts, so that NASA did not have to purchase space on Soyuz. In September 2005, American astronaut William S. McArthur Jr. had become the 11th U.S. passenger on a Soyuz, and, subsequently, Russia had required payment for any carriage of U.S. astronauts. Therefore, NASA had asked Congress to amend the act so that it could buy space on Russian spacecraft.(Guy Gugliotta, “U.S. Access to Space Station Is Preserved,” Washington Post, 11 November 2005.)
 Former NASA astronaut Michael L. Coats became Director of NASA’s JSC, replacing Jefferson D. Howell Jr., who had left to become a visiting professor at the University of Texas in Austin. Coats had begun working at NASA in 1978 and had flown three Space Shuttle missions before retiring from NASA in 1991. Before becoming JSC Director, Coats had worked for Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado.(NASA JSC, “NASA Names Former Astronaut New Johnson Center Director,” news release J05-055, 7 November 2005; NASA History Division, “NASA Center Directors,” 14 April 2009, http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/director.html (accessed 21 July 2009).)
 JAXA’s Hayabusa spacecraft successfully landed on the asteroid Itokawa, marking the first landing of a Japanese spacecraft on an extraterrestrial body. JAXA had created the spacecraft to collect samples from the asteroid―named after Japanese space scientist Hideo Itokawa. Scientists had theorized that asteroids are composed of material that has remained unchanged since the solar system’s formation, and they hoped that analyzing the composition of that material could provide information about the origins of celestial bodies. JAXA planned for a capsule with samples from Itokawa to launch from the asteroid within a few days and to land in the Australian outback in June 2007.(George Nishiyama for Reuters, “Update 1–Japan Probe Lands and Collects Samples on Asteroid,” 26 November 2005.)
 Shana L. Dale became Deputy Administrator of NASA, replacing Frederick D. Gregory, who had announced his resignation from NASA in September 2005. Before joining NASA, Dale had worked at the Office of Science and Technology Policy, serving as Chief of Staff, General Counsel, and, finally, as Deputy Director for Homeland and National Security. In addition, Dale had served as Staff Director for the House Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1995 to 2000.(NASA, “Dale Sworn In as NASA Deputy Administrator,” media advisory M05-186, 29 November 2005; NASA, “Griffin Applauds Confirmation of Dale as NASA Deputy Administrator,” news release 05-386, 4 November 2005.)
 The NASA Advisory Council (NAC), responsible for providing counsel and policy advice to the NASA Administrator on important programs and issues, held its first meeting after its organizational restructuring. NASA had restructured the NAC to provide it with better support as NASA implemented the Vision for Space Exploration. Under the reorganization, the NAC had incorporated standing committees that it had previously chartered. The six committees composing the restructured Council were Aeronautics, Audit and Finance, Exploration, Human Capital, Science, and Space Operations. Each committee was responsible for examining particular subject areas and providing findings to the full Council, which would consider the findings and supply specific recommendations to the Administrator. Former U.S. Senator and Apollo program astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt chaired the 24-member NAC, which also included former Apollo program astronaut Neil A. Armstrong, the first person to walk on the Moon.(NASA, “New NASA Advisory Council Holds Inaugural Meeting,” news release 05-416, 29 November 2005; NASA, “NASA Advisory Council (NAC),” 19 July 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/offices/nac/home/ index.html (accessed 22 July 2009).)
 ESA announced that its Mars Express spacecraft had discovered ancient geological structures and ice reservoirs―but not liquid water―below Mars’s surface. Mars Express, equipped with radar capable of conducting subsurface analyses of the planet, had detected a crater approximately 250 kilometers wide (155 miles wide) below the planet’s surface, as well as 1.8 kilometers (1.1 miles) of subsurface water ice near its north pole. However, the spacecraft had not detected the liquid water necessary to support life. Even deep below the surface of Mars, the planet’s polar temperatures decline to -129oC (-200oF), preventing its ice from melting. Scientists regarded the discovery of subsurface ice as evidence that Mars’s environment was unable to harbor life.(John Johnson, “European Mars Express Show[s] That the Red Planet Was Not as Warm or Wet as Previously Thought,” Los Angeles Times, 1 December 2005; “Radar Provides Deeper View of Ice on Mars,” Nature 438, no. 7068 (1 December 2005): 545.)
 NASA announced a major discovery: images from the Cassini spacecraft had revealed geological activity on Saturn’s moon Enceladus. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had jointly created Cassini to study Saturn and its moons. Although scientists had previously believed that Enceladus is too small to be geologically active, data from Cassini had revealed that the moon is one of the solar system’s most geologically dynamic objects. The images showed surface features such as deep canyons and flowing material, a south polar hot spot, and jets of icy particles supplying matter to one of Saturn’s rings.(NASA, “NASA’s Cassini Images Reveal Spectacular Evidence of an Active Moon,” news release 05-422, 6 December 2005; Jeffrey S. Kargel, “Enceladus: Cosmic Gymnast, Volatile Miniworld,” Science 311, no. 5766 (10 March 2006): 1389–1391.)
 The FAA announced that it would deploy a new communications system―called the En Route Communications Gateway (ECG)―in all 20 en route, air traffic–control centers (formally called Air Route Traffic Control Centers) in the continental United States. En route centers manage high-altitude air traffic between airports and serve as the National Airspace System’s hubs. The FAA had designed ECG to communicate data from existing radar sites and other legacy sources to the en route centers, as well as to enable future air traffic–communications systems to receive radar and other data through the Internet. Lockheed Martin had designed the ECG as a replacement for the Peripheral Adaptor Module Replacement Item, which was susceptible to system-wide outages.(FAA, “FAA Deploys New Communications Gateway at Air Traffic Control Centers,” news release AOC 41-05, 7 December 2005; Lockheed Martin, “FAA, Lockheed Martin Complete National Rollout of New Radar Data Communications Gateway,” news release, 8 December 2005, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/ 2005/FAALOCKHEEDMARTINCOMPLETENATIONALRO.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
 ESA and JAXA performed the first bidirectional, optical, interorbital communication, a form of communication in which satellites use lasers to transmit and receive commands and data over long distances. Laser-based communications have numerous advantages over communications using radio waves, including freedom from interference and higher data-transmission speeds and volumes. ESA and JAXA performed the communication between ESA’s Advanced Relay and Technology Mission satellite and JAXA’s Optical Inter-Orbit Communications Engineering Test Satellite. Previously, ESA and JAXA had conducted unidirectional, optical communications between their satellites, but this event was the first bidirectional form of this type of communication.(ESA, “Successful Optical Data Relay Link Between OICETS and Artemis,” http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMIJVVLWFE_index_0.html (accessed 27 July 2009); JAXA, “Toward the Era of Optical Communications in Space,” news release, 9 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2005/12/ 20051209_oicets_e.html (accessed 27 July 2009).)
 JAXA officials announced that the agency would delay the Hayabusa spacecraft’s return to Earth by two years. JAXA had created Hayabusa to collect samples from the asteroid Itokawa, and Hayabusa had successfully landed on the asteroid in November 2005. However, problems with the spacecraft’s thrusters had prevented a probe containing samples from launching during a period when the asteroid’s alignment with Earth and the Sun provided an opportunity for the probe to return to Earth successfully. In addition, JAXA officials reported that they were uncertain whether Hayabusa’s probe had actually collected samples from the asteroid.(Guy Gugliotta, “Japan to Wait Two Years Before Starting Space Probe’s Return,” Washington Post, 15 December 2005; JAXA, “Status of the Hayabusa,” news release, 14 December 2005, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/ 2005/12/20051214_hayabusa_e.html (accessed 28 July 2009).)
 NASA announced that it would remove the potentially problematic foam insulation ramps from the Space Shuttles’ external fuel tanks before the next Shuttle launch, which NASA had scheduled for 2006. NASA had examined the foam ramps after a portion of foam had separated from Discovery during its July 2005 launch, nearly striking the Shuttle. The event was similar to the one that had contributed to the destruction of Columbia in 2003. Engineers had designed the foam ramps―formally called Protuberance Air Loads (PALs)―to protect Shuttle tanks’ fuel- pressurization lines and electrical cables from potentially damaging winds during launch. NASA technicians remained unsure of why the foam ramp had separated from Discovery, but inspections conducted in November 2005 had revealed small cracks in a PAL. The PAL with the cracks was on a tank that NASA had tested before Discovery’s launch but had not used for that mission.(Warren E. Leary, “NASA Plans To Remove Some Foam from Shuttle,” New York Times, 16 December 2005; Michael Cabbage, “Shuttle To Lose Fuel-Tank Foam,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 16 December 2005.)
 Scientists using NASA’s HST announced the discovery of two new rings and two new moons around the planet Uranus. The newly discovered rings―faint bands of dust that undergo continual change, with dust spiraling out of the rings―are replenished by debris from collisions between asteroids and the newly discovered Uranian moon called Mab. The discovery of the rings increased the number of known Uranian rings to 13. The discovery of the two moons, which the scientists named Cupid and Mab after mythological and Shakespearean characters, increased the number of known Uranian moons to 27, the most of any planet in the solar system. Scientists also remarked that the orbits of known Uranian moons had changed since Voyager 2 had last observed them in 1986. Scientists described the dynamic nature of Uranus’s moons and rings as indicative of dynamism throughout the solar system. Scientists hoped that observing Uranus would help them better understand this dynamism.(Mark R. Showalter and Jack J. Lissauer, “The Second Ring-Moon System of Uranus: Discovery and Dynamics,” Science 311, no. 5763 (17 February 2006): 973–977; Frank D. Roylance, “Hubble Images Show More Rings, Moons Around Uranus,” Baltimore Sun (MD), 23 December 2005.)
 Woodrow Whitlow Jr. became Director of NASA’s GRC, replacing the retiring Julian M. Earls. Whitlow had served as Deputy Director of NASA’s KSC since September 2003. Before that, he had served as Director of Research and Technology at GRC. Whitlow, who held bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral degrees in aeronautics and astronautics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, had begun working for NASA in 1979 as a research scientist at LaRC.(NASA Glenn Research Center, “Center Director: Dr. Woodrow Whitlow Jr.,” 10 July 2008, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/about/bios/whitlowbio.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
 ESA launched the satellite Giove A on a Soyuz-Fregat rocket at 5:19 a.m. (UT) from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan. The satellite was the first component of a satellite navigation system called Galileo. According to ESA’s plan, the Galileo system would consist of 30 satellites and would commence operations by 2008. ESA had created Galileo to reduce European dependence on the United States for satellite navigation services and to provide more accurate civilian services than the GPS, a system that the U.S. military had created. According to ESA, users who had mobile phones with integrated chips would be able to use Galileo to find directions to particular destinations, such as parks and restaurants. Galileo would be capable of providing civilian users with real-time positioning accuracy to within 1 meter (3.28 feet). Civilian services from the GPS were accurate to nearly 5 meters (16 feet).(Molly Moore, “With Satellite Launch, E.U. Positions Itself to Compete,” Washington Post, 29 December 2005; ESA, “First Galileo Satellite on Orbit to Demonstrate Key Technologies,” ESA news release 61-2005, 28 December 2005, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_61_2005_p_EN.html (accessed 31 July 2009).)
 The FAA published the first proposed regulations on commercial human spaceflight, a growing industry often referred to as space tourism. The Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of 2004 (Pub. L. No. 108-492) required the U.S. Department of Transportation, which oversees the FAA, to implement regulations on commercial human spaceflights. Congress had passed the bill for to establish a balanced and clear regulatory regime that promoted the development of the growing commercial human spaceflight industry. Most of the FAA’s proposed regulations addressed passengers’ informed consent and crew members’ qualifications, as well as the training of both passengers and crew. The proposed regulations would remain subject to public comment for 60 days (until 27 February 2006). The FAA was required to issue the final regulations by 23 June 2006.(Darlene Superville for the Associated Press, “Gov’t Issues Proposed Space Tourism Rules,” 29 December 2005; Human Space Flight Requirements for Crew and Space Flight Participants, 70 Fed. Reg. 77, 262 (29 December 2005) (to be codified at 14 C.F.R. pt. 401, 415 et al.).)
 President George W. Bush signed into law Pub. L. No. 109-155, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005, which authorized NASA’s appropriations for fiscal years 2006 through 2010 and directed NASA to pursue particular programs during that period. More specifically, the new law directed NASA’s Administrator to ensure that NASA would pursue a balanced set of programs related to aeronautics research and development, human spaceflight, and scientific research―including robotic missions to the Moon. Among the specific programs the law directed NASA to pursue was the launch of the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) at a date as close to 2010 as possible, and the landing of Americans on the Moon by 2020. Both objectives were components of the Vision for Space Exploration. Moreover, the law specifically authorized appropriations for only two years―US$17.9 billion for FY 2007 and US$18.7 billion for FY 2008.(H.R. Rep. 109-354, at 22 (2005) (Conf. Rep.).)
