At the request of U.S. Senators John McCain (R-AZ) and Bill Frist (R-TN), the U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report, analyzing the United States’ role in the ISS and the cost of the program. GAO estimated that life-cycle costs could reach US$96 billion, US$2 billion more than the 1995 estimate, and that these costs could increase further because of the potential for changes in the program. According to the report, “at the current estimated spending rate, the program would incur additional costs of more than [US]$100 million for every month of schedule slippage.” The report cited, as reasons for the cost increases, schedule slippage, delays in production of components, the need for additional flights to and from the space station, and NASA’s decision to change its tracking requirement for space debris. GAO’s report added as much as US$1 billion to the estimate overall, including crew-return-vehicle testing and resupply flights not part of the original NASA estimate. Although the report cited U.S. Department of Defense as the only agency with appropriate tracking equipment, its equipment would need as much as US$5 billion in upgrades to handle the new NASA requirements. The report also highlighted other issues including insufficient staff at KSC to handle nine Shuttle launches per year.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “Space Station U.S. Life-Cycle Funding Requirements: Statement of Allen Li, Associate Director, Defense Acquisitions Issues, National Security and International Affairs Division,” testimony before the House Committee on Science and Technology, report no. GAO/T-NSIAD-98-212, 24 June 1998; Armed Forces Newswire Service, “Space Station Costs Higher than Expected, GAO Says,” 17 June 1998; Tamara Lytle, “Space Station’s Costs Trouble 2 GOP Senators,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 3 June 1998.)
The U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology held a hearing about the International Space Station (ISS) project, focusing on the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, headed by Jay Chabrow. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin had selected Chabrow to lead the investigation into the cost of the ISS. The task force’s findings concluded that the space station may cost US$7 billion more than the original estimate and may take two years longer than anticipated to complete. Congressional supporters and opponents of the program questioned NASA officials about the project’s cost and slipping timetable, but officials indicated that they needed a few more weeks to study Chabrow’s report and were unable to say whether they agreed with his team’s figures. However, Goldin acknowledged that Russia’s participation in the program was not working. He also promised to provide Congress with a new assessment of costs and with assembly schedules by 15 June, including estimates for continuing the project without critical Russian equipment. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) seemed mollified after Goldin had spoken. However, Sensenbrenner “chastised the Clinton administration,” remarking that its failure to send a representative from the Office of Management and Budget to the hearing reflected “the low priority” the administration placed on solving the problems facing the ISS program.(Warren E. Leary, “Space Plan’s Costs Increase amid Delays,” New York Times, 7 May 1998; Larry Wheeler, “Goldin Rips Russians, Promises New Station Schedule by June 15,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 7 May 1998.)
The Soyuz landing capsule, carrying two Russian cosmonauts and a French astronaut returning from Mir, landed safely in the snow and bitter cold (-22°F or -30°C) about 20 miles (32 kilometers) from the northern Kazakhstan village of Arkalyk. Only one of eight rescue helicopters was able to meet the crew because of wind, clouds, and thick snow, limiting visibility to less than 160 feet (49 meters). Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov returned to Earth after a six-month mission on Mir. During their stay on Mir, the cosmonauts had focused on repairing the aging space station. Léopold Eyharts returned to Earth with six salamanders. The two cosmonauts who had replaced Solovyev and Vinogradov had flown the salamanders to Mir, carrying them on board the space station in January. While in space, Eyharts had conducted experiments on the salamanders, including monitoring the effects of antigravity on the reptiles’ egg-laying capabilities.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Focus: Russia-France Space Crew Returns to Deep Cold,” 20 February 1998.)
At the American Geophysical Union meeting in Boston, astrophysicists Alexander G. Kosovichev of Stanford University and Valentina V. Zharkova of the University of Glasgow in Scotland presented evidence confirming their “solar-bomb theory.” Using sequential images that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) spacecraft had captured, the two scientists explained that, 20 minutes following the rupture of a solar flare from the surface of the Sun, “a seismic wave front surges across the [S]un’s face like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond.” The SOHO images proved that solar flares not only release energy into the Sun’s atmosphere, but also “trigger huge waves of seismic energy that ripple through the [S]un like earthquakes.”(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Solar Flares Trigger Sunquakes,” 27 May 1998; A. G. Kosovichev and V. V. Zharkova, “X-ray Flare Sparks Quake Inside Sun,” Nature 383, no. 6683 (28 May 1998): 317.)
Russia announced it would retire the Mir space station during the summer of 1999, six months earlier than originally planned. The decision resulted from a meeting between Russian Space Agency Director General Yuri N. Koptev and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov, who agreed that Russia had insufficient funds to continue to fly the station. The agreement allocated approximately US$100 million for Mir’s final year, including funds for “a series of rockets to direct Mir to an unpopulated area of the Pacific Ocean.” Nemtsov also agreed to pay the Russian Space Agency the US$600 million owed for Mir’s operations in 1997, using “unspecified ‘nonbudgetary sources’.”(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Russia Agrees to Early End for Mir Space Station,” 2 July 1998; Anna Dolgov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 3 July 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin returned to Earth from a 207-day sojourn aboard Mir, along with former Kremlin aide Yuri M. Baturin, who had accompanied the cosmonauts’ replacements to the space station, spending 12 days in space. The two cosmonauts arrived in Russia to find a devalued ruble and the return of Viktor S. Chernomyrdin as Acting Prime Minister. Russian President Boris N. Yeltsin had not yet fired Chernomyrdin’s government at the time Musabayev and Budarin left for Mir, and the two cosmonauts had missed the entire four-month term of Prime Minister Sergei V. Kiriyenko. Yeltsin had dissolved Kiriyenko’s government the week before the cosmonauts’ return flight to Earth. Because Yeltsin had devalued the ruble, the two cosmonauts also found that their pay had diminished.
A computer failure aboard Mir partially affected the space station’s solar panels, causing the panel to fail to generate sufficient electricity and requiring the crew to use the Soyuz capsule thrusters for steering. To conserve energy, the crew turned off nonessential equipment, including the air conditioner and lights. Although they replaced the computer with a new one, the crew was unable to load the necessary software. The crew feared the failure might delay Space Shuttle Discovery’s launch to Mir, planned for 2 June.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Cosmonauts Replace Mir Computer,” 31 May 1998; Marcia Dunn, “Mir Space Station Has a New Problem—Computer Failure Causes Solar Panels To Turn from Sun,” Seattle Times (WA), 31 May 1998.)
Shuttle Endeavour docked with Mir at an altitude of 214 nautical miles (2,467 miles or 3,970 kilometers), bringing the seventh American astronaut to work on board Mir since the program began in 1995. Andrew S. W. Thomas, a mechanical engineer, replaced David A. Wolf, a physician, who had been on board Mir since September. The hatches opened at 5:25 p.m. (EST), and Thomas's transfer occurred at 6:35 p.m. (EST).(New York Times, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station with Astronaut and Supplies,” 25 January 1998; NASA, “STS- 89.”)
The Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, out of contact with ground controllers since 25 June, responded to signals sent by NASA’s Deep Space Tracking Network antennas in Canberra, Australia. Although the signals contained no data, SOHO transmitted a series of short radio bursts, indicating to space scientists that the craft was still able to receive ground commands and, therefore, that they might still have a chance of salvaging it.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Contacted,” news release 98-145, 4 August 1998; Frank Sietzen Jr. for United Press International, “Contact Re-established with Wayward Satellite,” 4 August 1998.)
The Russian Space Agency announced that the first module of the ISS was completed and ready to ship to the launchpad. Under a contract with Boeing Company, Khrunichev’s Moscow factory had designed and built this first module to hold cargo. The new module was similar to two existing modules in the Mir space station. Russia had originally scheduled the module for launch in November 1997, but fell behind in the production of the second unit. Despite the delay, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev emphasized the importance of the day during a news conference: “This event symbolizes the fact that Russia was, is, and shall be a space nation, capable of realizing large-scale projects penetrating into space.” The ISS project, a joint effort of Russia, the United States, the European Space Agency (ESA), Canada, and Japan, was especially significant to Russia since the ISS would replace Mir as the only piloted element of Russia’s space program.
At a hearing of the U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology, NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin defended NASA’s purpose and role in the ISS project. Representative Nicholas V. Lampson (D-TX) advised Goldin that cost overruns and Russia’s failure to meet its agreement had caused some lawmakers to propose cancelling the space station. Goldin responded that canceling the ISS would cancel human spaceflight, relegate the United States to second-class power status, and have international repercussions. Lawmakers at the hearing asked Goldin to furnish NASA’s proposal to overcome the problems associated with the ISS, providing estimates of the amount necessary to complete the project. Goldin refused to give specifics until NASA had evaluated several plans and calculated the cost of the alternative plans, including contingency plans in the event Russia could not meet its commitment.(Paul Recer for Associated Press, “NASA Defends Space Station Plans,” 24 June 1998; John C. Henry, “NASA Chief Concedes Space Station Delays—Has Contingency Plans If Russia Can’t Do Its Part,” San Diego Union- Tribune (CA), 25 June 1998.)
Cosmonauts Talgat A. Musabayev and Nikolai M. Budarin, trying for a third time, successfully stabilized a bent solar panel during a spacewalk of 4 hours and 15 minutes. The solar panel was only one of 10 nonfunctioning panels. The crew had not intended to repair the damaged panel fully, but only to stabilize it, so that it would not break loose and hit the space station. The cosmonauts cut short the spacewalk, scheduled to take 51⁄2 hours, when the thruster engine aligning Mir with the Sun ran out of fuel. Forced to return to the space station early, the cosmonauts were unable to remove some scientific equipment attached to the outside of the station.(Florida Today (Brevard, FL), “Mir Crew Shortens Spacewalk After Thruster Fuel Runs Out,” 7 April 1998. 459 Edith M. Lederer for Associated Press, “Europe-Space Water,” 7 April 1998; Washington Times, “Europe’s Space Surveyor Finds Water Vapor Near Stars, Planets,” 8 April 1998.)
This date marked Mir’s 12th birthday. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, and U.S. astronaut, Australian-born Andrew S. W. Thomas, took a 45-minute trip outside the space station, moving the escape capsule to the other side of Mir to make space for the next cargo craft to dock. Ground controllers briefly lost contact with the crew when Mir lost its connection to a communications satellite. For the first time, Thomas wore the Russian-made spacesuit that had been too small when he first arrived at the space station.(Associated Press, “BRF—Mir,” 20 February 1998; Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Focus: Mir Marks 12th Birthday with Brief Excursion,” 20 February 1998.)
NASA marked its second full year of “continuous human presence in Earth orbit” aboard Russia’s Mir space station. Shuttle Atlantis had launched on 22 March 1996, with U.S. astronaut Shannon W. Lucid aboard. Lucid then spent 188 days in space, an American record. She was the second NASA astronaut to live aboard Mir. Following her tenure, an unbroken succession of astronauts, John E. Blaha, Jerry M. Linenger, C. Michael Foale, David A. Wolf, and Andrew S. W. Thomas, had spent time on Mir. Norman E. Thagard, the first American astronaut to live on Mir, had arrived in March 1995, spending 115 days on Mir before Lucid’s stay. Nine months separated Thagard’s mission and Lucid’s. Frank L. Culbertson Jr., head of NASA’s cooperative human spaceflight program with Russia, commented, “an unbroken presence has been extremely valuable to our having an awareness of what it takes to fly a space station, to maintain an outpost on the frontier.”(Mark Carreau, “NASA Marks Second Year in Orbit: Continuous Human Presence in Space Accomplished Aboard Mir,” Houston Chronicle, 21 March 1998.)
NASA’s Office of Earth Science Enterprise selected the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington, DC, and the University of Colorado’s Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics to conduct “parallel six-month definition studies of a new small satellite to monitor variations in the amount of radiant solar energy that reaches Earth,” as part of the preparations for the Total Solar Irradiance Mission.(NASA, “Two Studies Will Refine and Expand Solar Monitoring Task,” news release 98-47, 19 March 1998. 444 Brett Davis, “Space Station Costs Irk Congress,” Huntsville Times (AL), 20 March 1998; Tamara Lytle, “U.S. Legislators Criticize Increasing Cost of NASA’s Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 20 March 1998.)
NASA named current Director of Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Joseph H. Rothenberg to head its Office of Space Flight, which oversees the Human Exploration and Development of Space Enterprise, which includes the Shuttle program and the planned International Space Station (ISS). Rothenberg replaced Wilbur C. Trafton, who had announced his resignation in November 1997. The Office of Space Flight accounted for about 40 percent of NASA’s US$13.6 billion annual budget. Rothenberg was the first Director of the Office of Space Flight who had no experience in military aviation, the astronaut corps, the Space Shuttle, or management of the space station program. However, he had a strong background in engineering and astronomy. Rothenberg was closely involved in planning and using the HST and had worked as a space engineer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA named Alphonso V. Diaz to succeed Rothenberg at GSFC.(Sean Holton, “NASA Picks an Outsider To Run Shuttles, Space Station,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 9 January 1998; Washington Post, “Rothenberg To Head Office of Space Flight,” 9 January 1998; NASA, “Diaz Named Goddard Space Flight Director,” news release 98-4, 8 January 1998.)
American astronaut David A. Wolf made his first spacewalk, accompanied by veteran spacewalker Anatoly Y. Solovyev, Commander of the Mir space station. Solovyev, making his 18th spacewalk, set the world’s record for the highest number of spacewalks by one individual.382 The spacewalk began 20 minutes later than scheduled, because of problems opening locks on the malfunctioning outer hatch. The scheduled task had been to assess wear and tear on the exterior of the station using a photoreflectometer designed in the United States. David A. Wolf worked for 2 hours trying to verify whether the device was working properly, but only succeeded in taking readings on the shell of the nine-year-old Kvant-2 module, one of the station’s oldest compartments. Engineers planned to use the data to help make selections for materials and protective coatings for the new ISS. Flight Director Vladimir A. Solovyov explained in a news conference at Mission Control outside Moscow, “the device proved to be far from mature, so it was decided to skip the examination of the core module.” Instead, the two men studied the holes in the Spektr module, which had suffered punctures during a collision with a cargo craft on 25 June 1997.(USA Today, “American Looks at Mir from Outside,” 15 January 1998; Oleg Shchedrov for Reuters, “Hitches Marred Mir Crew Space Walk, Says Official,” 15 January 1998; Houston Chronicle, “Astronaut, Cosmonaut Take Short Spacewalk: Excursion Marked by a Few Small Difficulties,” 15 January 1998.)
The U.S. House of Representatives subcommittee responsible for allocating funding for the space program voted on a US$13.3 billion budget for NASA, US$138 million less than President William J. Clinton had requested and US$300 million less than the U.S. Senate subcommittee had approved. Subcommittee Chairperson Jerry Lewis (R-CA) stated that the House had reduced the budget allocation because NASA planned to fly fewer Shuttle missions in the next fiscal years and because of the delays in assembling the ISS. Unlike the Senate, the House did not vote to monitor the budget of the program by creating a separate account for space station funding.(Brett Davis, “House Panel Approves $300 Million Less for NASA Budget than Senate Panel,” Huntsville Times (AL), 19 June 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev announced that Russia had found the funds needed to continue participating in the ISS project. Although the Russian Cabinet had rejected Koptev’s request for additional funds, a meeting with Finance Minister Mikhail M. Zadornov and Deputy Prime Minister Boris E. Nemtsov had led to an agreement that funding for the ISS would come from a “special budget section.” However, the Russian Space Agency provided no details of the funding plan. Koptev also announced that the Russian Space Agency might scrap the Mir space station in the fall, a year ahead of schedule, to make more cash available for the ISS. Koptev suggested that the space agency would look for revenue sources outside of the government.(Associated Press, “Russia-Space,” 29 May 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Arthur G. Stephenson, President of Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, as the new Director of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama. MSFC’s previous director had retired in January, and at that time, NASA had appointed MSFC’s Deputy Director Carolyn S. Griner as Acting Director of the Center. Before his tenure at Oceaneering Advanced Technologies, Stephenson had worked 28 years for TRW Inc. of California. His last position was as Director of TRW Inc.’s Space Transportation and Servicing Advanced Programs. During his 34-year career, Stephenson had worked on various projects related to MSFC, including the Orbital Maneuvering Vehicle, during the 1970s and 1980s; the Gamma Ray Observatory; automated rendezvous and docking; and the space-welding inspection, extravehicular-activity tool. He had also directed the International Space Station (ISS) robotic-system engineering support to the Boeing Company.(NASA, “Arthur Stephenson Named To Head Marshall Space Flight Center,” revised news release 98-163a, 11 September 1998; Space News, “Marshall Gets Director After Eight-Month Wait,” 14–20 September 1998.)
SPACEHAB Inc., a Virginia-based, commercial space company with a staff of 85, purchased the Johnson Engineering Corporation, a 400-person firm contracted to support NASA’s Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas. SPACEHAB’s chairperson said the company would “expand the use of Johnson Engineering’s larger technical staff to support its plans for expansion into the commercial space arena.” Investors had incorporated SPACEHAB in 1984, to “develop a commercial research module that could accommodate small, private, as well as government- financed science experiments and engineering tests during [S]pace [S]huttle mission[s].” However, when the anticipated commercial market had failed to develop, SPACEHAB “changed its strategy,” winning NASA contracts. NASA used SPACEHAB modules, stored in the Shuttle’s payload bays, as cargo containers for storing “tons of food, clothing, and other gear that was ferried to Russia’s Mir space station aboard a series of recently concluded U.S. [S]huttle flights.”(Mark Carreau, “Spacehab of Virginia Acquires NASA Contractor,” Houston Chronicle, 5 July 1998.)
NASA named astronaut Eileen M. Collins to command Space Shuttle Columbia on the upcoming Mission STS-93 in December 2008. Collins was the first woman to command a Space Shuttle mission. NASA had selected her as an astronaut candidate in 1990, and she had become an astronaut in July 1991. She flew her first mission aboard Shuttle Discovery in February 1995. On that mission, Discovery came within 30 feet (9 meters) of Mir during a practice run for docking with the space station. Collins was also the first woman ever to pilot a Space Shuttle, flying Shuttle Atlantis in May 1997, to deliver British-born U.S. astronaut C. Michael Foale to Mir and to return astronaut Jerry M. Linenger to Earth.(NASA, “Collins Named First Female Shuttle Commander,” news release 98-37, 5 March 1998; Reuters, “Woman Air Force Officer To Command Shuttle CNN,” 4 March 1998.)
Progress M-38 launched on a Soyuz-V rocket from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying a 900-kilogram (2,000-pound) propulsion unit. Mir’s crew planned to attach the unit to the Quantum module of the space station. The cargo craft also carried 1,500 kilograms (3,300 pounds) of repair tools, replacement parts, food, and water.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 533, 1 April 1998, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx533.html (accessed 20 October 2008).)
The joint committee of NASA and the European Space Agency investigating the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) incident issued a preliminary report. The committee found that several errors had led to the loss of the satellite’s signal. First, Mission Control had “unknowingly activated” two preprogrammed sequences, which lacked commands to reorient the spacecraft properly. The resulting anomalies had caused SOHO to enter into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR). A “rapid decision” to turn off one of the craft’s gyroscopes had ultimately triggered two more ESRs, sending the spacecraft “flailing out of control.” Controllers also discovered that “undetected failures,” which had occurred sometime earlier in the year, “had taken out three of the four batteries.”(NASA, “Efforts To Recover SOHO Spacecraft Continue as Investigation Board Focuses on Most Likely Causes,” news release 98-125, 16 July 1998; James Glanz, “Chain of Errors Hurled Probe into Spin,” Science 281, no. 5376 (24 July 1998): 499; United Press International, “UPI Science News,” 28 July 1998.)
NASA announced that the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) had found the youngest cluster of stars ever observed in a galaxy near the Milky Way. The baby stars were “enveloped in a cloud of luminous gases,” in the galaxy known as the Small Magellanic Cloud, about 200,000 light- years from Earth. The HST had discovered the 50 new stars, each 300,000 times as bright as the Sun, “concentrated in a region only 10 light-years across in a cloud known as N81.” Before the capture of the HST’s high-resolution images, astronomers had referred to the area as The Blob.(NASA, “Nearby Star Cluster Yields Insights into Early Universe,” news release 98-132, 23 July 1998; Washington Times, “Hubble Telescope Finds Family of Stars,” 24 July 1998; New York Times, “Genesis in a Cosmic Firestorm,” 28 July 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery Mission STS-91 launched on schedule from Kennedy Space Center (KSC) in Cape Canaveral, Florida, despite problems with the automatic steering system on Mir. The Shuttle’s mission was to retrieve the seventh and last American to live aboard Mir. The day’s temperature reached 97oF (36oC) during the countdown, making it the “hottest launch day anyone could remember.” The mood of the launch was tense, because NASA had never tested the new lightweight fuel tank during flight. According to NASA officials, the new tank worked well. Among the crew members aboard Discovery was Valery V. Ryumin, veteran cosmonaut and chief of the Russian operations in the Shuttle–Mir program. The Russian Space Agency had selected Ryumin to inspect Mir, so that Russian officials could make an informed decision regarding how long cosmonauts could safely continue to inhabit the space station. Other crew members included Commander Charles J. Precourt; Pilot Dominic L. P. Gorie; and Mission Specialists Wendy B. Lawrence, Franklin R. Chang-Dìaz, and Janet L. Kavandi. For the first time, the Shuttle carried the Alpha Magnetic Spectrometer (AMS), designed to search for dark and missing matter (antimatter) in the universe.(NASA, “Discovery Launch to Mir on Mission STS-91 Set for June 2,” news release 98-85, 20 May 1998; NASA, “Mission Archives: STS-91, Ninth and Final Shuttle–Mir Docking,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-91.html (accessed 11 June 2007); Chicago Tribune, “Cosmonauts Fix Mir’s Steering; Now Shuttle Launch Can Proceed,” 2 June 1998; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Discovery Soars on NASA’s Last Voyage to Mir,” 2 June 1998; Robyn Suriano for Gannett News Service, “Celebrated Cosmonaut Comes Out of Retirement for Shuttle Mission,” 1 June 1998.)
NASA modified a contract with Boeing Information, Space and Defense Systems, increasing by US$163.4 million the company’s contract for work on the ISS. Under the modified contract, Boeing would supply additional engineering support and prelaunch testing for the ISS. The original eight-year prime contract, effective since 1995, had a value of US$7.1 billion and covered the construction and integration of the ISS. The modification covered sustained engineering for station elements, engineering support following a component’s delivery to NASA, and support of multielement integrated testing.(NASA, “Engineering and Testing Support To Be Supplied by International Space Station Contract Modification,” contract announcement c98-u, 2 December 1998.)
The U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Related Agencies, responsible for allocating space funding, voted to back funding for NASA’s ISS obligations but “cautioned the space agency to control costs and ensure Russia’s commitment to the expansive project.” The subcommittee voted for a US$13.6 billion budget for NASA for the fiscal year, including US$2.3 billion for the space station. Senate Subcommittee Chairperson Christopher Bond (R-MO) said that, although the budget was US$150 million more than President William J. Clinton had requested, it was US$33 million less than NASA’s 1998 spending level.(Patrick Connole for Reuters, “US Senate Panel Backs Space Station, Cut Superfund,” 9 June 1998.)
The two Russian crew members of the Mir space station completed a record-breaking spacewalk. Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev and Pavel V. Vinogradov dismantled and retrieved in record time the Kristall module’s optical-monitoring equipment made by the United States. The scheduled 6-hour spacewalk took only 3 hours and 8 minutes. However, it was unclear whether the cosmonauts had been able to repair a leaky hatch. The problem was not with the rubber sealing, as Russian ground control had suspected, but rather with a malfunctioning lock that was preventing the hatch from sealing hermetically. The cosmonauts activated 10 reserve locks and pumped air into the airlock, planning to monitor the hatch for leaks over the next 24 hours. The spacewalk was Commander Solovyev’s 16th in five flights over 10 years. He had spent more than 70 hours in free space, more than any other person had accrued.(Washington Post, “Mir Commander Walks into Spaceflight History,” 10 January 1998; Washington Times, “Cosmonauts Possibly Fix Leaky Hatch, Do Spacewalk in Record-Short Time,” 10 January 1998.)
Space Shuttle Discovery docked successfully with Mir. Upon the opening of the hatches, astronaut Andrew S. W. Thomas officially ended his 130-day mission aboard Mir and became a crew member of Discovery. The transfer also marked the completion of a total of 907 days of U.S. astronaut presence aboard the space station. Because of the Ku-band failure, Russian cameras on Mir recorded the docking, while Russian ground stations televised live the meeting of the two crews.(NASA, “ Mission Archives: STS-91”; Steven Young for Reuters, “Shuttle Collects Last U.S. Astronaut from Mir,” 5 June 1998.)
Using precision flying, Space Shuttle Endeavour’s robotic arm, cameras, and a computerized vision system, the U.S.-Russian crew of Endeavour successfully joined the U.S. module Unity to the Russian module Zarya. With a weight of 21 tons (19,100 kilograms or 19.1 tonnes), Zarya was the “most massive object” that the robotic arm had ever lifted. Because Unity blocked the astronauts’ view from the Shuttle’s window, they relied on a system of cameras, as well as on the new Canadian Space Vision System, to provide visual cues concerning the two units’ exact positions.(Kathy Sawyer, “U.S., Russian Modules Are Linked in Orbit: Foundation for New Space Station Formed,” Washington Post, 7 December 1998.)
Astronomers announced that pictures from a new camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) supported the theory that a new planet was forming around Beta Pictoris. Images focusing on the disc (the halo of dust and gas rotating around the star) revealed that, instead of a smooth flow, one quadrant has a large bulge, indicating the orbital path of a planet that could be many times larger than Jupiter. No actual planet was visible in the images, only the effects of its gravitational pull. Nevertheless, this was the strongest evidence to date in visible light, of the presence of a possible planet. Beta Pictoris is younger (20 million to 100 million years old compared to the Sun’s 4.5 to 5 billion years) and about eight times brighter than the Sun. The formation of planets around a young star suggested that planets form very early in the life of a solar system.(Washington Post, “Images Support Theory of New Planet: Hubble Photos Show Bulge in Star’s Halo Dust—63 Light-Years from Sun,” 9 January 1998.)
The Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force, an independent task force convened at the request of NASA and charged with analyzing the cost and schedule of constructing and maintaining the ISS, released its official report. The task force concluded that “program size, complexity, and ambitious schedule goals were beyond that which could be reasonably achieved within the [US]$2.1 billion annual cap or [US]$17.4 billion total cap.” The task force concluded that “the International Space Station will be delayed by up to three years and cost as much as [US]$250 million more per year relative to the FY 1999 budget submission,” recommending that NASA “revise the current [s]tation plan so that it is achievable with the funds available.” NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin, who had appointed Jay Chabrow to lead the task force, told members of the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies that he would not accept the task force’s conclusions, because he had not yet fully reviewed the report. Goldin told the panel that everyone involved in the space station program was very concerned about cost overruns and schedule slips, but that if Congress imposed a cap on ISS funding, it could affect the schedule significantly, delaying the project up to two years. Goldin warned, “such a funding shortfall would hurt relations with the international partners.” The report also placed much of the blame for the budget and schedule issues on Russia. In 1993 the Clinton administration and top officials at NASA had advised Congress that, were Russia not involved in the project, NASA would “save an estimated [US]$2 billion, expand the station’s capabilities and enable the research station to be completed sooner.” However, the task force’s report concluded that “those assumptions were faulty.”(NASA Advisory Council, “Report on the Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force on the International Space Station,” 21 April 1998, http://history.nasa.gov/32999.pdf (accessed 24 September 2007); Larry Wheeler, “Russia’s Role in Station Has Project over Budget, Behind Schedule,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 24 April 1998; Aerospace Daily, “Goldin Not Sold on Report Finding Space Station Overruns,” 24 April 1998.)
At a NASA Advisory Council meeting at Marshall Space Flight Center, Jay Chabrow, an aerospace industry consultant, presented findings of a study conducted to determine the true costs of assembling and maintaining the future ISS. U.S. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) and other concerned lawmakers had tasked Chabrow and his seven-member team of private and government analysts with undertaking this investigation, conducted over five months. The analysts’ findings showed that the ISS could cost as much as US$6 billion more than NASA officials had estimated, reaching a total of US$24 billion, and that the outpost likely would not be ready to house a full crew until 2006. The report also provided estimates regarding the total cost of the space station over its entire lifetime. The analysts projected that Space Shuttle missions to assemble the station, resupply flights, and staff operating the Shuttle from the ground, would cost NASA US$94 billion. The study also found that planned caps on congressional spending were unrealistic, and that NASA and Boeing officials had been overly optimistic in their cost and schedule estimates. Factors driving costs higher included Russian nonperformance, software development and integration, construction of a crew return vehicle, and Boeing cost overruns. The report did not account for further cost increases in the event of a total Russian pullout.(Wheeler, “Station Cost Overrun.”)
At a NASA press conference, Ethan J. Schreier of the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and his colleagues discussed new Hubble Space Telescope (HST) images. The new images showed in greater clarity an old galaxy’s black hole “feeding on a smaller, younger galaxy that collided with it.” The scientists explained that the new images revealed young stars in the midst of an “obviously old galaxy,” suggesting that a collision had occurred. The merged galaxy complex, known as Centaurus A, was about 10 million light-years away from the Milky Way. The images, taken with HST’s newest infrared camera, also showed gas and dust feeding an apparent large black hole. An inner disc of gas, swirling around the black hole, was behaving in a manner opposite to scientists expectations, based upon the behavior of other galaxies. Hans- Walter Rix of the University of Arizona theorized that the collision could explain the difference, postulating that the HST “may have caught Centaurus A in the midst of trying to realign itself after its spiral companion plowed into it.” Schreier offered an alternative explanation—that the mass of the merged galaxies was greater than the mass of the black hole, causing the gravitational pull to warp the inner disc.(Elizabeth Manning for United Press International, “Hubble Reveals Feeding Black Hole,” 14 May 1998; NASA, “Hubble Provides Multiple Views of How To Feed a Black Hole,” news release 98-71, 14 May 1998.)
Controllers at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) sent routine commands to the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) to maneuver the satellite. Instead of responding correctly, SOHO suddenly went into emergency Sun reacquisition mode (ESR), “activated when an anomaly occurs and the spacecraft loses its orientation toward the Sun.” Consequently, NASA lost all communication with the satellite, along with the ability to track it. SOHO’s mission was to track “major solar activity that may induce power outages and interfere with radio, TV, and other signals from space.” The mission was particularly important because of the anticipated solar maximum, expected to occur during the year 2000. During the solar maximum, a phenomenon that peaks every 11 years, the Sun emits intense radiation capable of scrambling signals from communications satellites and causing power failures, as well as brilliant auroras. The European Space Agency (ESA) and NASA had launched SOHO in December 1995, as a joint mission. In April 1998, the spacecraft had successfully completed its initial two-year mission to study the Sun’s atmosphere, surface, and interior.(NASA, “SOHO Spacecraft Observations Interrupted,” news release 98-112, 26 June 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Sun- Studying Probe Failing To Respond; NASA Fears It’s Lost,” USA Today, 29 June 1998.)
The Alabama Engineering Hall of Fame inducted into its roll of honors James B. Odom, an engineer at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) who had served NASA for 33 years in the International Space Station, Space Shuttle, and HST programs. The Hall of Fame also honored Marshall’s X-ray Calibration Facility, which had tested and calibrated x-ray telescopes since the 1970s. MSFC’s X-ray Calibration Facility supported the Advanced X-ray Astrophysics Facility in achieving a resolving power 10 times greater than any previous x-ray telescope.(Huntsville Times (AL), “MSFC Facility, Ex-official To Be Lauded,” 21 February 1998.)
A Soyuz TM-28 spacecraft blasted off from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying the penultimate crew of the Russian space station Mir. The three-member crew was composed of former presidential defense adviser Yuri M. Baturin, Flight Commander Sergei V. Avdeyev, and Engineer Gennady I. Padalka.564 Baturin was the first Russian bureaucrat to travel into space, and his inclusion in the mission attracted “unusually heavy Russian media coverage.” The former Kremlin adviser had trained alongside professional cosmonauts, passing all examinations. Earlier in the year, President Boris N. Yeltsin had fired space physicist Baturin without an explanation, and Baturin had focused since then on training for the mission to Mir.(Shavkat Rakhmatullayev for Reuters, “Russia Blasts First Bureaucrat into Space,” 13 August 1998; Associated Press, “Mir Mission Under Way Despite Russian Economic Troubles,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 August 1998.)
NASA released results from the Hubble Deep Field South (HDF-S) to the worldwide astronomy community for research, as well as to the public. HDF-S was a 10-day observation that had taken place in October 1998. With all of its new cameras and other instruments trained simultaneously down the same 12 billion–light-year–long “corridor,” the team of astronomers at the Space Telescope Science Institute and NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center had captured a “core sample” of the universe, doubling the number of far-flung galaxies available for astronomers to study. The astronomers had studied a region in the constellation Tucana, near the south celestial pole, complementing a previous deep-field study carried out in late 1995, when scientists aimed the HST at a “small patch of space near the Big Dipper.”(NASA, “The Universe ‘Down Under’ Is the Target of Hubble’s Latest Deep-View,” news release 98-206, 23 November 1998.)
NASA announced that Boeing Company’s cost overruns for the International Space Station (ISS) had increased by about 30 percent to US$783 million, and that NASA intended to “further cut the company’s bonus fees.” In reporting to NASA the latest cost overruns, Boeing had explained that “continued production and testing and the need to set aside money for contingencies” had caused the latest increase, US$183 million more than the US$600 million previously estimated. Under the terms of NASA’s cost-plus-fee contract, Boeing would lose an additional US$27.5 million in bonus fees, besides the US$78 million reduction that NASA had imposed.(Seattle Times (WA), “Boeing Reports More Space Station Overruns,” 7 August 1998.)
NASA’s Langley Research Center in Hampton, Virginia, opened a new Collaborative Engineering Center equipped with virtual reality, teleconferencing, and cutting-edge technology. Using a combination of a joystick and computerized voice commands, engineers could control the three-dimensional, virtual space station, which included a docking Space Shuttle orbiter.(Akweli Parker, “NASA Reshaping the Way It Works,” Virginian-Pilot (Norfolk, VA), 16 January 1998.)
NASA announced the selection of veteran cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev for the crew of Mission STS-88, the first American ISS assembly mission. In December 1998, Krikalev would join aboard Endeavour Commander Robert D. Cabana, Pilot Frederick W. “Rick” Sturckow, and Mission Specialists Nancy J. Currie, Jerry L. Ross, and James H. Newman. NASA had assigned Mission STS-88 the task of attaching the U.S.-built Unity module to the Russian-built Zarya control module, scheduled to launch in November 1998. Krikalev had been a member of two Mir space station crews and had flown aboard the Space Shuttle as a member of the Mission STS-60 crew in February 1994. During Mission STS-60, Krikalev had operated the robotic arm and supported a variety of experiments in materials science.(NASA, “Future Space Station Resident Joins Assembly Crew,” news release 98-137, 30 July 1998.)
A Progress cargo spacecraft delivering supplies to Mir veered off course while in automatic mode, forcing the space station’s crew to perform a manual docking. Mission Control ordered Commander Talgat A. Musabayev to perform the docking when the two craft were only 65 feet (20 meters) apart. Musabayev steered the cargo craft smoothly and avoided repeating last June’s collision.(Reuters, “Focus: Technical Failure Mars Russian Space Docking,” 17 March 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 17 March 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Edward J. Weiler Acting Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, effective immediately. Weiler had acted in the position since Wesley T. Huntress Jr.’s departure on 28 September. Since March 1996, Weiler had served as Science Director of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems within the Office of Space Science. He had been a program scientist for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1979.(NASA, “Weiler Named Associate Administrator for Space Science,” news release 98-204, 16 November 1998. 619 Paul Hoversten, “Space Storm Fizzles; Satellites Survive ‘Drizzle’,” USA Today, 18 November 1998.)
The investigation board of engineers and officials from NASA and the European Space Agency released their final report, determining how controllers had lost communication with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite on 24 June. The board’s findings, presented at a joint news conference held in Washington, DC, and Paris, concluded that no anomalies existed on the spacecraft; the loss of SOHO “was a direct result of operational errors, a failure to monitor the status of the spacecraft adequately, and the use of insufficiently tested rescue procedures.” However, the board emphasized that no single cause or particular person was responsible for the incident.(Warren E. Leary, “Satellite To Study Sun Is Reviving from Dead,” New York Times, 4 September 1998.)
U.S. House Committee on Science and Technology Chairperson F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R- WI) and ranking Representative George F. Brown Jr. (D-CA) submitted a letter to President William J. Clinton requesting that he supply a plan within 30 days, “detailing how the [a]dministration expects to resolve the dire problems surrounding the International Space Station.” The two members of Congress asked President Clinton to intervene with President Boris N. Yeltsin to “ensure full Russian compliance with its stated commitments to the space station.” In the aftermath of the announcement of the independent Cost Assessment and Validation Task Force’s findings on the ISS, the members of Congress were attempting to rectify the inadequate budget submission. They asked the President to “direct the Office of Management and Budget to deliver a workable plan to Congress . . . so that the relevant [c]ongressional committees can consider OMB numbers when crafting NASA appropriations and authorization bills.”(Federal Document Clearing House,” Committee Asks Clinton for Space Station Plan,” government news release, 24 June 1998.)
After a delay of more than a year, a Russian Proton booster rocket launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan, carrying into orbit the first module of the International Space Station (ISS), the 41.2-foot (12.6-meter) Zarya. The role of Zarya, translated as Sunrise, would be to act as a “space tugboat” in the early stages of construction, providing propulsion, power, and communications.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russia Puts First Segment of International Space Station in Orbit,” 20 November 1998.)
NASA announced that a long-exposure, infrared image, taken with a camera on the Hubble Space Telescope (HST), had uncovered the most distant galaxies ever seen. HST’s Near Infrared Camera and Multi-Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) had detected galaxies that might be over 12 billion light-years away, depending on which cosmological models scientists used. NASA’s Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science, Edward J. Weiler, deemed the discovery a major step toward fulfilling one of HST’s key objectives: to search for the “faintest and farthest objects in the universe.”(NASA, “Hubble Goes to the Limit in Search of Farthest Galaxies,” news release 98-179, 8 October 1998.)
NASA awarded US$33 million in grants to 48 researchers, to conduct microgravity biotechnology research through NASA’s Office of Life and Microgravity Science and Applications. To those investigators awarded the 40 grants for ground-based research, NASA provided access to its microgravity research facilities, including aircraft flying parabolic trajectories and sounding rockets. NASA awarded eight grants to flight-definition investigators, to prepare for experiments on the International Space Station (ISS).(NASA, “NASA Announces Research Grants in Microgravity Biotechnology,” news release 98-217, 1 December 1998.)
The 16 countries involved in the International Space Station (ISS) agreed, for the second year in a row, to delay construction, naming 2004 as the new target date for completion. The delay was primarily the result of Russia’s inability to pay its share of the program’s costs. NASA Associate Administrator for Space Flight Joseph H. Rothenberg said that the new five-year schedule was “extremely tight and allows for few, if any, launch delays.” NASA estimated that the space station would require 43 flights for its assembly, two fewer flights than previously scheduled. Under the revised schedule, Russia planned to launch nine flights, three fewer than originally scheduled, and NASA intended to launch 34 Shuttle flights to transport parts, one more than originally planned. To save money, Russia canceled construction of two life-support modules and a stowage chamber.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 1 June 1998; New York Times, “Space Station Partners Approve Assembly Delay,” 1 June 1998.)
Astronomers at the University of Manchester in England and the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) announced that six radio telescopes, in concert with the HST, had “captured the first image ever recorded of an unbroken ‘Einstein ring’,” a “circle of light created by the gravitational warping of space between a very distant galaxy and the earth.” Physicist Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity had predicted that “light from a distant object would travel a curving path if it passed close to a massive object along the line of sight from Earth.” The radio image showed a fragmented group of bright arcs, but the HST showed that the galaxy’s infrared emission region was perfectly in line with the gravitational lens and Earth, confirming the existence of the Einstein ring.(Malcolm W. Browne, “‘Einstein Ring’ Caused by Space Warping Is Found,” New York Times, 31 March 1998. 127)
Endeavour lost power to its small forward-maneuvering jets for 30 minutes. Because the jets, which deliver 25 pounds (11 kilograms) of thrust, keep the complex stabilized as it orbits Earth, the loss of power left the Endeavour–Mir complex adrift. During this malfunction, the crew continued its main task, to transfer supplies and equipment from the Shuttle to the space station. NASA officials explained that the crew had never been in danger. However, if the Shuttle’s small maneuvering jets had not regained power, Endeavour would have had to rely on its primary jets, which deliver 875 pounds (397 kilograms) of thrust. Using the primary jets would have risked damage to Mir upon separation of the two spacecraft.(Brad Liston for Reuters, “Faulty Jets Are Fixed, and Space Complex Is Stabilized,” New York Times, 27 January 1998.)
The X-38 atmospheric vehicle completed its first unpiloted test flight successfully. Project Manager John F. Muratore commented that the successful test was “the culmination of two years of hard work by a team from the Johnson Space Center and the Dryden Flight Research Center.” NASA had created the X-38, which could hold up to seven passengers, as an escape vehicle for the International Space Station (ISS). Described as a “whale-shaped, wingless vehicle with fins that look as if they were inspired by a 1956 Cadillac,” the X-38 was the first new spacecraft in more than 20 years to reach the flight-testing stage. Engineers had designed a fully automated craft, “so that even badly injured crew members could climb in, [the vehicle would] separate from the station, and the vehicle would then serve as an ambulance, using satellite-based navigation aids” to carry passengers directly back to a designated landing field on Earth.(NASA, “X-38 Atmospheric Vehicle Completes First Unpiloted Flight Test,” news release 98-44, 12 March 1998; David Colker, “Emergency Space Vehicle Model Takes To Test Flight,” Los Angeles Times, 13 March 1998.)
NASA and Russian Space Agency officials announced that Russia had agreed to sell research time aboard the International Space Station (ISS) for US$60 million, with payment dependent on the Russian agency’s completion of critical milestones. The ISS collaborators, including representatives of the 16 countries participating in the ISS program, had reached the agreement during a week of meetings in Moscow. Russia had missed three target dates because of insufficient funds. The deal, part of NASA’s efforts to bail out its partner and to “prevent costly new delays” in the construction and launch of the ISS, did not release Russia from its obligations to build the service module. As the Moscow meeting concluded, NASA officials also announced that the launches of the first ISS components, the Zarya and Unity modules, remained on schedule, and that the international partners had agreed to reconvene to refine the ISS assembly sequence, at the launch of the Unity module from Kennedy Space Center (KSC).(NASA, “Statement Following Conclusion of Moscow Meetings,” news release 98-176, 2 October 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Russian Space Agency Makes Sale,” 5 October 1998; William J. Broad, “To Buy Some Time, Russia To Sell U.S. Some Time in Space,” New York Times, 5 October 1998.)
U.S. Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr. (R-WI) convened a hearing before the House Committee on Science and Technology to discuss NASA’s request for an additional US$60 million to purchase hardware from Russia for the ISS, over and above the US$1.2 billion in space-related funds already paid to Russia. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin indicated that the additional funding was essential and that, without it, the program would risk termination. Sensenbrenner refused to support approval of the funding without a detailed explanation from U.S. Department of State and White House officials of why the program needed additional funds. Sensenbrenner had asked Jacob Lew of the Office of Management and Budget and Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott to speak at the hearing, but both failed to appear. Sensenbrenner said he could not “go along with NASA’s request to start bailing out the Russian space program,” stating that he had seen no convincing evidence that either NASA, or the White House, or Russia, “would make good use of the money.”(Paul Recer, “Angry Congressman Threatens To Withhold Space Station Money,” San Diego Union-Tribune (CA), 8 October 1998.)
NASA officials announced that the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland, which had operated the science program for the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) since 1983, would also manage the science operations for the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST). As one of the cornerstone missions of the Astronomical Search for Origins and Planetary Systems, a major project within its space science program, NASA expected the NGST “to provide a critical follow-on to the Hubble Space Telescope.” With capabilities unavailable in existing ground- based or space telescopes, the NGST’s purpose was to observe the first stars and galaxies in the universe, to understand better how the universe formed after the Big Bang. After consulting advisory committees, Wesley T. Huntress Jr., Associate Administrator for NASA’s Office of Space Science, had decided that the “most cost-effective and scientifically sound way to proceed” would be “to expand the [Space Telescope Science] Institute’s responsibilities to include the management” of the new telescope.(NASA, “NASA Selects Home for Next Generation Space Telescope,” news release 98-96, 8 June 1998.)
Dr. William K. Douglas, the physician who had overseen the care of the seven Mercury astronauts, died of a viral infection at the age of 76. As part of his assignment to NASA’s Manned Spacecraft Center at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia, Dr. Douglas had been “personally responsible for the medical care and flight preparation of the seven Mercury astronauts.” He had cared for Alan B. Shepard Jr., Virgil I. “Gus” Grissom, John H. Glenn Jr., and M. Scott Carpenter when they undertook the nation’s first four human spaceflights. After retiring from the U.S. Air Force in 1977, Dr. Douglas had joined the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, where he had helped design an orbiting space station before retiring in 1988. In 1992 Douglas was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in Alamogordo, New Mexico.(Wolfgang Saxon, “William Douglas, 76, the Doctor for the Seven Early Astronauts,” New York Times, 24 November 1998.)
Japan’s National Space Development Agency (NASDA) docked the two satellites⎯Orihime and Hikoboshi⎯in outer space, marking the first time two robotic spacecraft had docked using remote control. U.S. and Russian space programs had used remote control to dock pilotless cargo craft with the piloted Mir space station, but had never maneuvered two robotic spacecraft together. NASA spokesperson Brian D. Welch called the accomplishment “an impressive feat.” NASDA timed the rendezvous of the two satellites to coincide with Japan’s Tanabata, or star festival, on 7 July, celebrating “a mythical meeting between the princess Orihime and her lover Hikoboshi,” associated with the stars Altair and Vega. According to the legend, the pair may meet only once a year on 7 July.(Associated Press, “Japanese Are Unveiling Stellar Space Program Progress Has Been Made Cheaply and Quietly,” New Orleans Times-Picayune, 8 July 1998.)
In a spacewalk lasting nearly 7 hours, Mir cosmonauts failed to stabilize the solar panel damaged in a collision in 1997. Russian space officials had postponed this spacewalk from 3 March, when the crew had been unable to unlock the hatch, breaking three wrenches in their attempts. Russian Space Agency cosmonauts, Kazakh Talgat A. Musabayev and Russian Nikolai M. Budarin, spent most of the spacewalk setting up a handrail, left outside the space station by the previous crew. After struggling to unfold and assemble the handrail, the pair only had enough time to install one of two footrests. The cosmonauts returned to Mir after the elapse of 6 hours and 40 minutes; their oxygen tanks only held approximately 7 hours of air. Russian Mission Control had intentionally turned off the audio system during most of the spacewalk. Officials said that Mission Control would no longer allow journalists to listen to radio traffic between Mission Control and spacewalkers, because reporters had become overly critical. Russian officials accused reporters of exaggerating problems on the space station, despite the fact that Mir had been operating relatively trouble free for several months before this spacewalk.(Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Undertakes Six-Hour Spacewalk To Repair Solar Panel,” 1 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir,” 2 April 1998; Vladimir Isachenkov for Associated Press, “Mir Crew Runs Out of Time, Fails To Stabilize Solar Panel,”1 April 1998.)
Endeavour’s Commander Robert D. Cabana and Russian cosmonaut Sergei K. Krikalev, leading the four other crew members, entered the Unity module for the first time, via an airlock attached to the Shuttle. The crew checked air pressure and quality, turned on lights and systems, detached components that were stored in the modules, and set up a communications system, connecting internal components with the two antennas outside Unity. Astronauts Jerry L. Ross and James H. Newman had installed the two antennas on 9 December. The Shuttle crew spent 28 hours inside the modules before turning off the lights and closing the station.(Warren E. Leary, “Astronauts Enter International Space Station,” New York Times, 11 December 1998; Paul Hoversten, “Shuttle Finishes Linkup with Space Station,” USA Today, 14 December 1998.)
Mir Commander Anatoly Y. Solovyev celebrated his 50th birthday⎯in space, enjoying a “semi- officially” sanctioned one-gulp-per-person dose of cognac and a birthday dinner chosen from the space station’s supplies. Solovyev had logged an impressive 80 hours of spacewalking during 17 walks. As of this Mir mission, Solovyev’s fifth, the Russian cosmonaut had spent a cumulative total of approximately 20 months on the space station.(Associated Press, “Mir-50-Year-Old Cosmonaut,” 16 January 1998.)
The crew of the Mir space station replaced the malfunctioning computer block, which had failed on 2 January, and restarted the station’s orientation system. This common type of malfunction, which had occurred seven times in 1997, did not create life-threatening conditions, but it did reduce the power supply to the space station, thereby crippling the gyroscope that oriented the station’s solar panels. Using the Soyuz escape module engines to control its orientation, Mir turned off all nonessential systems, to conserve energy until the crew had completed the repair.(Washington Post, “Mir Crew Replaces Computer Block,” 4 January 1998; Chicago Tribune, “New Year, Old Woe—Mir Computer Glitch,” 3 January 1998.)
Scientists studying images taken by NASA’s Galileo spacecraft announced, in a joint teleconference with Cornell University and NASA’s JPL, that Jupiter’s rings appeared to consist of dust, created in the course of millions of years, as asteroids and comets crashed into the four small moons nearest the planet’s surface⎯Metis, Adrastea, Amalthea, and Thebe. The images, captured during several hours in November 1996, when Galileo was able to observe the rings lit up by the Sun, had provided “unprecedented details of the tiny dust particles.” Furthermore, scientists observed that, in the images, “the three rings stopped abruptly at different moons.” Images from a second flyby in September 1997 had confirmed that “the depths of the three rings matched the depths of the moons’ orbits,” and that material in the rings “matched the dark red dust on the moons’ surface.” The scientists said that more moons than rings exist, because some of the moons supply dust to more than one ring.(NASA, “Galileo Finds Jupiter’s Rings Formed by Dust Blasted Off Small Moons,” news release 98-167, 15 September 1998; New York Times, “New Images Clear Up a Jupiter Mystery: Its Rings Are Just Dust,” 16 September 1998; Dennis Cauchon, “Scientists Solve Mystery of Jupiter’s Rings: Pictures Suggest Asteroid Impacts Stirred Moon Dust,” USA Today, 16 September 1998.)
In a vote of 66 to 33, the U.S. Senate defeated Senator Dale Bumpers’s (D-AK) amendment to the appropriations bill for the Veterans Administration, Housing and Urban Development, and Independent Agencies. The amendment would have cut the United States’ US$2.3 billion share of the FY 1999 budget for the International Space Station (ISS), cancelling the ISS program. During floor debate preceding the vote, Senator Bumpers, who had been trying to eliminate U.S. funding for the space station for the past eight years, referred to the previous month’s U.S. General Accounting Office report. The report had projected that the cost to develop, assemble, and operate the space station over several years would reach US$100 billion, in part because of recurring cost overruns. Senator John H. Glenn Jr. (D-OH) countered Senator Bumpers’s arguments against the space station, citing the “incredible scientific possibilities” that could result from research on the ISS, in such areas as neurology, sleep disorders, and balance.(Frederic J. Frommer for Associated Press, “Space Station,” 7 July 1998; Vickie Allen for Reuters, “International Space Station Survives Senate Vote,” 7 July 1998; Federal Document Clearing House, “Bumpers Amendment Would Ground Space Station,” government news release, 7 July 1998.)
402Pauline Arrillaga for Associated Press, “Space Shuttle,” 30 January 1998; NASA, “STS-89.” Fourteen nations and space agencies participated in a ceremony, signing final accords to build and manage the future ISS. Participating countries were Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Acting Secretary of State Strobe Talbott signed, on behalf of the United States, the 1998 Intergovernmental Agreement on Space Station Cooperation, and NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin signed separate bilateral memoranda of understanding with heads of the Russian Space Agency, ESA, and the Canadian Space Agency. The new agreements superseded previous agreements concerning the ISS, which Canada, Europe, Japan, and the United States had signed in 1988.(New York Times, “Space Station Accord Signed,” 30 January 1998; Associated Press, “Agreements Signed for Launching of Space Station,” 29 January 1998; NASA, “Space Station Agreements To Be Signed in Washington,” news release 98-17, 29 January 1998.)
NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin submitted a 29-page report to lawmakers of the U.S. House of Representatives, officially responding to “an independent review panel’s damning assessment that the [ISS] could cost US$7.3 billion more than NASA estimated.” The panel had also reported that NASA would likely complete the ISS more than four years behind schedule. Goldin acknowledged significant budget and schedule problems but maintained that NASA’s plan remained manageable, despite its shortcomings.(Larry Wheeler for Gannett News Service, “NASA Chief Admits Space Station Project Has Major Woes,” 17 June 1998.)
Phillip Z. Tapper, emergency coordinator for NASA’s GSFC, announced that exposure to smoke and water during the previous day’s fire had damaged parts of two spacecraft. Tapper said that engineers had not yet determined the exact damage to the heat protection panels, which they were planning to install in the Hubble Space Telescope and another spacecraft.(Associated Press, “NASA Fire Damages Spacecraft Parts,” 21 August 1998.)
The Russian government agreed to pay a US$44.5 million debt to the Russian Space Agency, to ensure that the agency would be able to complete a long-delayed component of the new space station. Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev said that the government had agreed to pay the debt in three installments, in October, November, and December.(Dow Jones Newswire, “Russian Government To Pay $44.5 Mln Debt to Space Agency,” 6 October 1998.)
Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev responded to U.S. criticism of Russian delays in constructing components of the ISS, “NASA [is] trying to ‘concentrate attention entirely on Russia’s difficulties’ even though [NASA is] ‘three months behind’ in constructing a laboratory module.” Koptev stated that the Russian Space Agency had only received one-fifth of the US$100 million President Boris N. Yeltsin had allocated for construction of the service module, leading to a seven-month delay in the program. In an effort to improve the Russian Space Agency’s financial situation, Vice President Albert A. Gore Jr. and Prime Minister Viktor S. Chernomyrdin discussed the possibility of Russia’s launching more foreign commercial satellites, with the condition that Russia would “keep its promise to stop assisting Iran’s weapons program.”(Houston Chronicle, “Russian Official Blames NASA for Delaying Space Station,” 18 March 1998.)
Russian Space Agency officials reported, for the first time since Zarya’s launch, that the module had experienced malfunctions. At a press conference, Director General of the Russian Space Agency Yuri N. Koptev explained that none of the module’s three minor malfunctions had any impact on the module’s overall operations. Koptev reported that one of the eight batteries storing energy collected from the module’s solar panels had not performed properly, but he emphasized that Zarya needed only four of the eight batteries to operate. Mission Control had detected an “unexpected abundance of humidity” inside the module, but engineers did not yet know its cause. The third problem involved a malfunctioning antenna in the craft’s automatic docking system, a device that the first ISS crew would not need until after their arrival in January 2000.(Adam Tanner for Reuters, “Minor Problems Plague New Space Station,” 25 November 1998.)
At a Kennedy Space Center (KSC) news conference, Space Shuttle Program Manager Thomas W. Holloway announced that an astronaut’s error had caused a US$10 million solar satellite to malfunction after Space Shuttle Columbia released the satellite in November 1997 during Mission STS-87. An investigation revealed that astronaut Kalpana Chawla had not sent the Spartan satellite a key signal to activate itself. Chawla’s efforts to recapture Spartan with the Shuttle’s robotic arm had sent the satellite spinning, and two astronauts had to undertake a spacewalk to retrieve it. The review panel, comprising both external experts and NASA staff, found that Chawla’s crewmates “could have helped her verify the command” but did not do so “because such vigilance was not part of the plan.” The panel made nine major recommendations intended to help both the Shuttle and the International Space Station (ISS) programs. Holloway announced that, in response to the board’s findings, NASA would make numerous changes to training, computers, and procedures.
