ISS Expedition 20 and 21 crew members ESA astronaut Frank De Winne, cosmonaut Roman Y. Romanenko, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk returned to Earth aboard the Soyuz TMA- 15 capsule. Soyuz TMA-15 landed in Kazakhstan at 2:15 a.m. (EST) in icy weather, ending a 188-day mission to the ISS. Although poor weather conditions had grounded the eight Mi-8 helicopters normally used in the recovery process, recovery crews in all-terrain vehicles were able to reach the spacecraft within 15 minutes of touchdown. Astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev remained on board the ISS, representing the smallest space station crew since July 2006.(William Harwood, “Space Station Crew Lands in Frigid Kazakhstan,” Spaceflight Now, 1 December 2009; James Dean, “Soyuz Makes Safe Return to Cold Earth,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 December 2009.)
SpaceX announced the successful demonstration of a laser-imaging detection and ranging (LIDAR) sensor called DragonEye, a proximity sensor that had launched aboard NASA’s Space Shuttle Endeavor on 15 July 2009 in Mission STS-127. With the help of NASA’s Commercial Crew and Cargo Program Office, SpaceX had tested DragonEye in proximity with the ISS, in preparation for future visits of SpaceX’s Dragon spacecraft to the ISS. DragonEye would guide the Dragon craft as it approached the space station, providing three-dimensional images based on the amount of time needed for a single laser pulse from the sensor to reach a target and to bounce back. DragonEye had used flight data gathered on board Endeavour to detect the ISS successfully and to track it through various approach and departure maneuvers. Following Endeavour’s return to Earth, DragonEye had returned to SpaceX for evaluation. SpaceX’s Falcon-9 launch vehicle and Dragon were both under contract to NASA to provide cargo resupply to the ISS, following the Space Shuttle’s retirement. The contract included 12 flights between 2010 and 2015, with SpaceX representing the only COTS contender with the ability to return cargo to Earth.(Space Exploration Technologies, “SpaceX’s DragonEye Navigation Sensor Successfully Demonstrated on Space Shuttle,” SpaceX news release 25, September 2009, http://www.spacex.com/press.php?page=20090925 (accessed 19 September 2011); Laser Focus World, “SpaceX Successfully Tests DragonEye LIDAR on Space Shuttle,” 30 September 2009.)
NASA announced the one-year extension of the Space Station Cargo Integration Contract that Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems had held since January 2004. The extension’s start date was 1 October 2009. As the second of two such options provided for in the original contract, the extension brought the total value of the contract to US$381 million. Under the terms of the contract, Lockheed Martin Integrated Systems provided sustained engineering for NASA carriers and cargo packing for delivery to and from the ISS. The company also determined the most efficient way to pack cargo; verified the adequacy of the integrated carriers; packed the pressurized cargo into subcarriers; and returned the cargo to providers, once it had returned to Earth.(NASA, “NASA Extends Space Station Cargo Integration Contract,” news release C09-038, 26 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/C09-038_ISS_cargo.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA astronaut Michael R. Barratt, Russian cosmonaut Gennady I. Padalka, and U.S. software engineer Charles Simonyi launched aboard a Soyuz spacecraft from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 6:49 a.m. (CDT), on a flight to the ISS. Barratt and Padalka would join JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata to form the Expedition 19 crew at the space station. The first space tourist to make a second flight to the ISS, Simonyi had previously visited the station in April 2007. He was flying under a commercial agreement with the Russian federal space agency Roscosmos. Simonyi would return to Earth with Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov, who had been aboard the station since October 2008. The Expedition 19 crew would continue conducting scientific investigations and preparing for the arrival of the station’s first six-person crew.
JAXA’s HTV 1 arrived safely at the ISS. NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott used the ISS’s robotic arm to capture the 18-ton (16.33-tonne, or 16,329-kilogram) cargo craft as it hovered at a distance of 30 feet (9.14 meters), marking the first time that the ISS had captured a robotic craft from orbit. Russian and European supply craft used a docking method to arrive at the space station, and Canadian astronaut Robert B. Thirsk berthed the craft at NASA’s Harmony module. The space agencies had scheduled HTV 1 to remain berthed at NASA’s Harmony module until November, when the ISS would release it to burn up in Earth’s atmosphere.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Space Station Crew Grabs New Cargo Ship From Orbit,” 18 September 2009; “ISS Crew Snares Robot Ship,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 September 2009.)
Space Shuttle Atlantis landed safely at NASA’s KSC at 9:44 a.m. (EST), successfully ending an 11-day mission to the ISS. Atlantis crew delivered and equipped the ISS with nearly 30,000 pounds (13,608 kilograms, or 13.6 tonnes) of critical spare parts. Atlantis crew also conducted three spacewalks in which astronauts completed extra tasks. The Shuttle crew also worked with five U.S., Russian, and European astronauts on board the ISS, to establish power, cooling, and airway connections ahead of the scheduled February arrival of the Tranquility module. The Shuttle and ISS crews also installed new external communications systems to facilitate future maintenance of the space station. Atlantis returned with ISS resident Nicole P. Stott, who had spent 91 days in space. NASA expected that Stott’s return would be the Shuttle’s last rotation of a station crew member.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Crew Returns Home After 11-Day Mission,” news release 09-279, 27 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/nov/HQ_09-279_Atlantis_lands.html (accessed 18 November 2011); Mark Carreau for Agence France-Presse, “Space Shuttle Atlantis Lands Back on Earth,” 30 November 2009.)
NASA’s GSFC announced that NASA’s STEREO mission had confirmed the existence of the so-called solar tsunami, a controversial phenomenon that the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) mission had first observed in 1997. In May of that year, the SOHO craft had recorded a tsunami-type wave rippling away from a CME blast site on an active region of the solar surface. At that time, scientists wondered whether the phenomenon had been an actual wave or a shadow of the CME. SOHO’s single point of view was insufficient to provide an answer to that question. However, in February 2009, the twin craft of the STEREO mission had recorded a wave from two positions, separated by 90 degrees, when sunspot 11012 suddenly erupted, giving researchers an unprecedented view of the event. The technical name for a solar-tsunami wave is “fast-mode magnetohydrodynamical (MHD) wave.” STEREO had captured a solar-tsunami wave climbing 100,000 kilometers high (62,137 miles high), racing outward at 250 kilometers per second (155.34 miles per second)—560,000 miles per hour (901,233 kilometers per hour) — and generating energy equivalent to 2.4 million megatons of TNT. Joseph B. Gurman of the Solar Physics Laboratory at NASA’s GSFC explained that, although solar tsunamis pose no direct threat to Earth, they help scientists diagnose conditions on the Sun and forecast of space weather more accurately.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “Mystery of the Solar Tsunami—Solved,” GSFC news release, 19 November 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/stereo/news/solar_tsunami.html (accessed 21 December 2011); Space.com, “Solar Tsunamis Are Real, NASA Says,” 25 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7602-solar- tsunamis-real-nasa.html (accessed 21 December 2011).)
Astronauts Steven R. Swanson and Joseph M. Acaba undertook the second STS-119 spacewalk at the ISS, primarily to lighten the workload for future crews. As their first task, the pair loosened bolts holding down batteries at the end of the ISS’s power-grid framework, in preparation for the batteries’ replacement during the next Shuttle visit, scheduled for June 2009. As Swanson and Acaba finished that task, the gyroscopes maintaining the position of the ISS- Shuttle complex became overloaded, setting off an alarm in the ISS. Discovery quickly assumed control with its thrusters, and Mission Control ordered Swanson and Acaba to continue with their tasks. The two astronauts had trouble with their next task, deploying an equipment-storage platform, because Acaba accidentally inserted a pin upside down. Mission Control instructed them to move on to other tasks—installing a global positioning system (GPS) antenna and using an infrared camera to photograph a pair of radiators, one of which had a peeling cover. Before reentering the ISS, Swanson tied down the equipment-storage platform to prevent it from moving around. NASA assembled a team to determine a means of prying or hammering the pin loose during the spacewalk scheduled for 23 March.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Go on 2nd Spacewalk at Space Station,” 22 March 2009; Mark Carreau, “To-Do List Keeps Astronauts Busy on 2nd Spacewalk,” Houston Chronicle, 22 March 2009.)
Astronauts aboard the ISS operated the Japanese robotic arm for the first time, moving two experiments. One of the two experiments would study the effect of the station’s space environment on electronics and devices; the other was an x-ray observatory that would scan the night sky, using an inter-orbit communications system to send images, data, and voice communications to Japan’s Kibo mission control center at Tsukuba Space Center. The ISS’s robotic arm moved the three payloads from JEL to JEF, the porch attached to Japan’s Kibo laboratory. After some initial problems with its grappling device, the 33-foot (10-meter) robotic arm continued its day-long operation as planned. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata helped to drive the robotic arm. Wakata, Japan’s first long-duration ISS resident, had lived aboard the station since March 2009.(Tariq Malik, “Japanese Experiments Moved to Space Station,” Space.com, 23 July 2009, http://www.space.com/ 7043-japanese-experiments-moved-space-station.html (accessed 29 August 2011).)
Astronauts Michael J. Massimino and Michael T. Good undertook the fourth spacewalk at HST, attempting to fix the spectrograph and to replace worn insulation on the telescope. To fix the spectrograph, Massimino first needed to remove a handrail, but a stripped bolt hampered his work. Even using various specially designed tools, he was unable to remove the bolt for 2 hours. As a last resort, after engineers at GFSC conducted two tests on a mock-up, Mission Control in Houston instructed Massimino to “use his muscles.” After successfully pulling the bolt off, Massimino tried to install a special plate to remove 111 tiny screws that held the spectrograph’s cover in place, but the battery of one of the tools became depleted. Massimino returned to the Shuttle, swapped out the batteries, and recharged his oxygen supply, but this task set the spacewalk another half hour behind schedule. After Massimino had successfully replaced the spectrograph’s internal electronics power-supply card, the astronauts still faced more than 90 minutes of cleanup and closeout work. Therefore, spacewalk coordinators decided to delay the insulation task until the fifth and final spacewalk. The spacewalk lasted more than 8 hours, the sixth longest in NASA history.(Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Stuck Bolt, Dead Battery Bedevil Hubble Repairs,” 18 May 2009.)
NASA astronauts Michael R. Barratt and Kevin A. Ford used a robotic arm to remove the 13.5- ton (12.3-tonne, or 12,247-kilogram) Leonardo cargo module from Space Shuttle Discovery’s cargo bay. An hour later, the astronauts had successfully attached the module to the Harmony module’s Earth-facing port and had begun the process of checking for leaks and pressurizing a vestibule between Harmony and the cargo module.(William Harwood, “Cargo Module Mounted to Space Station for Unloading,” Spaceflight Now, 1 September 2009.)
NASA astronauts David A. Wolf and Timothy L. Kopra successfully completed the first of the five spacewalks scheduled at the ISS for STS-127. Over the course of 5 hours and 32 minutes, the duo installed the 1.9-tonne (4,189-pound or 2.09-ton) Japanese Exposed Facility (JEF), with the assistance of four crew members, who operated the Canadarm2 from inside the ISS. Koichi Wakata and Douglas G. Hurley used the robotic arm to help remove the structure from the Shuttle’s cargo bay, and Julie Payette and Mark L. Polansky maneuvered it over to Kibo, the Japanese research module. NASA described the JEF as a “type of porch for experiments that require direct exposure to space.” After completing their work with JEF, Wolf and Kopra moved to the ISS truss, to work on attaching two spare-parts platforms. ISS crew had already set up one of the platforms, the Cargo Attachment System. However, during STS-119 the crew had experienced difficulty deploying a platform, when a jammed pin failed to release. Wolf and Kopra had used a new tool, built especially for the task, to unfold the platform successfully. The spacewalk was Kopra’s first and Wolf’s fifth.(Jean-Louis Santini for Agence France-Presse, “Endeavour Astronauts Complete First Space Walk,” 19 July 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Astronauts Add Porch to Space Station,” Space.com, 18 July 2009, http://www.space.com/7007- astronauts-add-porch-space-station.html (accessed 25 August 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis launched from NASA’s KSC at 2:28 p.m. (EST) on STS-129, carrying nearly 30,000 pounds of replacement parts for use at the ISS. NASA had packed the spare parts inside two Express Logistics Carriers (ELCs). Astronauts would install the ELCs outside the space station on the central truss during one of the three scheduled spacewalks. Most of the spare parts, which included two steering gyroscopes, a group of tanks, pumps for the ISS cooling system, and a hand for a robotic arm, would remain packed indefinitely until a need for them arose. The STS-129 crew was composed of Commander Charles O. Hobaugh; Pilot Barry E. Wilmore; and Mission Specialists Leland D. Melvin, Michael J. Foreman, Robert L. Satcher Jr., and Randolph J. Bresnik.(NASA Space Shuttle Mission Archives, “Mission STS-129: Delivering the Goods,” 4 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/shuttlemissions/sts129/launch/129_overview.html (accessed 21 November 2011); James Dean, “A ‘Picture-Perfect’ Start: Atlantis Hauls Spare Parts to International Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 17 November 2009.)
NASA announced that its Moon Mineralogy Mapper (M3), on board ISRO’s Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, had detected water molecules in the polar regions of the Moon. Data from the Visual and Infrared Mapping Spectrometer (VIMS), on NASA’s Cassini spacecraft had helped to corroborate the findings, as had data from the High-Resolution Infrared Imaging Spectrometer on NASA’s spacecraft EPOXI—Extrasolar Planet Observations and Characterization (EPOCh) and Deep Impact Extended Investigation (DIXI). M3’s spectrometer had measured light reflecting off the Moon’s surface at infrared wavelengths, splitting the spectral colors small enough to reveal a new level of detail in surface composition. The M3 science team found that the pattern of absorption of the wavelengths at the lunar surface was consistent with the absorption pattern for water molecules and hydroxyl, which is a molecule consisting of one oxygen atom and one hydrogen atom. In 1999 Cassini’s VIMS instrument had also collected data showing water molecules and hydroxyl, but that data had never been published. Roger N. Clark, a U.S. Geological Survey scientist in Denver who had been a member of both the VIMS and the M3 teams, remarked that the data from the two instruments closely agreed, showing as much as 1,000 water molecule parts per million in the lunar soil. To confirm the VIMS and M3 data further, scientists examined EPOXI mission data from June 2009. EPOXI data not only confirmed the findings but expanded on them. Jessica Sunshine, a member of the University of Maryland’s EPOXI team, as well as Deputy Principal Investigator and member of the M3 team, remarked that the extended spectral range and the views over the Moon’s north pole had enabled scientists to explore the distribution of both water and hydroxyl as a function of temperature, latitude, composition, and time of day. She added that the analysis unequivocally confirmed the presence of water molecules and hydroxyl on the lunar surface, revealing that the entire surface of the Moon’s north pole appeared to be hydrated during some portion of the lunar day.(NASA, “NASA Instruments Reveal Water Molecules on Lunar Surface,” news release 09-222, 24 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-222_Moon_Water_Molecules.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “It’s Not Lunacy, Probes Find Water in Moon Dirt,” 24 September 2009; Kenneth Chang, “In Surprise, Moon Shows Signs of Water,” New York Times, 24 September 2009.)
Commander Gennady I. Padalka and Flight Engineer Michael J. Barratt, of ISS Expedition 20, landed safely on the steppes of Kazakhstan in the Soyuz TMA-14 spacecraft, following a six- month residency at the space station. During their mission, Padalka and Barratt had presided over the inauguration of the station’s six-person crew, as well as two Space Shuttle assembly and resupply missions. The two missions had included the delivery of new science facilities for expanded research and the arrival of the first Japanese HTV. Also aboard Soyuz TMA-14 was Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté, who had launched on 30 September with the Expedition 21 crew to spend nine days aboard the ISS. Laliberté had hosted a global Web cast from aboard the space station, to promote his One Drop Foundation. The mission of the One Drop Foundation was to preserve the world’s water resources and to provide global access to clean water. With Padalka’s departure, ISS Expedition 21 Commander Frank DeWinne became the first European to take command of the ISS.(NASA, “Soyuz Landing Caps Historic Space Station Increment,” news release 09-237, 11 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09_237_Soyuz_Lands.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Douglas Birch for Associated Press, “Russian Spacecraft with Circus Tycoon Lands Safely,” 13 October 2009; Todd Halvorson, “European Takes Command of Space Station, Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 10 October 2009.)
GAO published a report finding that the development schedules of Space Exploration Technologies (SpaceX) and Orbital Sciences Corporation had recently fallen behind, despite steady progress. SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation, NASA’s commercial partners, were working on transportation technologies for space cargo, according to Commercial Orbital Transportation Services (COTS) agreements. Both companies had experienced schedule slips that would delay demonstration launches scheduled for 2010 and 2011. Having successfully completed its initial 14 developmental milestones on time, SpaceX was in the process of testing, fabricating, and assembling key components. However, a schedule slip in the development of its launch vehicle had contributed to anticipated delays of two to four months in most of SpaceX’s remaining milestones, including demonstration missions. Orbital had successfully completed seven of 19 developmental milestones but had experienced delays in the development of its launch vehicle. The delays were partly because NASA and Orbital had amended their agreement, which now required Orbital to demonstrate a different cargo-transport capability than originally planned. This change had delayed the demonstration mission date from December 2010 to March 2011. GAO pointed out that the delays would cause NASA to experience a cargo-resupply shortfall for the ISS, once the SSP had concluded in 2010. NASA estimates showed that NASA would need to have 82.7 tonnes (91 tons) of dry cargo delivered to the ISS between 2010 and 2015. To deliver approximately half the total amount of dry cargo, NASA planned to use ISS partners’ vehicles—three Russian Progress vehicles in 2010 and 2011, six Japanese H-II Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2015, and four European Automated Transfer Vehicles between 2010 and 2013. Based on these projections, GAO concluded that NASA would face a cargo-resupply shortfall of approximately 40 tonnes (44 tons) between 2010 and 2015. If commercial partners were to experience further delays or to become unable to provide cargo- resupply services when anticipated, NASA would be unable to make as full a use of the ISS as it had intended.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Partners Are Making Progress, But Face Aggressive Schedules To Demonstrate Critical Space Station Cargo Transport Capabilities” (report no. GAO-09-618, Washington, DC, June 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09618.pdf (accessed 5 August 2011); Network World Fusion, “Can Commercial Space Technology Get Off the Ground? NASA’s Commercial Space Technology Is Seemingly at a Crossroads,” 17 June 2009; Mark Matthews, “GAO Gives COTS Companies a Passing Grade,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 17 June 2009.)
University of California at Irvine announced the publication of a NASA-funded study about bone strength among astronauts. Although previous studies had examined bone-mineral density, this study was the first to evaluate bone strength. Joyce Keyak, a professor of orthopedic surgery and biomedical engineering at University of California at Irvine, led the study. She and her research team used a novel computer program that Keyak had developed to identify hipbone fracture risk in people with osteoporosis. They analyzed hipbone CT (computed tomography) scans of one female and 12 male astronauts who had spent four to six months aboard the International Space Station (ISS). The researchers found that, on average, the astronauts’ hipbone strength decreased 14 percent. However, three astronauts experienced losses of 20 to 30 percent—comparable to those seen in older women with osteoporosis. The research team published its findings in the online version of Bone, the journal of the International Bone and Mineral Society.(University of California at Irvine, “Astronauts on International Space Station Lose Alarming Amounts of Hipbone Strength,” news release, 26 January 2009, http://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/article/ 19371 (accessed 2 February 2011); Kristen Schott, “UCI Study Finds Astronauts at Risk for Bone Loss,” OC Metro (Newport Beach, CA), 27 January 2009.)
Progress 32 successfully carried out an automated docking at the ISS Pirs docking compartment, with Flight Engineer Yuri V. Lonchakov monitoring the process from a terminal inside the space station. The two spacecraft linked up flawlessly and the docking required no intervention from Lonchakov.(Tariq Malik, “New Russian Cargo Ship Docks at Space Station,” Space.com, 13 February 2009, http://www. space.com/4777-russian-cargo-ship-docks-space-station.html (accessed 10 March 2011).)
A new Russian MRM 2 named Poisk, or Explore, docked with the ISS at 10:41 a.m. (EST). A cargo ship carrying Poisk had launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on 10 November. The 4-ton (3.63-tonne, or 3,628-kilogram) module, measuring 13 feet long (4 meters long) and 8 feet (2.4 meters) in diameter, attached to the space-facing port of the Zvezda service module. Poisk would provide a fourth Russian docking port, an airlock for Russian spacewalkers, and an experiment platform. In addition to Poisk, the Russian delivery included water-supply equipment, hygiene supplies for the crew, medical equipment, personal items, and spare parts.(Associated Press, “Space Station Gets New Research Module,” 13 November 2009; James Dean, “Watch Live: Russian Module Docking at Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 13 November 2009; Tariq Malik, “Space Station Gets New Russian Module,” Space.com, 12 November 2009, http://www.space.com/7518-space-station-russian- module.html (accessed 28 November 2011).)
Pursuant to a 2008 congressional mandate, NASA was required to provide a research management plan for the ISS National Laboratory. The GAO report, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research,” evaluated how NASA was currently using the ISS for research and how NASA expected to use the ISS once it was completed. The report also identified challenges to maximizing ISS research, as well as examining common management practices at other national laboratories and large science programs, practices that could apply to the management of the ISS.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “International Space Station: Significant Challenges May Limit Onboard Research” (report no. GAO-10-9, Washington, DC, November 2009), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d109.pdf (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA astronauts Christopher J. Cassidy and Thomas H. Marshburn undertook the fifth and final spacewalk of STS-127 at the ISS, focusing on odd jobs and unfinished tasks, which they completed in 4 hours and 54 minutes. The duo rewired power cables for the ISS’s American- built attitude-control system; secured loose insulation on a Canadian-built maintenance robot; and added to JEF a pair of television cameras, which would provide good views of Japan’s new unpiloted cargo ship, the H-2 Transfer Vehicle, scheduled to make its maiden flight in September 2009. The only task that the astronauts left unfinished was the installation of a cargo attachment system, a task that Mission Control had decided would require too much time. Instead, Mission Control instructed Cassidy and Marshburn to tend to some “get-ahead” tasks—attaching wire ties to external cables and installing new handrails and work-site attachments on the Kibo laboratory. The five spacewalks tied the record for the most EVAs (extravehicular activities) performed on the ISS while a Space Shuttle was docked at the station.(Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Wrap Up Space Station Service Call,” Space.com, 27 July 2009, http://www.space. com/7059-spacewalkers-wrap-space-station-service-call.html (accessed 26 August 2011).)
Soyuz TMA-16 docked with the ISS Zvezda service module at 4:35 a.m. (EST), safely delivering to the ISS NASA astronaut Jeffrey N. Williams, Russian cosmonaut Maxim V. Suraev, and Cirque du Soleil founder Guy Laliberté. Williams and Suraev were joining ISS Expedition 21 as flight engineers. The docking marked the first time that three Soyuz craft had docked at the space station at one time. The automated docking system worked flawlessly.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: Crew Docks Safely at Space Station,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 2 October 2009. 147 NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Impacts Lunar Crater in Search for Water Ice,” news release 09-236, 9 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-236_LCROSS.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Seth Borenstein for Associated Press, “Moon Crash: Public Yawns, Scientists Celebrate,” 10 October 2009.)
Progress 31, a new digitally controlled Russian Progress M-01M-series cargo spacecraft, completed its mission when its remaining fragments fell into the Pacific Ocean after reentry into Earth’s atmosphere. The craft had launched from Baikonur, Kazakhstan, on 26 November 2008, to deliver 2.5 tons (2,267 kilograms, or 2.27 tonnes) of cargo to the ISS, including scientific equipment and supplies of food, fuel, and water. The craft had undocked from the ISS on 6 17 February, undergoing tests at a safe distance from the space station before decommissioning.
Commander Scott D. Altman eased Atlantis up to within 30 feet (9.1 meters) of HST. Operating the Shuttle’s robotic arm, K. Megan McArthur captured the telescope at 1:14 p.m. (EDT), on her first attempt. An hour later, still using the robotic arm, McArthur successfully secured the telescope in its berth at the back of the Shuttle’s cargo bay. A communication glitch slowed the procedure—the astronauts had sent commands to the telescope to ease the capture, directing it, for example, to shut off the gyroscopes. However, the astronauts were unable to discern whether HST had obeyed their commands. Instead, the crew had to relay the information through the telescopes control room at NASA’s GSFC.(Dennis Overbye, “Astronauts Grab Hubble for Repairs,” New York Times, 14 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “What a Catch! Hubble Grabbed for Spacewalking Repairs,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 14 May 2009.)
NASA announced its selection of Einstein, Hubble, and Sagan Fellowships in three areas of astronomy and astrophysics. Each postdoctoral fellowship would provide support to the awardees for three years at any host university or research center in the United States. Jon Morse, Director of the Astrophysics Division in NASA’s Science Mission Directorate (SMD), described the recipients as among the best and brightest young astronomers in the world, who had already contributed significantly to studies of how the universe works, the origin of the cosmos, and whether life exists beyond Earth. Morse described the fellowships as a springboard for scientific leadership, as well as an inspiration for the next generation of students and researchers. NASA awarded 10 fellowships in the Einstein program, to conduct research related to NASA’s Physics of the Cosmos Program; 17 fellowships in the Hubble program, to pursue research associated with NASA’s Cosmic Origins Program; and five fellowships in the Sagan program, which 26 NASA had created in September 2008, in alignment with its Exoplanet Exploration Program.
ISS Expedition 18 Commander E. Michael Fincke and cosmonaut Yuri V. Lonchakov successfully completed all scheduled tasks in a spacewalk lasting almost 5 hours. Fincke and Lonchakov installed EXPOSE-R (studies of exobiological processes in outer space), a joint European-Russian scientific experiment involving biological materials. They placed the experiment outside the Zvezda service module, which astronauts had been unable to activate during a December spacewalk because of an internal cable problem. NASA astronaut Sandra H. Magnus assisted in the installation of EXPOSE-R from inside the ISS. Fincke and Lonchakov also rotated a container holding a scientific experiment involving Russian materials and trimmed a set of six straps positioned near the Pirs docking compartment, to prevent their interference with incoming Russian vehicles needing to dock. In addition, they photographed the Zvezda module, as part of a survey to assess its condition after nine years in orbit. The spacewalk was Lonchakov’s second, Fincke’s sixth, and their second spacewalk as a team. Fincke had undertaken all of his six spacewalks wearing a Russian spacesuit.(James Dean, “Live in Orbit: ISS Spacewalk Complete,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 11 March 2009; Tariq Malik, “Spacewalkers Upgrade Space Station,” Space.com, 10 March 2009, http://www.space.com/6396- spacewalkers-upgrade-space-station.html (accessed 12 May 2011).)
With the assistance of K. Megan McArthur, who operated the robotic arm, astronauts John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel undertook a spacewalk to upgrade HST for the first time in seven years. The mission was Grunsfeld’s third visit to HST and Feustel’s first space mission. The team’s primary task was to replace the 16-year-old Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 with the new Wide Field Camera 3. Feustel and Grunsfeld struggled with a pair of bolts on the old camera, setting them 30 minutes behind schedule. However, Feustel managed to work the bolts loose without breaking them, which would have blocked installation of the new US$132 million camera.(Mark Carreau, “Spacewalkers Equip Hubble with New Computer,” Agence France-Presse, 15 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Hubble Repair Passes ‘Speed Bump’,” USA Today, 15 May 2009.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed safely at 3:14 p.m. (EDT) at NASA’s KSC in Florida, completing its 13-day mission to the ISS. The crew of STS-119 had delivered, installed, and deployed the space station’s final set of solar-array wings, thus completing the station’s truss and supplying full power; replaced a failed unit for a system that converts urine to potable water; and performed important tasks in preparation for future upgrades and additions. STS-119 spacewalkers had failed to deploy fully an external cargo carrier on the Port-3 truss segment but had secured it in place. Mission Control had cancelled the installation of a similar payload attachment system on the starboard side, tasking NASA engineers with evaluating the problem. NASA planned to complete the installation during future spacewalks. JAXA astronaut Koichi Wakata had remained aboard the ISS, replacing Flight Engineer Sandra H. Magnus, who had been aboard the space station for more than four months.(NASA, “NASA’s Shuttle Discovery Glides Home After Successful Mission,” news release 09-072, 28 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09072_STS-119_Landing.html (accessed 4 May 2011).)
Three new ISS residents arrived at the space station aboard a Russian Soyuz capsule, bringing the outpost’s full staff to six for the first time in its 10-year history. Also, for the first time, each of the major space station partners had a representative on board: Roman Y. Romanenko and Gennady I. Padalka of Russia, Michael R. Barratt of the United States, Koichi Wakata of JAXA, Belgian astronaut Frank De Winne of ESA, and Robert B. Thirsk of CSA. The first ISS crew had arrived in the year 2000, two years after the launch of the first part of the station. Since that time, the ISS had expanded to nine rooms, including three full-scale laboratories, five sleeping compartments, two toilets, two kitchens, and two mini-gyms, making the station 81 percent complete. The increased crew size also ushered in a new era of station operations that would allow astronauts and cosmonauts to focus on scientific research rather than on the assembly and maintenance of the ISS.(Marcia Dunn, “Space Station Crew Finally at Full Staff of 6,” Agence France-Presse, 30 May 2009; Todd Halvorson, “At Space Station, the House Is Packed,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 1 June 2009.)
JAXA successfully launched its 16.5-ton (14.97-tonne, or 14,969-kilogram) H-2 Transfer Vehicle (HTV 1), loaded with 4.5 tonnes (4.96 tons) of cargo and supplies for delivery to the ISS. Liftoff occurred at 1:01 a.m. (EDT) from the Tanegashima Space Center, and JAXA confirmed separation from the rocket’s upper stage approximately 15 minutes later. HTV 1, which carried both pressurized and unpressurized cargo to the ISS, was the first craft capable of transporting both types of cargo. The pressurized cargo included food, computer equipment, and other supplies. Also aboard was cargo that NASA and JAXA intended to use on JAXA’s Kibo module: NASA’s Hyperspectral Imager for the Coastal Ocean (HICO) and Remote Atmospheric and Ionospheric Detection System (RAIDS) Experiment Payload (HREP), for studies of the ocean and atmosphere, and JAXA’s Superconducting Submillimeter-Wave Limb-Emission Sounder (SMILES) instrument, designed to study the ozone layer. Masazumi Miyake, Deputy Director of JAXA’s Houston office, said that the launch signaled a new era for JAXA, opening new horizons for Japan in its efforts to achieve human spaceflight. Miyake added that the HTV-1 mission was a demonstration flight to verify functionality and performance. However, after completing the mission, JAXA intended to launch an average of one operational HTV per year. HTV 1 represented Japan’s first attempt at a major orbital rendezvous and its first launch to a staffed space station. The HTV program, which Japan had been developing since 1997, had cost the United States US$700 million. The cost of the HTV spacecraft unit was US$200 million, not including the launch vehicle.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 671, 1 October 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx671.html (accessed 16 September 2011); Robert Block, “Japan Enters New Era of Space Exploration,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 11 September 2009.)
In the third spacewalk at HST, John M. Grunsfeld and Andrew J. Feustel carried out a set of unprecedented tasks—no astronaut had ever tried to take apart any of HST’s scientific instruments in space. The work proceeded smoothly, unlike the two previous spacewalks, and the astronauts completed all tasks within the allotted 6.5 hours. Grunsfeld and Feustel successfully connected the US$88 million Cosmic Origins spectrograph, a task that required them to remove the corrective lenses that had restored HST’s vision in 1993. The newer scientific instruments had built-in corrective lenses, rendering the 1993 lenses unnecessary. Grunsfeld then fixed the ACS using a set of specially designed tools. Working from a dark work site at an odd angle and wearing stiff, heavily padded space gloves, Grunsfeld cut off a grate and removed 36 tiny fasteners and four circuit boards. The new cards and the power supply pack slid smoothly into place.(Marcia Dunn, “Spacewalkers Pull Off Toughest Hubble Repairs Yet,” Agence France-Presse, 17 May 2009; Traci Watson, “Spacewalkers Easily Pull Off Tricky Hubble Fix,” USA Today, 17 May 2009.)
Russia’s Soyuz TMA-17 launched from Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan at 3:52 p.m. (CST), carrying NASA astronaut Timothy J. Creamer, Russian cosmonaut Oleg V. Kotov, and JAXA astronaut Soichi Noguchi to the ISS. The three crew members, scheduled to remain at the ISS until May 2010, would join Expedition 22 crew members American Jeffrey N. Williams and Russian Maxim V. Suraev aboard the space station, bringing the station crew total to five. The mission was Creamer’s first. The launch marked the first time a Soyuz craft had launched at night in winter.(NASA, “Crew Lifts Off From Kazakhstan To Begin Science and Construction Work Aboard the International Space Station,” news release 09-295, 20 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09- 295_Soyuz_launch_ex22.html (accessed 16 December 2011); Peter Leonard for Associated Press, “Astronauts Blast Off for Christmas Space Mission,” 21 December 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “New Crew Launches Toward International Space Station,” Space.com, 21 December 2009, http://www.space.com/7693-crew-launches- international-space-station.html (accessed 9 January 2012).)
NASA announced that it had completed the Orion project’s preliminary design review (PDR), one of a series of checkpoints in the design life cycle of a complex engineering project. Project managers must complete these checkpoints before hardware manufacturing can begin. The PDR marked a major milestone in the construction of the next CEV. The review board had concluded its evaluation on 31 August 2009, establishing the basis for proceeding to the critical design phase. The Orion CEV design featured a 16.5-foot-wide (5-meter-wide) capsule-shaped crew module for four astronauts; a service module housing utility systems; propulsion components; and an LAS. The PDR evaluated the vehicle’s capability to support flights to the ISS, missions to the Moon lasting for a week, and missions to the Moon lasting as long as 210 days. Each subsystem of the CEV had undergone reviews between February and July 2009, before the project proceeded to the overall vehicle-level review. The vehicle-level review had lasted two months, including reviewers from all 10 NASA field centers. These reviewers evaluated the hundreds of design products that the Lockheed Martin−led industry partnership had delivered. T. Cleon Lacefield, Vice President and Orion Project Manager at Lockheed Martin in Denver, Colorado, remarked that, because Lockheed Martin had worked so closely with its NASA counterparts, the CEV design was much more mature than is typical for programs at the PDR checkpoint. Moreover, before the PDR, Lockheed Martin had completed 300 technical reviews, 100 peer reviews, and 18 subsystem-design reviews.(NASA, “NASA’s Orion Spacecraft Passes Significant Design Milestones,” news release 09-202, 1 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-202_Orion_Passes_PDR.html (accessed 15 September 2011); Tariq Malik, “NASA’s New Moonship Passes Review Amid Rocket Uncertainty,” Space.com, 1 September 2009, http://www.space.com/7217-nasa-moonship-passes-review-rocket-uncertainty.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
Space Shuttle Atlantis arrived at the ISS on mission STS-129. With the assistance of a robotic arm, NASA astronauts immediately unloaded one of two ELCs: a 16-foot-by-14-foot (5-meter- by-4-meter) platform, containing pumps, storage tanks, and other equipment weighing hundreds of pounds apiece. All of the equipment was too large to launch aboard any vehicle other than the Shuttle. With only five launches to go before the scheduled 2010 retirement of the Space Shuttle program, NASA planned for the Shuttles to carry to the ISS as many spare parts as possible in the time remaining. In addition to spare parts sent to the ISS for storage, Atlantis had also carried thousands of microscopic specimens. NASA intended to use the specimens in experiments studying the effect of gravity on human muscle development and physiology. Upon the docking of Atlantis with the ISS, NASA astronaut Nicole P. Stott, who had been on board the ISS for approximately three months, became a member of the Shuttle crew. Stott would return home on board Atlantis at the conclusion of STS-129.(Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Shuttle Docks at Space Station, Unloads Parts,” 19 November 2009; Agence France-Presse, “Shuttle Atlantis Docks with Space Station,” 19 November 2009.)
