$16,280,069 contract for construction of F-l rocket engine test stands was awarded to Santa Fe Engineers, M. M. Sundt Construction Co., and Stolte, Inc., by Army Corps of Engineers as agent for nasa. Complex of three test stands and control center would be built at Edwards afb, Calif.
nasa Administrator Webb announced that the Mission Control Center for future manned space flights would be located at Manned Spacecraft Center (msc), Houston, Tex. The Center, including its computer complex, communications center, flight simulation facility, and flight operations displays, would be operational by 1964 for Gemini rendezvous flights and later Apollo lunar missions.
Governor Nelson Rockefeller, addressing New York State Associated Press Association, proposed establishment of New York state science and technology foundation “to stimulate industrial expansion through research attuned to the space age.” Mid-October: J. Thomas Markley, Apollo project officer at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, announced details of space facility to be established by nasa at White Sands Missile Range (see Sept. 17). To be used in testing Apollo spacecraft’s propulsion and abort systems, wsmr site facilities would include two static test-firing stands, a control center blockhouse, various storage and other utility buildings, and an administrative services area. October 16: Nike-Apache two-stage sounding rocket carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 103-mi. altitude, in nasa launching from Wallops Island, Va. Primary objectives of the flight were to measure ionosphere electron density and temperature and to obtain data on the ion density and conductivity of the ionosphere.
nasa graduated first group of Project Mercury tracking personnel completing new course at Wallops Station, the seven graduates representing personnel from nas a and dod contractors. Directed by gsfc, the Mercury Network Training Program consists of specialized courses to support the man in space mission, one requiring that the subsystems at all 18 sites in a global network are continuously monitored and provide precise data concerning the spacecraft’s location, altitude, and operational status as well as the astronaut’s condition. Real-time data must flow between the sites, the Computer Center at gsfc, and the Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral.
Italian Space Research Commission announced Italy would attempt to orbit its first satellite in 1963. The 200-lb. scientific satellite wollid be launched from a platform floating in the Indian Ocean and would measure air density variations caused by solar radiation.
Agreement establishing U.S.-Italy cooperative space program, signed in May, was confirmed in Rome by Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson and Italian Foreign Minister Attilio Piccioni. The Memorandum of Understanding between nasa and the Italian Space Commission provided for three-phase program, expected to culminate in launching of a scientific satellite into equatorial orbit. Generally, nasa would provide the Scout rockets and personnel training; Italians would launch the vehicle with its Italian payload and would be responsible for data acquisition as well as for towable launch platform located in equatorial waters.
nasa announced selection of International Business Machine Corp. to provide ground-based computer system for manned space flight Projects Gemini and Apollo. The computer complex will be part of the Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc), at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston.
Navy Astronautics Group established at pmr its first space satellite command, to operate the Transit navigational satellite system. In addition to the headquarters at Point Mugu, the command will eventually encompass a satellite command and ejection station, computer center, operations control center, and satellite tracking facility at Point Mugu, and other tracking facilities at Winter Harbor, Maine; Minneapolis, Minn.; and Wahiawa on Oahu, Hawaii.
Piloting a nasa F-106 supersonic jet airplane from Pope afb, N.C., Astronaut Virgil I. Grissom notified Jacksonville, Fla., air route traffic control center that Ms Tacan radio navigation aid had gone out. Flying above clouds and around thunderstorms, Grissom began operating an emergency radio beacon signal and was directed to a safe landing under a thunderstorm at Patrick afb by Miami air traffic control center.
