nasa announced signing $35,200,018 contract with International Business Machine Corp. for computer complex design, equipment, and associated services for Integrated Mission Control Center at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (nasa Release 63-151)
faa’s Miami air route traffic control center began area positive control (apc) radar separation service to jet aircraft flying above 24,000 ft., bringing 22 out of 25 faa centers into the apc network and covering 90% of continental U.S. Centers at Great Falls, Mont., and Boston will join in 1964 and the St. Louis center would be phased out. The next step in the program would be to lower the apc floor from 24,000 ft. to 18,000 ft. (faa Release 63-97)
Air Defense Command and faa began combined operations in Great Falls Sage (Semi-automatic Ground Environment) Direction Center at Malmstrom afb, Mont., the event marking a milestone in military and civil air traffic control, faa’s new Great Falls Air Route Traffic Control Center makes use of ado’s operational facilities, computers, long-range radars, and related equipment to provide air traffic control services to civil and military aircraft operating in about 135,000 sq. mi. of air space over Montana and North Dakota, (faa Release 63-102)
gsfc announced that under a $2 million contract now under final negotiation, Sperry Rand Corp.’s Univac Div. would deliver eleven Model 1218 computer systems to manned space flight tracking stations for operation by July 1964. These computers would automatically summarize telemetry from the spacecraft, provide summaries for display in the mission control center so that the controllers can select and examine certain data on a real-time basis, and prepare the telemetry data for final processing in the more elaborate computers at gsfc and msc. During the Mercury program, controllers at the tracking stations had to select data manually. (gsfc Release G-26-63)
nasa announced selection of Pliilco Corp. for negotiation of contract to develop and equip Manned Flight Mission Control Center (mfmcc) at nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston. To be operational in mid-1964, mfmcc would direct Gemini rendezvous and Apollo flights just as Mercury Control Center at Cape Canaveral directed Project Mercury manned space flights, (nasa Release 63-14)	,
gsfc selected two companies for negotiation of contracts pertaining to Nimbus weather satellite. $252,000 contract to General Electric Co. called for development of operating procedures for Nimbus control center as well as training of personnel to operate the center. $165,000 contract to rca Electron Tube and Semiconductor Div. required contractor to furnish solar cells for Nimbus satellites and Nimbus operational system, (gsfc Release G-19-63)
