Brig. Gen. Joseph Bleymaier, Deputy Chief of Staff for Manned Space Flight, afsc, said that usaf would sharply increase its participation in NASA’s manned space flight program; usaf astronauts might be assigned for training as crew members on some Gemini and Apollo flights, and 100 officers would help staff Integrated Mission Control Center (imcc) at msc. [George Low, msc Deputy Diricetor, denied this claim three days later (see June 9).] General Bleymaier disclosed that: (1) flight crews of Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol) would come from nine Dyna-Soar pilots now at Aerospace Research Pilot School, Edwards afb; (2) usaf would begin discussing specific flights aboard Gemini and Apollo when Sec. of Defense Robert S. McNamara gave approval for production of mol; (3) 17 Titan III—C launches were planned, two allocated to MOL; (4) payloads of 6,000 lbs. would contain scientific research projects, with NASA experiments to be accommodated. (Houston Post, 6/10/64; M&R, 6/15/64, 12)	_
nasa Goddard Space Flight Center’s Space Operations Control Center established that Soviet lunik iv spacecraft, launched April 21, 1963, was in a barycentric orbit—i.e., orbiting around the center of gravity (4,600 km. from earth’s center) of the earth-moon system. This unusual orbit was apparently a coincidence, because final Tass announcement about the probe had said it would become a satellite of the sun. (gsfc, and msfc SIN, 4/64,15-16)
NASA and Australian Ministry for Supply announced agreement for establishment of space tracking and data acquisition station in the Orroral Valley near Canberra, Australia, for ground support of NASA’s Orbiting Observatory satellites. The facility would be a sister facility to NASA stations near Fairbanks, Alaska, and Rosman,. N.C., which monitor, control, and command the Orbiting Observatories, as well as receive, record and forward to the control center information transmitted from the satellite to the ground, (nasa Release 64-55)
First major test of revamped NASA worldwide tracking network, part of preparation for manned earth-orbital space flights in Project Gemini. During nine-day drill, simulated flight missions were conducted which involved Goddard Space Flight Center, Mission Control Center, and eight sites in the worldwide tracking network. (msc Roundup, 10/14/64,1; Goddard News, 10/19/64,1)
NASA selected International Business Machines Corp. Federal Systems Div. to supply technical services for support of Goddard Space Flight Center’s computer facilities. The computation services and allied systems permitted GSFC to acquire high-speed raw data from spacecraft and to convert it almost instantaneously into intelligible information concerning the spacecraft. Contractor was to staff and operate computer facilities related to launch monitoring system at Cape Kennedy, the early flight tracking station on Bermuda, and gsfc control center, (nasa Release 64-166)
dod announced award of $15,599,775 contract to Boeing Co. for Project Hibex (Hi-G Booster Experiment), an arpa research experiment investigating high performance missile boosters, (dod Release 38-64) January 11: Philco Corp. had begun cable and pneumatic tube installation in the Mission Control Center under construction at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, msc announced. Philco was prime contractor for flight control equipment for the Project Gemini/Apollo facility, which was scheduled for occupancy in mid-1964. (msc Release 64-8)
