At a Special Awards Ceremony at NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, the Presidential Citation was presented to John H. Robinson of Resources Management Div. Robinson was one of the three individuals responsible for organizing a control center, preparing all Pert networks, and operating this control center. Operation was so effective that USAF was able to complete a modernization program far ahead of schedule with a monetary saving of several million dollars, (msc Roundup, 7/9/65, 3)
The countdown rehearsal for the Gemini (gt-3) flight, conducted at Cape Kennedy, was delayed two hours because of (1) a propellant leak in Titan II rocket, (2) crossed wires in ground support equipment, (3) failure of some of the batteries to reach peak power immediately, and (4) faulty reading in control center. Project Gemini officials said none of these problems had been serious, but the combination would have caused a postponement on launch day. {NYT, 3/9/65; N.Y. Her. Trib., 3/9/65; Balt. Sun, 3/9/65)
Attempt to launch Gemini vi from etr was unsuccessful when an electric plug connecting the Titan II booster to the launch pad fell loose 2}4 sec. early, causing the automatic sequencer to shut down the engine booster 1.2 sec. after ignition. Inside the Titan II a wire extended from the tail plug to tap a circuit which carried current from the batteries to an intervalometer—electric clock—which controls the first 21/% min. of powered flight. When the plug shook loose prematurely and started the clock, signals that liftoff had occurred were sent to the Titan ii’s automatic pilot, local guidance stations, and an automatic sequencing device at KSC Launch Control Center. The sequencer registered the mishap and shut down Titan Ii’s engines. Astronauts Stafford and Schirra remained calm throughout the misfire with Command Pilot Schirra rejecting the option to actuate the ejection seats. The astronauts were removed 99 min. later from the spacecraft and the launch rescheduled for Dec. 15. (Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/13/65, Al; Simons, Wash. Post, 12/13/65, Al; MSC GEMINI V11/GEMIN1 VI Fact Sheet)
Aircraft operations in the U.S. increased 10% for the second consecutive year, according to statistics reported in FAA Air Traffic Activity, Calendar Year 1964. Ten percent gains were made in each of three major categories: total aircraft operations (takeoffs and landings at 278 airports with faa airport traffic control towers)—34.2 million; instrument approaches at Air Route Traffic Control Center (aRTCc) areas— 1.005 million; and IFR (Instrument Flight Rule) aircraft handled at artccs—11.7 million, (faa Release 65-22)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, announced change of primary control of manned flight missions from Cape Kennedy to Manned Spacecraft Center Mission Control Center. Christopher Kraft, mission flight director for GT—3 flight, completed Mar. 28, would serve as mission director for GT-^4 flight scheduled for later this year, msc Mission Control Center would provide centralized control of manned spaceflight programs from launch through recovery; computer-driven time and data displays would report instantly the status of astronauts, spacecraft, and supporting operations to mission/flight director. Most information would travel over land lines. (Transcript; NASA Release 65—119)
Gemini V launch counted down to T-10 min. before it was canceled and reset for Aug. 21. Astronauts L. Gordon Cooper (L/Col., usaf) and Charles Conrad, Jr., (Lcdr., usn) were disappointed, but took the delay in stride. Cooper commented: “. . . you promised a launch today and not a wet mock.” Five hours before the scheduled launch, computer studies suggested that the liquid hydrogen in the spacecraft’s fuel cells was boiling off too quickly. Engineers’ attempts to force additional liquid hydrogen into the fuel cells succeeded only in hastening the escape of hydrogen gas. Finally, a colder liquid hydrogen was used with success. Ten minutes before lift-off, apparent troubles with a telemetry programer caused another hold in the countdown. During a thunderstorm, a lightning-induced power surge affected the electrical instruments. At 5:00 p.m., edt, as NASA officials were opening a press conference, they were informed that a fire had broken out in a communications cable linking the Gemini v launch complex with mission control center. The officials said that there was a “very good possibility” that Gemini 5 could be launched on Aug. 21, but that no definite date could be set until a partial countdown was held the next day to determine the damage caused by the power surge and the cable fire. (Clark, NYT, 8/20/65, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 8/20/65; A1; WSJ, 8/20/65, 1)
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center awarded $1,059,000 contract to Aetron, a division of Aerojet-General Corp., for installation of equipment on a Saturn V second-stage test stand at Mississippi Test Operations. Equipment would include consoles to check out systems on the flight stages being tested as well as in the area’s test control center, (msfc Release 65—53)
Vice President Hubert Humphrey and his party, which included Rep. Carl Albert (D-Okla.) and Sen. Fred Harris (D-Okla.), visited NASA Manned Spacecraft Center and were briefed on the Gemini program by Charles W. Mathews; on the Apollo program by Dr. Joseph F. Shea; and on the life support systems by Richard Johnston of Crew Systems. Mr. Humphrey—it was his first visit to MSC—took a “ride” in the Gemini docking trainer with Astronaut Walter M. Schirra, Jr. (Cdr., usn) and then he and his party observed a simulated Gemini liftoff at the Mission Control Center and a portion of a mission, (msc Roundup, 7/23/65, 1; Houston Post, 7/14/65)
ComSatCorp’s 85-lb. early bird i, the first commercial communications satellite, was successfully launched from Cape Kennedy with a three-stage Thrust-Augmented Delta (Tad) booster. An hour after launching, flight control center confirmed that the satellite had entered an elliptical transfer orbit with apogee, 22,677 mi. (36,510 km.) ; perigee, 908 mi. (1,463 km.) ; period, 11 hrs. 10 min., and was sending clear radio signals. NASA handled the launching under a contract with ComSatCorp. About 40 hrs. after launching, a kick motor aboard early bird i would be fired to adjust the path of the satellite to a synchronous circular orbit at 22,300 mi. altitude above the Atlantic, early bird i would become the first link in ComSatCorp’s proposed worldwide satellite communications system and would relay radio, television, teletype, and telephone messages between North America and Europe. (Clark, NYT, 4/7/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 4/7/65; ComSatCorp)
Gemini 7 spacecraft was mechanically mated with its launch vehicle following activation of two replaced fuel cell sections. The cells originally installed in the spacecraft were thought to have been damaged when one of hte cryogenic reactant tanks was inadvertently overpressurized. Preparations at Launch Complex 19 and flight controller simulations in Mission Control Center, Houston, were proceeding smoothly toward supporting the scheduled December 4 launch date, (msc Roundup, 11/26/65, 1)
