Application of space age technology to traffic control was near, Chairman of the Board of the Ford Motor Co. Henry Ford II told the Young Men’s Business Club of Greater New Orleans meeting in New York. He said plans would soon be presented to the Government for a nationwide traffic control system based on earth survey satellites for aerial reconnaissance. They would be linked by computers to urban traffic control centers and "to the stoplight in the corner and even the car radio. . . . As fantastic as it may seem, we believe such a system will be technically feasible and economically sound.” Technical capacity for development of system had been gained from experience of the Philco Corp., a Ford subsidiary, in designing and operating msc’s Flight Control Center. Philco’s communication system was being used on Gemini 'missions. (NYT, 7/22/66, 27)
Dr. Jan H. Oort, head of Leiden Observatory, the Netherlands, and former head of International Astronomical Union, received 1966 Vetlesen Award in earth sciences. Administered by Columbia Univ. for the G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation, the prize was awarded for "outstanding achievement in the sciences resulting in a clearer understanding of earth.” NASA Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell noted in speech at award dinner that "through the space approach . . . the domain of the geosciences” had been strengthened and extended: "The theories, instruments, and skills needed and developed to study the earth can now be applied to investigating the moon and planets at first hand. Comparative studies of the planets and their atmospheres, ionospheres, and magnetospheres, promise increased understanding of our own planet, earth.” (Text; Sullivan, NYT, 10/19/ 66, 36)
NASA had selected Philco Corp. for negotiation of $35-million, incentive-fee contract for "continued systems engineering and operational support” of Mission Control Center at msc. (NASA Release 66-190)
Edmond C. Buckley, nasa Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, in testimony before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Advanced Research and Technology, reviewed nasa’s tracking and data acquisition network program: "During fiscal year 1965, the network, under the management of Goddard Space Flight Center, successfully supported four Gemini missions, two of which were manned. So far in fiscal year 1966, three manned Gemini missions have been supported, including the highly successful Gemini VII/VI rendezvous in December.. . . "During 1965, an average of 32 satellites was supported at any given time. This included satellites launched in prior years which were still transmitting useful data plus new satellites which were launched during the year. In 1966, the average number of satellites to be supported is expected to increase to more than 35 including flight of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, the Biosatellite, and Applications Technology Satellite. "In 1967, the average number of satellites to be supported is estimated to exceed 40 with the spacecraft, collectively, contacting the network stations more than 650 times daily. Contributing to the extensive workload in 1967 will be the additional flights of the Orbiting Astronomical Observatory, Biosatellite, Applications Technology Satellite, and Orbiting Geophysical Observatory. . . . "During fiscal year 1965, the [Deep Space] network successfully supported the Ranger VII, VIII, and IX missions and the cruise phase of the Mariner IV mission. The precise operation of the facilities at Goldstone and the control center at Pasadena in support of the Ranger missions was essential to the accuracy achieved in impacting on the surface of the moon, and to the activation of the cameras and transmission of live television pictures of the moon’s surface. In fiscal year 1965, 85-foot antenna facilities at both Canberra, Australia, and Madrid, Spain, became operational and participated in Mariner IV support.. . . "The excellent support provided the Mariner IV mission permitted the spacecraft, after a flight of 325 million miles and an elapsed time of 228 days, to pass Mars with a deviation of only 1,000 miles from the projected fly-by distance of 5,000 miles and to take the first close-up pictures of the planet. The Deep Space Network continued to support the Mariner IV spacecraft after encounter and established a new twoway communications record of 191 million miles between network stations and the spacecraft. .. . On January 4, 1966, the Goldstone facility received a signal from the Mariner IV spacecraft over a distance of 216 million miles.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 608, 727-9)
