Apollo 11 astronauts would leave three items on lunar surface to commemorate landing, NASA announced. Silicon disc, 1%-in-dia, would carry statements by Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon; messages of goodwill from leaders of 73 countries; list of leaders of Congress and members of four congressional committees responsible for NASA legislation; and names of NASA’s top management, past and present. Statements, messages, and names had been etched on disc by process used to make microminiature electronic circuits. Each message had been reduced 200 times, to barely visible dot. Three- by five-foot nylon American flag with tubing along top edge would be erected on eight-foot aluminum staff on airless moon. Two other U.S. flags and flags from 136 nations and 50 U.S. states would be carried to moon and returned to earth. Plaque left on lm descent stage would bear images of two hemispheres of earth and inscription “Here men from the planet earth first set foot upon the moon July 1969, A.D. We came in peace for all mankind.” It would bear names of Apollo 11 crew—Astronauts Neil A. Armstrong, Edwin E. Aldrin, Jr., and Michael Collins—and President Nixon, (nasa Releases 69—83E, 69-83F, 69-83H)
President Nixon and his daughter Tricia {foreground) watched preparations jor the launch of Apollo 12 from ksc, while Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA A rimin' istrator, shielded Mrs. Nixon from rain. Seconds into flight an electrical discharge shut down the spacecraft fuel cells, but the astronauts corrected the condition. 10,000	ft with tops at 21,000 ft. During ascent observers on ground saw two parallel streaks of lightning flash between clouds and launch pad. NASA reported electrical transients, later attributed to electrical potential discharges from clouds through spacecraft to ground, had suddenly shut off spacecraft’s electrical power at 00:36 get and turned on numerous alarms in cm. Spacecraft automatically switched to backup battery power while crew restored primary power system. Commander Conrad radioed, “We had everything in the world drop out.” Control Center commented, “We’ve had a couple of cardiac arrests down here, too.” “There wasn’t time up here,” Conrad answered. Power system remained normal throughout rest of mission. Spacecraft entered planned parking orbit with 118-mi (189.9-kra) apogee and 115.0-mi (185.0-km) perigee. After postlaunch checkout CSM. separated from Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and LM, code-named Intrepid, Onboard TV initiated after separation clearly showed csm transposing and docking with lm at 3:27 GET and ice on windows from rain frozen during liftoff. Crew ejected CSm/lm from S—IYB and conducted first SPS burn for translunar insertion. Slingshot maneuver placed S—IVB into earth orbit with 515,549.4-	to 560,429.9-mi {829,519.0- to 901,731.7-km) apogee and 93,213.2-	to 109,324.1-mi (149,980.0- to 175,902.5-km) perigee and period of 39 to 45 days, instead of heliocentric orbit planned, because of error in instrument unit. To ensure that electrical transients during launch had not affected lm systems, Conrad and Bean entered LM at 7:20 GET for housekeeping and systems checks. All checks indicated systems were satisfactory, Translunar insertion maneuver was so accurate that midcourse maneuver No. 1 was not necessary. Midcourse correction No. 2, at 30:53 GET, placed spacecraft on desired hybrid circumlunar trajectory with closest approach of 69.1 mi; third and fourth maneuvers were not necessary. Good-quality TV coverage of preparations for and performance of midcourse maneuver was transmitted for 47 min. Conrad and Bean began transfer to LM during translunar coast Y2 hr earlier than planned to obtain full TV coverage through Goldstone tracking station. The 56-min transmission, beginning at 62:52 get, showed excellent color pictures of GSM, intravehicular transfer, LM interior, earth, and moon. Gordon reported crew was in good condition. TV broadcast scheduled for 81:30 GET before lunar orbit insertion was canceled because of sun angle and glare on spacecraft windows. Spacecraft entered lunar orbit with 194.3-mi (312.6-km) apolune and 72.0-mi (115.9-km) perilune at 83:25 GET (10:47 pm est Nov. 17) after first sps burn. During first lunar orbit good quality TV coverage of lunar surface was transmitted for 33 min. Crew provided excellent descriptions of lunar features. Second SPS burn circularized orbit with 76.1-mi (122.5-km) apolune and 62.5-mi (100.6-km) perilune at 87:47 get. Conrad and Bean transferred to lm for l^g-hr housekeeping, voice and telemetry test, and oxygen-purge-system check and then returned to CM. CM Yankee Clipper, reported sighting Surveyor III and Intrepid on moon. Conrad opened lm hatch at 115:11 GET, descended LM ladder, and deployed modularized equipment stowage assembly (mesa) containing camera which recorded his descent to lunar surface. Conrad reported seeing Surveyor HI spacecraft and said lm had landed 25 ft down-range from lip of crater. Conrad, inches shorter than Neil A. Armstrong, who had stepped onto moon July 21, had difficulty taking last step from ladder. When he touched lunar surface at 115.22 get (6:44 am est Nov. 19) Conrad said, “Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small step for Neil, but that’s a long one for me.” He said lunar surface was soft and loosely packed, causing his boots to dig in as he walked, and sun was bright like a spotlight, lm had landed so gently its shock-absorbing legs were barely telescoped by gentle impact. Conrad recorded Bean’s descent to lunar surface at 115:52 get (7:14 am EST Nov. 19). Shortly after color TV camera was removed from mesa bracket, transmission was lost and was not regained for remainder of eva. Crew collected 40- to 50-lb contingency sample and reported mounds resembling volcanoes. Mounds were 4 ft high with flattened tops 5 ft wide and sides sloping out to 15- to 20-ft dia. Conrad said he saw neither breccia nor vesicular rocks, only basalts. Lithium hydroxide canisters and contingency sample were transferred to lm ; S-band antenna, solar wind composition experiment, and American flag were deployed as planned, alsep with SNAP—27 atomic generator was deployed 600—700 ft from lm. Shortly after deployment passive seismometer transmitted to earth signals from astronauts’ footsteps as they returned to lm. During deployment astronauts kicked up dust and some adhered to instruments. Overall effect would be determined through long-term measurements of system’s engineering parameters. Conrad and Bean dusted each other off and entered Intrepid after 3 hrs 56 min walking on lunar surface. After resting inside lm and checking plans for second eva period, astronauts left lm at 131:33 get (10:55 pm est Nov. 19), 1 hr 40 min ahead of schedule. Astronauts stored lm TV camera in equipment transfer bag for return to earth for failure analysis. Conrad walked to alsep site to check leveling of lunar atmosphere detector. Astronaut movement on surface was recorded on passive seismometer and lunar surface magnetometer, eva traverse took crew to alsep deployment site, Head Crater, Bench Crater, Sharp Crater, Halo Crater, Surveyor III site, Block Crater, and back to lm. Astronauts walked 1,500—2,000 ft from lm, covering about 6,000-ft distance, their confidence and speed increasing with experience. After walk Conrad reported he had fallen once but Bean had picked him up without difficulty. Conrad rolled grapefruit-sized rock down wall of Head Crater about 300—400 ft from passive seismometer, but no significant response was detected. Crew obtained desired photographic panoramas, core samples, trench sample, lunar environment sample, and assorted rock, dirt, bedrock, and molten samples. They reported fine dust buildup on all sides of larger rocks and said soil color lightened as depth increased. Crew reported Surveyor footpad marks were still visible and entire spacecraft looked brown, as if something had rained on it. Glass parts were not broken. Crew retrieved parts of Surveyor III, including TV camera and soil scoop. They then retrieved solar wind composition experiment and stowed it in equipment bag, took stereo pictures near lm, and transferred all collected samples, parts, and equipment to lm. They dusted off, reentered LM, and jettisoned equipment according to plan, closing hatch by 134:82,get (2:44 am EST Nov. 20), after 3 hrs 49 min walking on lunar surface in second eva period. While lm was on moon Gordon, orbiting moon in csm, completed lunar multispectral photography experiment and photographed Wall of Theophilus and future landing sites, Fra Mauro and Descartes. Film would be analyzed to aid scientists in planning for future sample collection and in extrapolating known compositions from returned samples to parts of moon that would not be visited. At 142:04 get (9:26 am est Nov. 20) lm successfully lifted off moon after 31 hrs 31 min on lunar surface, leaving lm descent stage. Astronauts brought back 95 lbs of lunar surface samples, parts of Surveyor III, films, and miniature flags of 136 nations, 50 U.S. states, and 4 U.S. possessions. A 1.2-sec overburn of lm ascent propulsion system caused by incorrect manual switching sequence prevented automatic shutdown of engine and resulted in insertion velocity 32 fps greater than planned, placing lm in orbit with 71.4-mi (114.9-km) apolune and 10.6-mi (17.1-km) perilune. Crew quickly recognized discrepancy, manually shut down engine, and used RSC trim maneuver to enter planned orbit with 53.3-mi (85.8-km) apolune and 10.1-mi (16.3-km) perilune. Rendezvous maneuvers occurred as planned and lm docked with csm at 145:36 get (12:58 pm est Nov. 20). TV was transmitted from csm for last 24 min of rendezvous sequence. Crew transferred with samples, equipment, and film to CSM; lm ascent stage was jettisoned and intentionally crashed onto lunar surface at 5:17 pm est Nov. 20 about 44.9 mi (72.2 km) southeast of Surveyor III. Crash was detected by seismometer left on moon and produced reverberations lasting for more than 30 min. Crew made csm plane-change maneuver at 159:05 GET and took high-resolution and stereo-strip photos and tracked landmarks, to conclude planned photography of Fra Mauro, Descartes, and Lalande. antine facility (mqf) with recovery physician and technician. Crew, physician, and technician remained inside mqf until it was delivered to Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston. cm was retrieved and mated to MQF transfer tunnel on board recovery ship. From inside MQF/cm containment envelope, MQF engineer removed lunar samples and equipment through decontamination lock and cm was sealed until delivery to LRL. Sample return containers, film, and other data were flown to Pago Pago and to Houston for transport to LRL. Primary Apollo 12 mission objectives—to perform selenological inspection, survey, and sampling of mare area, deploy and activate ALSEP, develop techniques for point landing capability, develop man’s capability to work in lunar environment, and obtain photos of candidate exploration sites—were achieved. All launch vehicle and spacecraft systems performed according to plan, with only minor and corrected discrepancies. Flight crew performance was outstanding. All three crew members remained in excellent health and good spirits. Accomplishments included first use of hybrid trajectory, largest U.S. payload placed into lunar orbit (72,335 ibs after lunar orbit insertion), first demonstration of point landing capability, first use of two EVA periods, first recharge of portable life-support system, first double-core-tube sample, first return of samples from vehicle previously landed on moon, longest distance traversed on lunar surface, first multispectral photography from lunar orbit, and longest lunar mission to date. Apollo 12 was ninth Apollo mission to date, sixth manned Apollo mission, and second manned lunar landing mission. Apollo 11 (July 16—24, 1969) had proved capability to perform manned landing on moon and return and to retrieve lunar samples for study on earth. Apollo program was directed by NASA Office of Manned Space Flight; msc was responsible for Apollo spacecraft development, msfc for Saturn V launch vehicle, and ksc for launch operations. Tracking and data acquisition was managed by gsfc under overall direction of NASA Office of Tracking and Data Acquisition, (nasa Proj Off; Mission Commentary; NASA Release 69—148; FonF; NYT, 11/15—26/69; W Post, 11/15-26/69; W Star, 11/15-26/69; B Sun, 11/15-26/69) November 14: President Nixon became first President to witness space launch while in office when he, Mrs. Nixon, and daughter Tricia viewed Apollo 12 launch at ksc. President called liftoff “spectacular.” Later he addressed NASA personnel in Launch Control: “. . . I know there has been a lot of discussion as to what the future of the space program is. ... I do think you can be assured that in Dr. Paine and his colleagues you have men who are dedicated to this program, who are making the case for it ... as against other national priorities and making it very effectively. I leaned in the direction of the program before. After hearing what they have had to say with re'gard to our future plans, I must say that I lean even more in that direction. ... I realize that in those within the program . . . there are different attitudes as to what the emphasis should be, whether we should emphasize more exploration or more in taking the knowledge we have already acquired and making practical applications of it. . . . We want to have a balanced program, but most important, we are going forward. America ... is first in space.” (Carroll, B Sun, 11/15/69, Al; PD, 11/17/69, 1601-2)
Control of Azur, West German research satellite launched by NASA Nov. 7, was phased over to German control center. Turn-on and checkout of all subsystems and instruments had been completed within six days after launch. All housekeeping and scientific data values were well within expected ranges, but spurious commands had been occurring intermittently; program of protective commands had been developed to keep spacecraft in proper mode of operation, (nasa Proj Off)
Washington Sunday Star published Associated Press interview with Dr. Charles A. Berry, MSC Director of Medical Research and Operations: While 4,514 hrs of weightlessness endured by U.S. astronauts in space had produced no serious medical problems, on moon “we will be placing men in an entirely new environment.” After four days of weightlessness, they would step onto surface where gravity field was one-sixth that of earth. At Mission Control Center in Houston, Dr. Berry would be watching Apollo 11 astronauts’ heart rate, oxygen consumption, and temperature of water that cooled spacesuits. Preflight physicals had enabled doctors to draw metabolic profile of each astronaut, including work capacity on earth at various heart rates, oxygen consumption, and body heat generated. “We know the heat production level which the portable life support system can handle without being overburdened. If it reaches that point for five minutes, we will tell the astronauts to stop and rest.” Because of spacesuits’ bulk astronauts would start with simple tasks and work up to tougher ones. Excitement could affect ability to sleep in four-hour rest period planned before lunar walk. “We might have to make a real-time decision on whether to give them a sleeping pill or perhaps a stimulant.” Apollo had taught one “amazing medical fact—that the loss of red-blood-cell mass apparently is caused by a pure oxygen atmosphere.” Results of using mixed nitrogen-and-oxygen atmosphere in spacecraft since January 1967 Apollo fire had indicated nitrogen apparently protected cells. (Benedict, AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
NASA and Australian Dept, of Supply and Dept, of Education and Science announced that 210-ft-dia radiotelescope at National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Parkes, Australia, might be used to relay TV signals from moon during Apollo 11 lunar landing mission in July. Signals from Apollo 11 antennas were scheduled to be received by Goldstone Tracking Station. If mission were delayed and moon were not visible from Goldstone while TV was scheduled, signals would be received at Parkes, transmitted to Sydney, and transmitted to NASA’s Mission Control Center at Houston via Intelsat-III F—3 over Pacific. (NASA Release 69—72)
President Nixon addressed 24th session of U.N. General Assembly: “Of all man’s great enterprises, none lends itself more logically or more compellingly to international cooperation than the venture into space. Here, truly, mankind is one: as fellow creatures from the planet Earth, exploring the heavens that all of us enjoy. The journey of Apollo 11 to the moon and back was not an end, but the beginning. “There will be new journeys of discovery. Beyond this, we are just beginning to comprehend the benefits that space technology can yield here on earth. And the potential is enormous. For example, we are now developing earth resource survey satellites, with the first experimental satellite to be launched sometime early in the decade of the seventies. Present indications are that these satellites should be capable of yielding data which could assist in as widely varied tasks as these: the location of schools of fish in the oceans, the location of mineral deposits on land, the health of agricultural crops. “I feel it is only right that we should share both the adventures and the benefits of space. As an example of our plans, we have determined to take actions with regard to earth resources satellites. . . . The purpose ... is that this program will be dedicated to produce information not only for the United States, but also for the world community. We shall be putting several proposals in this respect before the United Nations, These are among the positive, concrete steps we intend to take toward internationalizing man’s epic venture into space—an adventure that belongs not to one nation but to all mankind.” (PD, 9/22/69, 1275-81)
