In Science editorial, Preston Cloud of UCLA Dept, of Geology said: “Planet Earth, seen from space, appears as a fragile and limited life-supporting system in a vast emptiness. That such a view is, in fact, an accurate one is now more widely accepted than it was not long ago, before Earth’s problems of overpopulation, overconsumption, limited resources, and environmental degradation attained the limelight. The danger is that a government and public now deluged by doomsday prophecies and bemused by equally confident reiterations that technology will cure all may hesitate in coming to grips with the problem, in the hope that, given time, it will go away.” (Science, 3/6/70, 1323) Of three supporting Aerobee 150 sounding rocket launches from WSMR two experiments were successful and were recovered. Third was recovered but pointing-control system had not trained experiment on sun. (NASA Releases 70-39, 70-28)
USN had “taken the wraps off” highly sophisticated $12-million control center being constructed for NATO comsats at Naval Radio Receiving Station near Chesapeake, Va., New York News reported. “The site joins a widespread network controlled from Supreme Headquarters, Allied Powers, Europe, in Casteau, Belgium.” (NY News, 9/9/70)
President Nixon issued statement from Key Biscayne, Fla., on future of U.S. space program: “Having completed that long stride into the future which has been our objective for the past decade, we must now define new goals which make sense for the seventies. We must build on the successes of the past, always reaching out for new achievements. But we must also recognize that many critical problems here on this planet make high priority demands on our attention and our resources. By no means should we allow our space program to stagnate. But—with the entire future and the entire universe before us—we should not try to do everything at once. Our approach to space must continue to be bold—but it must also be balanced.” General purposes of space program should be exploration, acquisition of scientific knowledge, and use of practical applications to benefit life on earth. Six objectives of space program should be lunar exploration; planetary exploration, including eventual manned Mars exploration; reduction in cost of space operations; extension of man’s capability to live and work in space; expansion of practical applications of space technology; and encouragement of greater international cooperation in space. “A program which achieves these goals will be a balanced space program. . .which will extend our capabilities and knowledge. . .and put our new learning to work for the immediate benefit of all people. As we enter a new decade, we are conscious. . .that man is also entering a new historic era. For the first time, he has reached beyond his planet; for the rest of time, we will think of ourselves as men from the planet Earth.” President Nixon said NASA Administrator, Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, had met recently with space authorities of Western Europe, Canada, Japan, and Australia to “find ways in which we can cooperate more effectively in space.” (PD, 3/9/70, 328-31)
