An Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial saluted Skylab as “a triumph of man’s ingenuity, endurance and indomitable spirit.” The May 14-June 22 Skylab 1—2 mission had been “a tremendous demonstration of why man is vital to the broad expansion of space missions that looms for the next decade, and it demonstrated on live television for every taxpayer who cared to watch exactly what the space shuttle is all about.” The first Skylab crew had salvaged 80% of a successful mission and a $2.5-billion investment from the prospects of total disaster, opened new vistas on the scientific work that could be accomplished from a space platform, and proved that man could live and work usefully for extended periods in space. (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/9/73, 7) July 9-20:	Apollo-Soyuz Test Project specialists from NASA and the Soviet Academy of Sciences met at Johnson Space Center. They continued development of trajectories and flight plans, agreed tentatively to a scientific experiment plan, and familiarized the Soviet crew of tbe July 1975 mission with the Apollo spacecraft. Participants included astp technical directors Glynn S. Lunney for the U.S. and Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev for the U.S.S.R., Apollo and Soyuz flight crews, the Working Group on Mission Model and Operational Plans, and members of the Working Group on Control and Guidance. The Soyuz cosmonauts [see May 24] attended lectures on and demonstrations of the Apollo spacecraft, docking model briefings, and crew activity discussions. Lunney and Bushuyev reviewed astp milestones and reaffirmed that they were on schedule. On July 14 the Soviet delegation heads and cosmonauts toured assembly and checkout facilities at the Rockwell International Corp. plant in Downey, Calif., where astp work was being carried out. Meeting results were announced by NASA in a July 20 communique. Progress had been reported on crew activities, control center operations, trajectories, and other operational aspects. Agreements were reached on November familiarization of the U.S. flight crews with Soyuz equipment in the U.S.S.R., a preliminary cosmonaut training plan in the U.S. in April 1974 and February 1975, and astronaut training in the U.S.S.R. in July 1974 and March 1975. The training plan was expected to be completed in November and flight procedures finalized by the end of 1974. Final selection of joint experiments would be made in October 1973. Flight safety reports would be exchanged. The U.S.S.R. had specified the Moscow Center of Control of Manned Space Flight near Moscow as astp control center and had announced that Cosmonaut Aleksey S. Yeliseyev would be U.S.S.R. flight director. The U.S. technical director and several U.S. working groups would attend U.S.S.R. ASTP meetings in October, (nasa Release 73—93; nasa Communique)
m/g John B. Hudson (usaf), Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems of Air Force Systems Command, became a lieutenant general and afsc Vice Commander. He succeeded l/g Edmund F. O’Connor, who became Vice Commander, AF Logistics Command, (afsc Newsreview 10/73, 1) October 1—6:	National Space Week was observed by 32 states to honor Nasa’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1]. The governors of the states had responded to a request by members of the Federation of Americans Supporting Science and Technology (fasst). Illinois Gov. Daniel Walker said: “The declared policy of the United States, that ‘activities of space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind,’ has established our country as the scientific and technological leader in space. NASA has coordinated the efforts of scientists and engineers in every field, the aerospace industry and educational institutions.” (fasst Release, 10/30/73) October 1—18:	A 47-member NASA delegation led by Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney met with Soviet counterparts in Moscow for two weeks of discussions of technical problems of the joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. mission scheduled for July 1975. Discussions culminated in an Oct. 18 midterm review of the project by Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, and Academician Boris N. Petrov, Chairman of the Intercosmos Council of the Soviet Academy of Sciences. Dr. Low had arrived in Moscow Oct. 14; his stay included visits to the Institute of Geochemistry, the Institute of Space Research, the Cosmonaut Training Center, and the Space Flight Control Center. In an Oct. 18 communique Dr. Low and Academician Petrov confirmed their satisfaction with the astp project status. All major milestones were being met on schedule and, Dr. Low said, progress made indicated that the scheduled launch date could be met. Soyuz orbital and Apollo docking module drawings had been exchanged and agreement had been reached that U.S. specialists would participate in preflight final checkout of flight equipment at the Soviet launch site. Specialists would be exchanged to fit-check compatible equipment at U.S. and U.S.S.R. launch sites. Academician Petrov told the press that U.S. specialists would be permitted at the Soviet launch site “up to the very minute of launching.” During the visit U.S. officials learned the deaths of three cosmonauts on Soyuz 11 June 30, 1971, were caused by accidental triggering open of an exhaust valve rather than by a hatch leak. The valve tripped open just after the reentry capsule separated from the larger orbiting module in a maneuver including firing of 12 explosive bolts. At least two crew members tried to close the valve but were unable to move fast enough. Unconsciousness from rapid decompression came in less than 10 sec; ground tests showed it would take 27 sec to close the valve by hand. U.S. officials said they were satisfied that subsequent modifications to the valve and crank mechanisms—tested on two unmanned flights, Cosmos 496 and 573, and on the manned Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 mission —were sufficient to prevent reoccurrence of the accident. (NASA Releases 73-199, 73-224; Smith, NYT, 10/19/73; jsc, astp Briefing transcript, 11/19/73; O’Toole, W Post, 10/29/73, Al; Av Wk, 11/5/73, 20-21) October 2:	NASA held three Skylab press briefings at Johnson Space Center. At a postflight crew press briefing, Skylab 3 Astronaut Alan L. Bean —who had splashed down Sept. 25, after a 59-day mission working in the Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop (launched May 14) with crew members Dr. Owen K. Garriott and Jack R. Lousma—said that the crew’s health had been “good the whole time.” Sufficient exercise, meals on time, and plenty of sleep had accounted f or their happiness and well-being. Having a scientist-astronaut aboard had created a “greater variety of interchange around the dinner table,” making “a better mission for everybody.” The mission would have been “50% less productive if Owen had not been there. He added a great amount to it . . . because his point of view is, just different.” Garriott said that a longer mission would necessitate “a somewhat less strenuous program,” but he could have spent eight hours a day at the wardroom window with a camera in each hand and a good supply of film “and never have any tendency to become bored.” Lousma said he still felt “a little less energetic” than before the mission, but within two weeks “I’ll be back to the same condition.” Dr. Willard R. Hawkins, jsc Deputy Director of Life Sciences for Medical Operations, said that the crew was “in very good shape” but still had dizziness with specific head movements. Strength of the flexor and extensor muscles had decreased 20%. The astronauts’ weights were steadily climbing toward their preflight weights. Early blood tests had shown the red cell mass was down an average of 12% for all three crew members. The blood plasma was also down 15% to 20%. In an overview of Skylab 4, the third and final manned Skylab mission, Skylab Program Office Manager Kenneth S. Kleinknecht said that the spacecraft (Command and Service Module 118) and crew members Gerald P. Carr, Dr. Edward G. Gibson, and William R. Pogue were being readied for Nov. 11 launch. Final decision on the launch date would be made after further evaluation of the mission. In preparation, 140 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment had been deleted from stowage. It had been replaced with another 150 kg (300 lbs) of operational equipment, 60 kg (130 lbs) for Skylab experiments, and 70 kg (150 lbs) of special equipment for Comet Kohoutek observations. After Oct. 8—10 flight readiness tests, only servicing, stowage, pyrotechnic installations, countdown demonstrations, and launch would remain. CSM—119, the rescue vehicle, was being prepared and would be available for a Jan. 6 launch if needed. Alfred A. Bishop, Manager of the jsc Missions Office, said that, after the first two weeks of acclimation, the Skylab 4 crew would perform 28 man-hours of experiments each day, an increase from the 19 to 221/j man-hours on Skylab 3. The increase would provide an additional 200 experiment man-hours. The crew would observe Comet Kohoutek, perform 12 experiments using the Apollo Telescope Mount, observe Mercury crossing the sun Nov. 10, observe a solar eclipse, and perform 10 to 14 new earth resources experiment package passes. (Transcripts)
The Soviet Mission Control Center at Star City, near Moscow, was described by U.S. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Director Glynn S. Lunney during a Johnson Space Center briefing on the Oct. 1-18 visit of a U.S. delegation to work with Soviet counterparts on the July 1975 joint docking mission. Soviet Mission Control was “not unlike the control centers ... in this country.” It was “characterized by consoles with some . . . large display screens down front and television display systems on the individual console.” The building housing Mission Control was in two sections. “One is sort of a wing where the main operations Control Room is and some auxiliary rooms and equipment.” Another wing held equipment for teletype, intercom, and TV. Lunney said a U.S.-built docking system and a U.S.S.R. docking system, “actually almost two docking systems, that were brought over by members of the Soviet test team,” had been undergoing tests at JSC since September. “The tests are almost complete with the mandatory test points that have to be taken. There’s a period . . . where some additional test points may be taken . . . and that will probably go on for the rest ... of November.” To date, the tests had gone smoothly. “I think what they are telling us is that the assumptions that went into the design appear to be verified and that indeed we can expect that same kind of results when we use the production hardware in the qualification test next year.” Lunney said U.S. delegates had learned that the Sept. 27-29 Soyuz 12 flight had tested fixes to the spacecraft to prevent reoccurrence of the fatal June 30, 1971, Soyuz 11 accident in which three cosmonauts died from decompression. He said that “all the fixes worked properly.” Modifications included use of spacesuits for launch and reentry, a gas supply and hose system, and a strong cap on the valve that had been triggered open accidentally; the cap now had to be fired pyrotechnically to release. Firings to separate the reentry module were modified and a manual override on the valve was made more accessible to the crew. Discussions had given “a fairly full treatment of the problem, to the point where we are satisfied that we know what happened and we know what the fixes are and they appear indeed to be very substantial.” (Transcript)
The Air Force approved the use of $38 million for initial production of jet engines for its new F—15 fighter aircraft, despite failure of the prototype engine to satisfy fully key testing requirements called for in the contract with the Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. (Getler, W Post, 4/26/73, A2) April 26:	The 19 U.S. students whose scientific experiments had been selected for the Skylab missions would help analyze and compile the data and results from earth orbit, NASA announced. Henry B. Floyd, Manager of the Skylab Student Project at Marshall Space Flight Center, had said NASA would leave everything possible to the individual student. “We are not telling the student what to do.” Each student experiment was being handled individually through principal investigators and science advisers who were expected to report results to NASA and the U.S. The students would be invited to report and exchange information at a symposium to be set up by nasa. (msfc Release 73-49) April 27:	Countdown demonstration tests were underway at Kennedy Space Center for both the Saturn V that would launch Skylab on May 14 and the smaller Saturn IB that would boost the astronauts into orbit on May 15 to join it. The solar telescope flight film had been installed in the Skylab multiple docking adapter section and the hatch closed. Reassessment and further testing of a leakage problem with an oxidizer tank bladder in the command module reaction control system had determined that the bladder was not defective. A Mission Control Center network-validation simulation was conducted at the Johnson Space Center; an orbital operations simulation had been interrupted to take advantage of late software deliveries. The Kennedy Space Center Public Information Office moved its operations to the Skylab News Center at Cape Canaveral, Fla. All ksc news activities would be conducted from there through two days after the launch of Skylab 2. (nasa Release 73-87; ksc Notice to Editors)
World Airways, Inc., dedicated its George P. Miller World Air Center Hangar, one of the world’s largest aviation buildings, at Oakland (Calif.) International Airport. The $14-million, 18 600-sq-m (200 000-sq-ft) facility had been named in honor of Rep. George P. Miller (D-Calif.), former Chairman of the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, who had been defeated in a 1972 primary, (naa News, 6/73/73, 1-2; A&A 1972) the outer solar corona, where charged particles received their final acceleration, and to demonstrate West German space technological capability. Equally funded by West Germany and the U.S., the project would be directed, after initial NASA liftoff control, by West Germany’s control center at Oberpfaffenhofen. Cochairmen of the Helios Working Group were Gilbert W. Ousley, Chief of Goddard Space Flight Center’s International Projects Office, and Ants Kutzer of the West German aerospace corporation Gesellshaft fur Weltraumforschung. (ksc Release 86-73; ksc pio)
Johnson Space Center announced the issuance of requests for proposals to build hydraulic actuators for space shuttle applications and to test them under simulated space conditions. The actuators were being considered for aerodynamics-surface and thrust-vector control on the shuttle. Proposals, leading to a firm-fixed-price research-and-development contract, were due by April 2. Work was to be concluded 12 mos after the contract award, (jsc Release 73-27) March 15-30:	Five U.S.-U.S.S.R. joint working groups met at Johnson Space Center and reached agreements on the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz Test Project. Technical specialists from each country would be in the other country’s control center during the mission and flight crews and specialists would be trained and made familiar with each country’s spacecraft and systems. Under a flammability agreement, the U.S. would provide fire resistant material for the Soviet cosmonauts’ flight clothing; the cosmonauts would use an Apollo headset in the Apollo spacecraft for communications to the Soyuz spacecraft over the Soviet communications link; the Soviet TV camera used in the Apollo spacecraft would be in a fireproof hermetically sealed container; and the still camera and film used by the cosmonauts in Apollo would be stored in a flameproof container. The U.S. would provide a 16 mm camera for Soviet use during docked operations in both Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft. Agreements were reached on the prescribed procedure if either country encountered anomalous results during test activities that concerned the other country and on mission planning for rendezvous. The groups agreed that additional testing was required on the docking seals, that the U.S. would limit Apollo control system thrusting in the roll axis to two thrusters to preclude excessive structural loads on the Soyuz spacecraft, and that an additional docking test could be performed on the second day, with the Apollo systems passive and the Soyuz active. Both countries agreed to perform and exchange safety assessments in fire, pyrotechnic devices, cabin pressure, and propulsion and control systems. The 47-man delegation of Soviet scientists and engineers included Cosmonauts Vladimir A. Shatalov and Aleksey S. Yeliseyev and the Soviet astp Technical Director, Academician Konstantin D. Bushuyev. At a March 19 press conference Bushuyev and U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney agreed that cordial, friendly, and cooperative progress was being made in planning the joint mission. Preliminary drawings of the two spacecraft had been exchanged so that mockups could be built. (C. M. Lee presentation to Aerospace Advisory Panel, 4/10/73; msc Release 73-24; jsc Roundup, 3/16/73, 1; Wilford, NYT, 3/20-73, 32; jsc pio)
Dr. Karl G. Harr, Jr., President of the Aerospace Industries Assn, of America, Inc., testified on the effects of the Apollo program before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences during NASA FY 1974 authorization hearings: Apollo “did not just sweep across our landscape to successful achievement of its specific objectives. Its effects on Earth are permanent and pervasive. Not just the hundreds of thousands of jobs it provided, the schools and homes it caused to be built, and the economic impact of the program itself; not just the invaluable accretion of scientific knowledge; not just the restoration of faith in American technological leadership—but a radical and enduring upgrading of technological capability throughout American industry. It is such advances that have enabled the United States to retain its preeminence in high technology production. And it is the continuation of such preeminence that is at stake when we consider the future of our space program.” (Transcript) April 5-26:	NASA’s Pioneer 11 (Pioneer-G), second Jupiter probe, was successfully launched into an excellent trajectory from Eastern Test Range at 9:11 pm est by a three-stage Atlas-Centaur-TE.........M-364—4 launch vehjcle. Eighteen hundred persons watched the nighttime launch after touring the Kennedy Space Center Flight Training and Vehicle Assembly Buildings, where Skylab was being prepared for a mid-May launch. Pioneer 11 sped away from earth at a velocity of 51 800 km per hr (32 200 mph), equaling the speed of Pioneer 10 (launched March 2, 1972, and still heading toward Jupiter), which flew faster than any previous man-made object. The primary objective was to obtain precursory scientific information beyond the Mars orbit with emphasis on investigation of the interplanetary medium during the 609- to 825-day journey, the Asteroid Belt, and Jupiter and its environment. The secondary objective was to advance the technology for long-duration flights to the outer planets. The 259-kg (570-lb) spin-stabilized spacecraft carried 12 scientific experiments to measure magnetic fields, plasma, cosmic rays and charged particles; the electromagnetic radiation in the ultraviolet, visible, and infrared ranges; and the asteroid-meteoroid population. During the encounter trajectory with Jupiter, the spacecraft would provide the best possible information on the radiation environment, provide good viewing conditions of Jupiter before periapses, and obtain a short occultation of the spacecraft by Jupiter. The spacecraft also carried a pictorial plaque identical to the one carried on Pioneer 10 for identification of its origin by any possible intelligent beings of another solar system. Six hours following launch the large number of thruster pulses used to precess the spacecraft and point the antenna toward the sun provided the impulse to deploy fully one of the two radioisotope thermoelectric generators that had failed to deploy completely at first. The magnetometer boom was deployed and the spin rate stabilized at 5.4 rpm. On April 6 four science instruments—the helium vector magnetometer, charged particles experiment, geiger tube telescope, and meteoroid, detector—were turned on. An April 11 midcourse correction moved the target point at Jupiter from slightly ahead of the planet as it moved on its orbit, and above the equatorial plane, to slightly behind the planet and below the equator. The adjusted course would allow several mission choices: to make an equatorial pass either close to or distant from the planet to inspect one or more of its moons; to pass over the flattened pole of the planet; to fly on to Saturn in 1980; or, like Pioneer 10, to leave the solar system and escape into interstellar space. The option chosen would depend on Pioneer 10 findings during its pass of Jupiter in December. Nine of the twelve experiments were turned on and were operating normally.	. The control center for Pioneer 11 was transferred April 16 from Jet Propulsion Laboratory to the Pioneer Missions Operations Center at Ames Research Center. On April 26 Pioneer 11, traveling at 9.34 km per sec (20 900 mph), was 14 350 000 km (8 920 000 mi) from the earth. A second midcourse correction was made. The operation of all spacecraft subsystems was normal and 11 of the 12 experiments were transmitting good data. Six to seven hits had been recorded by the meteoroid detector. The infrared radiometer remained to be turned on. The spacecraft was expected to enter the Asteroid Belt in August 1973 and reach Jupiter in December 1974. The Pioneer program, begun in 1958, was directed by Ames Research Center. Pioneer 6 and 7 (launched Dec. 16, 1965, and Aug. 17, 1966, to study the heliocentric space environment) and Pioneer 8 and 9 (launched Dec. 13, 1967, and Nov. 8, 1968, to study interplanetary phenomena) continued to supply data from heliocentric orbit on solar plasma, magnetic and electric fields, and cosmic rays. (NASA prog off; nasa Releases 73-41, 73-72; arc Release 73-43; icsc Release 61—73)
