U.S.S.R. flight controllers for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project began two weeks training at Johnson Space Center in preparation for the July 1975 mission. Some 20 Soviet controllers attended sessions on Apollo trajectory, spacecraft systems and communications, docking module, Mission Control Center operations, and contingency flight planning. (jsc Release 74-264; NASA Release 74-284; JSC Roundup, 8 Nov 74)
Ames Research Center scientist Dr. Theodore Wydeven, Jr., had developed a new technique for coating salt lenses, NASA announced. Lenses made from large salt crystals had long been used in scientific applications because they were transparent to infrared light, but they were susceptible to fogging from even slight moisture. Using a method from his water purification experiments, Dr. Wydeven had prepared a Teflon-like membrane in an electric discharge to coat a salt lens, at a few cents a coating. The coating increased resistance to moisture and enhanced optical quality of the lens because of the film’s antireflection properties. (nasa Release 74—319) 10-hr procedural simulation of the launches of the Apollo and Soyuz spacecraft, with exchange of status reports and data on spacecraft position, was held at JSC the third day. The first JSC Mission Control Center simulation with Apollo crewmen was scheduled for mid-February 1975, with the first all-up simulation with both control centers and both Apollo and Soyuz crews in late March 1975. (jsc Release 74—275; Chriss, LA Times, 24 Dec 74, 8; JSC pio, interview, 15 Sept 75)
Dr. George M. Low, NASA Deputy Administrator, signed a NASA and Soviet Academy of Sciences agreement on news coverage of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project flight, scheduled for July 1975. The agreement brought a protest from Associated Press President and General Manager J. Wes Gallagher because it excluded American newsmen from the Soviet launching. In a 23 Oct. letter to Gallagher, Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, stated that, while the Soviets were adamant on this question, they had otherwise agreed to provide “the most complete, Comprehensive release ever to the U.S. news media of real-time information related to a Soviet space mission.” The agreement, Dr. Fletcher noted, covered joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. activities while recognizing the right of each nation to establish policies for their respective independent activities. The U.S. would not exclude Soviet newsmen from the U.S. liftoff. The Public Affairs Agreement provided that, beginning with the Soyuz launch and ending with the Apollo recovery, onboard information from both spacecraft, voice communications between the spacecraft, and ground communications with both spacecraft, as well as ground-based and onboard TV, would be exchanged immediately. The first real-time TV coverage of a Soviet launch would be released to the West. Factual information on joint activities would be released immediately. Lines from the U.S. public affairs center in Moscow would communicate with technical specialists in the Soviet mission control center. For the first time, Soviet commentators would be at the Soviet control center and launch site during mission operations to describe countdown, launch, and mission events as they occurred, for immediate release, (nasa Int Aff, interview, 30 Sept 75; AP, NYT, 12 Oct 74, 2; 24 Oct 74, 9; NASA press conf transcript, 12 Nov 74)
President Ford as a Congressman had been a “staunch defender of space spending” whenever critics suggested cuts in NASA’s budget, the San Diego Union reported. As minority leader, Ford had declared that the space program could be justified by its spinoffs. In April 1972, Ford had defended a $200-million space shuttle appropriation because he had believed that its loss would end the space program. (Macomber, SD Union, 8 Sept 74,19) With President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Mstislav V. Keldysh, Dr. Fletcher visited the space flight control center near Moscow, from which the ASTP mission would be controlled in July 1975. Dr. Fletcher also visited the cosmonaut training center and the Apollo-Soyuz laboratory center with the head of the Intercosmos Council, Academician Boris N. Petrov, and discussed Soviet-American cooperation in exploration and peaceful uses of outer space with Deputy Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers Vladimir A. Kirillin, (nasa Off of Admin, Daily Appointments Calendar; Tass, fbis-Sov, 12 Sept 74, U1; 13 Sept 74, U1)
Skylab . . . has demonstrated that this nation is capable of conducting broader and more useful beneficial activities in space that directly relate to our own planet Earth,” Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said at a postrecovery press briefing at Johnson Space Center. It had “moved the space program from the realm of the spectacular into a new phase that can be characterized ... as almost businesslike if not yet quite routine.” The Skylab experience was necessary for the future in space and had confirmed that NASA was proceeding in the right direction with development of the space shuttle. Skylab Program Director William C. Schneider said 30 earth resources passes had been planned and 39 accomplished during the Skylab 4 mission. There had been 350 hrs of Apollo Telescope Mount observations planned and 338 hrs completed. Observations of Comet Kohoutek included 13 by the Apollo Telescope Mount and 111 by other instruments. All 28 planned corollary experiments and all major medical and student experiments had been completed. Original planning had called for 140 days in orbit for the three manned missions; 172 were accomplished. Skylab’s greatest achievement “was to prove . . . there is no limit in our space research”; the limit “is only our resolve, not our ability to do work, not the ability of men to work and not our technical knowledge.” (Transcript)
John M. Thole had been appointed Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science effective 1 Sept., NASA announced. Thole would succeed Vincent L. Johnson, who had retired. Former project manager for the Applications Technology Satellite at Goddard Space Flight Center, Thole had joined gsfc in 1960 and had held a variety of project management positions since that time, (nasa Ann, 26 Aug 74) 26 August-20 September: Thirty NASA engineers and technicians met with U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences counterparts in Moscow as joint preparations for the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project’s July 1975 flight continued. On 8 Sept, another group of 47 specialists and engineers headed by U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney arrived in Moscow for 2 weeks of meetings with the Soviet group headed by U.S.S.R. Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev. The project directors announced plans for joint prelaunch tests at the U.S. launch site 1-8 Feb. 1975 and at the U.S.S.R. launch area 5-13 May 1975. Flight crews and technical specialists from both countries would participate. Soviet specialists also announced plans to fly a manned Soyuz mission to test ASTP-related systems. NASA would be informed of further details before the flight to permit tracking. Thirteen U.S. flight controllers were also spending two Weeks in Moscow beginning 15 Sept., meeting with Soviet controllers for familiarization and training, including briefings on Soviet Mission Control Center operations, Soyuz spacecraft systems, and the mission flight plan, (jsc astp Press Communique, 20 Sept 74; jsc Roundup, 13 Sept 74; jsc Release 74-250) year in space. Dr. G. D. Whedon of the National Institutes of Health stated that weightlessness could threaten capable musculo-skeletal functions during space flights lasting up to three years unless measures could be developed to prevent significant losses of calcium, phosphorus, and nitrogen. Continued loss of calcium could cause astronauts to break their backs or legs and could promote formation of kidney stones. Dr. William E. Thornton, life scientist in the jsc Astronaut Office, reported that by Mission Day 3 all Skylab crewmen had lost more than 2000 cc (2 qts) of extravascular fluid from calf and thigh; at recovery, a sharp reversal was noted. The Thornton team suggested that the reason for the shift was the intrinsic and unopposed lower limb elasticity, which forced venous blood and other fluids toward the head. Other investigators reported that such cardiovascular changes as the heart’s decreased ventricular size and the suppression of red blood cell production was the body’s accommodation to weightlessness. These physiological changes had been the expected response to a lack of exertion; they reversed after the astronauts’ return to earth, (jsc Roundup, 30 Aug 74,1-2; JSC proj off, interview, 12 Aug 75; Altman, NYT, 1 Sept 74,14)
The Navy had selected International Business Machines Corp. Electronic Systems Center as prime contractor for the light airborne multipurpose system (lamps) helicopter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Under a $13.8-million contract, IBM would develop and test a prototype antisubmarine warfare and avionics and weapon control system for installation and integration in a helicopter furnished by the Navy. (Av Wk, 8 April 74,24) 8 April-3 May: Some 75 Soviet aerospace specialists—including U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project Technical Director Konstantin D. Bushuyev, prime crewmen Aleksey A. Leonov and Valery N. Kubasov, Flight Director Aleksey S. Yeliseyev, and training officer for astp crews Valery F. Bykovsky—joined U.S. astp astronauts and specialists at Johnson Space Center to continue technical discussions and planning for the July 1975 joint astp mission. Agreement was reached that specialists and flight crews would visit the U.S. launch site in February 1975 and the U.S.S.R. launch site in May 1975, for familiarization with the spacecraft and to test compatible equipment. NASA had defined no technical need for U.S. representatives at the Soviet launch site during actual liftoff; U.S. specialists would be in the control center. Apollo docking module and Soyuz life-support-system tests were reviewed, in addition to safety assessment reports on control systems and spacecraft manufacturing test and checkout. Schedules for each of the five joint experiments—ultraviolet absorption, biological interaction, microbial exchange, multipurpose furnace, and artificial solar eclipse— were approved. Agreement was also reached on the basic approach and content of the joint flight readiness review, to be held in May 1975. The U.S.S.R. crew and U.S. astp Astronauts Thomas P. Stafford, Vance D. Brand, and Donald K. Slayton walked through hundreds of procedures for the first time as crews, to verify the integrity of the docking module that would connect the Soyuz and Apollo command and service modules. At a 26 April press conference Stafford demonstrated his proficiency in the Russian language by answering newsmen’s questions in Russian. Cosmonauts and astronauts agreed that “we’ve no problem in language.” One cosmonaut said, “Our work is considerably better when the American crew speaks Russian and our crew speaks English.” Glynn S. Lunney, astp Technical Director for the U.S., said during a 3 May press briefing that the work in the U.S. and jointly was on schedule. The progress “has been good and . . . gratifying.” Prof. Bushuyev said that “there can be no longer any doubt that we will be successful in preparing for and achieving our joint flight in July 1975.” (jsc Roundup, 12 April 74, 1; astp Communique; Press briefing transcripts, 26 April 74, 3 May 74)
Japan successfully launched Tansei 2 experimental MS-T2 satellite from Kagoshima Space Center, Uchinoura, on a three-stage MU—3C booster at 2:00 pm local time (1:00 am edt) after a two-day postponement because of bad weather. A thrust-vector-control system had been installed on the 2nd stage of the booster to stabilize its flight. The improved version of the four-stage MU-4S was the first guided booster Japan had used. The satellite entered orbit with a 3229-km apogee, 283-km perigee, 121.7-min period, and 31.2° inclination, kyodo news service reported the objective was “to test the control devices and not for scientific observation.” Tansei 2, named “Light Blue” for the Univ. of Tokyo colors, was Japan’s fifth satellite and third test satellite. Ohsumi (launched 11 Feb. 1970) and Tansei 1 (launched 16 Feb. 1971) were test satellites returning performance data. Shinsei (launched 28 Sept. 1971) had carried instruments to study cosmic rays and electric waves, and Denpa (Radio Explorer Satellite launched 19 Aug. 1972) had carried instruments to probe the ionosphere, (gsfc SSR, 28 Feb 74; FBis-Japan, 22 Feb 74, 13-14; A&A 1971) The Italian-built 170-kg San Marco 4 carried three experiments: an Italian density-drag accelerometer to measure atmospheric drag, a U.S. omegatyon to measure the temperature and density of thermosphere molecular nitrogen, and a U.S. neutral mass spectrometer to measure primary constituents of the neutral atmosphere. Data gathered by San Marco 4 in the equatorial zone and Explorer 51 in the auroral zone would provide a good picture of the effects of magnetic storms on the thermosphere and differences in the thermosphere’s response to energy coming from the sun to the poles and the equator. The omegatron experiment was activated 19 Feb. and the neutral mass spectrometer 22 Feb. By 26 Feb. both instruments were acquiring worthwhile scientific data. The Italian density-drag accelerometer, activated shortly after launch but not performing properly, was being investigated. All spacecraft systems were functioning as planned. San Marco 4 was the fourth satellite launched under cooperative agreements between NASA and the Italian Space Commission. San Marco 1 was launched 15 Dec. 1964; San Marco 2, 26 April 1967; and San Marco 3, 24 April 1971. Under the latest agreement, signed 6 Aug. 1973, Italy had designed and built the spacecraft, provided one experiment, and conducted launch operations. The U.S. provided the Scout booster, two experiments, technical consultation, launch crew training, and spacecraft tracking and data acquisition, (nasa mors, 15, 26 Feb 74; NASA Releases 74-30,74-39) 18 February—6 March: Thomas L. Gatch ’was lost at sea while attempting the first transatlantic balloon flight. Gatch lifted off from Harrisburg, Pa., 18 Feb. in a two-meter sealed gondola, the Light Heart, suspended from 10 helium-filled balloons. He hoped to reach 12 000-m altitude and ride the jet-stream winds across the Atlantic to Europe, but changes in air currents pushed him south of his planned course. Radio contact was made with Gatch 19 Feb. by an airliner 1600 km east northeast of Puerto Rico. He was spotted at 305-m altitude 21 Feb. by a Liberian ship 1670 km off the coast of Africa. Further inconsistent and unconfirmed radio contacts and sightings made tracking Gatch’s balloon difficult. After reports of a sighting on the Spanish Sahara, the Spanish Foreign Legion searched the 480-km Moroccan-Spanish Sahara border for two days, while U.S. military aircraft and ships were put on lookout. The Dept, of Defense ordered an intensive visual radar and radio search 1 March of the Atlantic Ocean 1530 km west of Africa, but the search was given up 6 March after exploration of 578 000 sq km of ocean. (W Star-News, 18, 22, 26 Feb. 74; W Post, 25 Feb, 2, 7 March 74; B Sim, 21,25 Feb 74) _
