NASA reported that its Nimbus 6 had helped rescue from the Atlantic off Iceland a 2-man balloon crew attempting a transatlantic flight. The balloonists—Maxie Anderson, 44, and Ben Abruzzo, 47 — were unharmed after an after-sunset pickup Sept. 12 by a USAF helicopter. They had lifted off Sept. 9 near Bedford, Mass., carrying a compact satellite-tracking unit giving out signals received by the satellite and relayed to GSFC, which plotted the balloon’s location and forwarded it to the control center at Bedford. The balloon ran into a snowstorm that blew it off course and broke radio contact; it splashed down 1930km (1200mi) short of its target in France. The crew owned the balloon, gondola, and tracking equipment, the latter purchased from a commercial firm. GSFC had cooperated earlier in search-and-rescue tests of the tracking unit. (NASA Release 77-190)
JSC announced it had signed a supplemental agreement with Rockwell Inti. Corp. for engineering-change orders on the Space Shuttle orbiter. The supplement, valued at about $226 million, would bring the value of the Rockwell contract to about $3.2 billion. The supplement would cover changes such as addition of lightning protection, payload and systems integration, avionics changes, provision of spares, and support of the carrier aircraft during ALT. (JSC Release 77-76) JSC announced it had signed a contract modification with Ford Aerospace covering hardware and software systems engineering, plus maintenance and operation of JSC’s mission control center and other ground-based data systems. The modification, valued at more than $1.4 million, would bring the value of the Ford contract to about $51.3 billion. (JSC Release 77-77)
United Nations Secretary-General Kurt Waldheim and delegates from 14 nations had recorded messages to be carried with music and natural sounds on a copper phonograph record by the Voyagers scheduled for launch from Cape Canaveral Aug. 20 and Sept. 1, Today newspaper reported. Messages were from Australia, Canada, the U.S., Chile, France, Belgium, Austria, Sweden, Egypt, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Iran, Pakistan, and Indonesia. They included poems in French and Swedish, a passage from the Koran in Arabic, and various texts in Esperanto, English, Flemish, German, Spanish, Persian, Urdu, Indonesian, the Creole language of Sierra Leone, and the Efik language of Nigeria. In his message, Waldheim said: “As the Secretary General of the United Nations, an organization of 147 member states who represent almost all of the human inhabitants of the planet Earth, I send greetings on behalf of the people of our planet. We step out of our solar system into the universe seeking only peace and friendship, to teach if we are called upon, to be taught if we are fortunate.” NASA spokesman Timothy Ferris said the messages, aimed at extraterrestrial intelligences, would be “like a note in a bottle for the extraterrestrials, if they exist.” Voyager 1, which would reach Jupiter in 1979 and Saturn in 1980, would pass out of the solar system several yr later. (Today, June 3/77, 10A; NYT, June 3/77, A4)
Johnson Space Center confirmed that NASA would turn off science instruments on the lunar surface and would dismantle the JSC control center for Apollo lunar-surface experiment packages (ALSEP) as of Sept. 30. The five stations still operating were put there by Apollo missions 12, 14, 15, 16, and 17. In July 1969 the original moonwalkers of Apollo 11 had left behind a prototype station with a design life of only 14 days; it had survived for 45 days and quit when its power supply failed. Specifications for the remaining five had included a lyr design life for 4, and 2yr for the Apollo 17 station; the Apollo 12 station was “well into its eighth year,” NASA noted. Built to record and transmit long-term lunar-surface data, the stations with their long life had provided researchers with a real bonus: instead of data from only one seismometer at a time, for instance, the group had operated as a sensor network, greatly enhancing available information on the moon’s internal temperature and magnetic field, charged particles in its environment, and especially moonquakes and meteoroid impacts. Although the experiments would be terminated, the transmitters would continue to operate, serving earth as an astronomy reference point. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory would use the signals in deep space work such as astrometrics and spacecraft navigation or monitoring the motion of the lunar orbit against a background of extragalactic stars to test gravity theories. The lunar stations had had problems: The Apollo 14 ALSEP ran for 4yr, quit for 2 days in March 1975, started up again, and had repeated this 6 times since. Understanding the trouble (temperature fluctuations resulting from the sun’s position had caused short circuits) would help in designing future science stations. (JSC Release 77-47; NASA Release 77-203)
JSC reported it had modified its mission control center to use solar power for dehumidifying the building. Solar panels installed on the roof would provide heat 60% of the time, according to weather calculations for the Houston area, and would save about 1.5 million ft3 of natural gas per yr at a construction cost of about $240 000. The modification was part of a joint NASA/DOE solar-energy demonstration project. (JSC Release 77-86)
JSC reported that its engineers had designed, built, and installed an emergency communications console at the medical center in Odessa, Texas, control center for the 17-county Permian Basin emergency medical system. The prototype console would allow physicians and nurses to consult with paramedics in the field, receive incoming electrocardiograms, set up radio-to-telephone patches, page hospital staff members, and automatically dial special care centers and other facilities in the area. After field tests and modification, JSC engineers would make console plans available to interested communities, according to a NASA announcement. (JSC Release 77-27; NASA Release 77-86)
NASA launched Italy’s first experimental domestic comsat SIRIO from ETR at 7:50pm EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 37 670km apogee, 229.7km perigee, and 23° inclination. At 10:57am EDT on Aug. 27, its apogee boost motor fired it into a near-circular orbit where it would drift by Sept. 8 to a station on the equator above the west coast of Africa at about 15°W. NASA would transfer operation to the Telespazio VHF/SHF control center at Fucino, Italy, about 45 days after launch. Italy’s National Research Council (CNR) would reimburse NASA for the cost of the launch vehicle and support services, estimated at $15.7 million, as agreed in March 1975. The Satellite Italiano Richerche Industriale Orientata (industrial research-oriented Italian satellite), 2m (6.5ft) high and 1.4m (4.6ft) in diameter, weighing 398kg (8781b) at liftoff, would transmit TV and voice data at super high frequencies (SHF) from Europe to North America in adverse weather conditions. The project had begun in 1969 as part of an ELDO program, specifically to carry out a communications experiment in the 12 and 18GHz bands proposed by Prof. Francesco Carassa of Milan Polytechnic Inst. The idea of using higher frequency ranges (30 to 60GHz) because of overcrowding on conventional frequencies had offered the advantages of greatly increased traffic in communications, less interference with present ground and satellite communications, and the use of small ground terminals. The Compagnia Industriale Aerospaziale (CIA) had designed and developed the spacecraft and was responsible for system management and orbit operations. Defense/Space Daily said the original Aug. 17 launch date had slipped because of possible interference between the SIRIO antenna and the third-stage system that might hinder separation. The NY Times said that “adverse wind conditions” Aug. 16 that delayed a test launch of the Navy’s Trident missile had automatically postponed the SIRIO launch. AvWk said that the SIRIO launch was important to Italy not only technically but also politically: it said NASA officials believed major changes would have occurred in the Italian government if the spacecraft had failed. (NASA Release 77-152; KSC Release 140-77; MOR 492-209-77-01 [prelaunch] Aug 9/77, [postlaunch] Nov 9/77; D/SD, Aug 22/77, 275; NYT, Aug 17/77, A-ll; A VWk, Sept 5/77, 23)
NASA announced plans to join with the Energy Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in a program to use solar energy for heat and hot water supply at 6 space centers from Va. to Calif. NASA would invest $500 000 and ERDA $1.25 million in up to 10 separate projects that had been scheduled for completion at NASA facilities by the end of the fiscal year, Oct. 1977. The programs could reduce utility bills by up to a quarter million dollars/yr. Five of the solar projects, all at MSFC, would heat an office building; heat liquid nitrogen to a gas, for experiments and manufacturing at 2 MSFC facilities; supply hot water for the cafeteria and restrooms in a 10-story building; and heat a warehouse used for storing hydraulic equipment. Other projects would supply hot water for cafeterias at Dryden Flight Research Center in Calif, and KSC in Fla.; hot water for photo labs at Ames Research Center in Calif, and LaRC in Va.; and heat and dehumidification for areas containing sensitive computer and other electronic equipment in the mission control center at JSC in Tex. NASA would also provide funds for 5 smaller solar heat projects at ARC, KSC, and MSFC, to be operational by the end of Aug. The program should demonstrate the possibility of offsetting the comparatively high initial cost of solar energy systems through substantial savings on oil, gas, and electrical energy. (NASA Release 77-15; MSFC Release 77-15; ERDA Release 77-18)
FBIS reported that the USSR had launched space station Salyut 6 into an orbit with 275km apogee, 219km perigee, 89.1min period, 51.6° inclination. A control center near Moscow would process information from the station aided by tracking stations on Soviet territory and on Soviet Academy of Sciences ships in the Atlantic. Onboard systems were functioning normally. (FBIS, Tass in English, Sept 29/77) •
