NASA announced appointment of Neil Hutchinson, Charles Lewis, and Donald Puddy, all of JSC’s Flight Operations Directorate, as flight directors at JSC for the first manned Shuttle-orbital flight, to plan and direct activities of the Mission Control Center during real-time Shuttle operations. They also would be responsible for integrating inputs from all elements of NASA, contractors, and the scientific communities. Hutchinson would manage all activities associated with the Shuttle-ascent phase; Lewis, the on-orbit phase; and Puddy, the orbiter reentry phase. All had served as flight directors during Apollo and Skylab missions. (JSC Release 78-16; JSC Roundup, Mar 31/78, 1)
Five European and U.S. scientists named in July as experimenters on NASA/ESA’s first Spacelab mission would begin training in the U.S. in Jan. 1979, NASA announced. The training tour, taking them to seven U.S. and two Canadian cities, would prepare them to operate equipment for scientific investigations that would fly aboard the Space Shuttle in 1981. Selection and training of these scientists to fly in space had been a departure from earlier NASA practice, as they were not career astronauts and had been chosen for the mission by the scientists who devised the experiments. This was also the first time that Western Europeans would fly in space, and the first time that NASA would orbit people who were not U.S. nationals. Of the five persons training for the mission, two—a European and an American—would actually fly on Spacelab 1; the others would operate ground-based experiment equipment and support the two in orbit. The chosen five had just returned from Europe where they had been since Oct. learning to operate the experiments chosen for Spacelab by European scientists. The science payload was about equally divided between NASA and ESA experiments in terms of weight, power, and volume requirements. Areas of investigation would include stratosphere and upper-atmosphere physics, materials processing, space-plasma physics, biology, medicine, astronomy, solar physics, earth observations, and technology areas such as thermodynamics and lubrications. MSFC would manage training in the U.S. as part of its overall responsibility for the first three Spacelab missions; ESA had managed the training in Europe. (NASA Release 78-198) During December: NASA announced it had silenced the scientific instruments aboard the orbiting solar observatory Oso 8 by radio command sent from Goddard Space Flight Center to NASA’s tracking station in Orroral, Australia, on the satellite’s orbit no. 18 072. A few moments later the Australia station confirmed that the satellite’s radio transmission had stopped. Last of the “sunshine” satellites that had begun investigating the sun with the launch of Oso 1 in 1962, Oso 8 (launched from Cape Canaveral June 21, 1975) had surpassed its 1-yr design lifetime by 2yr. It had far exceeded all prelaunch mission objectives, and had obtained the most accurate observations yet of the solar chromosphere and transition regions, giving scientists a better understanding of these. Dr. Roger Thomas, Oso 8 project scientist at GSFC, said that the lessons learned from 16yr of OSO satellites had been instrumental in developing new experiments for future studies of the sun such as next yr’s solar maximum mission. Four of the eight experiments aboard the 1064kg Oso 8 had been designed to measure the sun during the quiet (solar minimum) period. Solar activity had increased substantially, and the solar-science community was preparing to study a period of maximum solar activity, in part through launch of the solar maximum mission in Oct. 1979. The nonsolar high-energy astrophysics experiments on Oso 8 also had made significant observations of the celestial sphere. These experiments had been superseded by Sas 3, Heao 1, and Heao 2. The Oso 8 control center at GSFC would be reconfigured to support the SMM mission. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
NASA announced that, as of Oct. 1, it had transferred the USNS Vanguard, which had supported Apollo, Skylab, and Apollo-Soyuz manned-spaceflight missions for 12yr and was last of an original 5-ship tracking and reentry-coverage flotilla, back to the U.S. Navy for navigation and ocean survey work. Vanguard, built by General Dynamics Corp.’s Quincy, Mass., shipyards and commissioned Oct. 15, 1966, had been the last of three identical ships (Mercury, Redstone, Vanguard) specifically designed for and dedicated to manned spaceflight support. The ships had demonstrated their versatility by supporting automated scientific-satellite missions and their extensive capabilities, functioning as well as any ground tracking station. The Mission Control Center at Houston had transmitted and received voice commands, biomedical data, spacecraft-environment reports, and command/control functions directly through the ship, which had formed part of a tracking network to ensure communications with spacecraft out of contact with land tracking stations. Space Tracking and Data Network (STDN) veterans estimated that fully half the Vanguard’s NASA lifetime had been spent in a mission-support status, the rest being in port, yard repair, or transit time. (NASA Release 78-157)
NASA announced it had signed a $77 million contract with General Electric Space Division to build Landsat-D, most advanced earth-resources-monitoring satellite system to date, scheduled for launch in 1981 to view the earth from more than 640km (400mi) altitude. In addition to a multispectral scanner (MSS) like that on the first three Land-sats, Landsat-D would carry a thematic mapper (TM) with spatial resolution three times as detailed as that of MSS. The new sensor could distinguish area features as small as 0.2-acre instantaneous field-of-view (IFOV) compared to the 1.2-acre IFOV resolution of present systems. The cost included a $5 million fee with possible additional earnings up to $4.3 million, depending on system performance once the satellite was in orbit. The contract included a backup spacecraft, data management system, operations control center at GSFC, transportable ground station, and a Landsat assessment system to demonstrate advantages of the TM over the MSS. Landsat data had served primarily for monitoring earth resources and managing food, fiber, and water resources; mineral and petroleum explorations; and landcover and land-use mapping. The U.S. Depts. of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and State, and a number of states and foreign governments would participate in the Landsat-D mission. (NASA Release 78-188).
NASA announced it had selected General Electric Co., Valley Forge, Pa., to provide a Landsat-D mission system consisting of a flight segment (and backup) and a ground segment that would include a data management system, an operations control center, a Landsat assessment system, and a transportable ground station, all to be managed by GSFC. General Electric would fabricate the mission-unique equipment and integrate and test the flight segments, as well as build and install the ground segment in government facilities. Proposed cost of the cost-plus-award-fee contract was approximately $70.5 million, to cover the Landsat-D launch in late 1981 and early orbital operations. The thematic mapper (TM) in Landsat-D’s instrument module, a second-generation 7-band multispectral scanning radiometer with a ground resolution of about 30m (100ft), could extend the inventorying of earth resources. NASA had designed Landsat-D to improve activities such as crop forecasting, vegetation-health assessment, forest- and range-resources management, water-resources management, land-use mapping, and mineral exploration. (NASA Release 78-102)
