NASA announced that proposals for establishing a space telescope institute in the United States were due March 3 at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). The institute, at a sight to be chosen [see November 18, 1979], would be a national facility for receiving and evaluating data from the space telescope and should be fully operational in the early 1980s. It would be responsible for selecting and supporting users of the telescope; science planning and scheduling; routine console operations; and data archiving, calibration, and analysis. The winning contractor would staff and operate a science support center at GSFC and would staff the institute with personnel and facilities needed to house and support principal investigators and general observers. The space telescope itself, scheduled for launch in 1983 or 1984, would observe about 350 times the volume of space visible from ground-based observatories. The data it acquired would go through a tracking and data-relay satellite to a control center at GSFC, then to the science institute for processing and analysis. The telescope should remain in orbit until the end of the century, visited at 30-month intervals by astronauts from the Space Shuttle to perform maintenance and replace instrumentation. If needed, the Shuttle could return it to Earth at five-year intervals for major repair, which would take about 1 year, then could launch it again. Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) would be project manager for the space telescope; GSFC would manage the on-board instrumentation and the science institute; the Headquarters Office of Space would have overall responsibility for the program. (NASA Release 80-1)
INTELSAT said that the full launch sequence for Intelsat 5A F2, world’s largest and most advanced commercial communications satellite, was completed successfully December 10 when the craft unfolded its antennas upon command from the Washington, D.C., control center relayed through a ground station at Fucino, Italy. Launched December 6 on an Atlas Centaur into a highly elliptical orbit, the satellite went into near-circular orbit when the apogee motor was fired December 8. For the next two days the control center staff had been activating it into operational configuration, unfurling its giant 51-foot (15.6-meter) solar arrays and locking its sensors on the Earth, spinning up the momentum wheel to stabilize it facing Earth’s surface. Final operation was antenna deployment. Intelsat 5A F2 would now drift in equatorial orbit to its station as primary Atlantic Ocean communications satellite by May 1981, when it would begin serving as communications link between the western hemisphere and Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. (INTELSAT Release 80-29-1)
FBIS carried Tass and other Soviet news reports on the flight of Salyut 6 and Soyuz 35 with cargo ship Progress 9. On May 2, cosmonauts Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, in their fourth week of flight, used “bilateral television communication” to visit with their families who had come to the mission control center. A May 6 report said that for the first time in manned space flight the crew had pumped water from the freight ship to containers on the station, using a system called Rodnik. The crew had completed unloading the food, regenerators, and fresh equipment from Progress 9 and refueled the joint propulsion unit; they would use the cargo ship to dispose of used material. On May 8, the chief of the aerogeology organization said Ryumin and Popov before the launch of Soyuz 35 had flown over certain linear and ring geological structures to acquire data for comparison with satellite observations; the Soyuz 26 crew (Romanenko and Grechko) had identified 25 such structures in the Soviet Union that proved to contain mineral deposits. By May 13 the crew repaired the on-board videotape recorder and replaced a motor in the biogravistat and a filter in the gas analyzer; some items would be returned to Earth for study. On May 16 they were putting plant sprouts in various stages of development into a special solution for study on Earth; they also used the Progress 9 propulsion unit for another orbit adjustment. The cargo ship separated from the orbital complex May 20 at 21:15 hours Moscow time; on May 22 ground command switched on its engine, and it “ceased to exist” upon entering the atmosphere. The next big event was launch at 21:21 hours Moscow time May 26 of Soyuz 36 carrying veteran Valery Kubasov and Bertalan Farkas, first Hungarian cosmonaut, to join Popov and Ryumin who had occupied Salyut 6 since April 9. Docking occurred at 22:56 hours Moscow time, and the visitors went aboard Salyut for a 7-day program of international research. Kubasov and Farkas would return to Earth in Soyuz 35, leaving Soyuz 36 for later use. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 2-27/80)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Southern Pacific Communications Company (SPC) had applied to the FCC for authority to build a domestic communications satellite system starting with two satellites in orbit and a third maintained as a spare. Capacity of the system would exceed that of any other domestic system now in orbit or in construction; each proposed satellite would have twice the capacity of the largest communications satellite now in domestic service (AT&T’s Comsat or RCA’s Satcom) and a voice or digital-data capacity 60% higher than Western Union’s Westar. SPC predicted that the demand for transponders would triple between 1980 and 1985 and said that no existing or planned system would be adequate to provide SPC with the capacity it would need by mid-decade. It had petitioned earlier to deny requests of RCA for orbit slots at 132 °W and 83 °W, of Western Union for 83 °W, and Hughes for 79 °W and 75 °W. Given authority to orbits its satellites at 132° and 83 °W, with assignment of a third slot at 79 °W, the company said it would provide service to all 50 states, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. It would also build a control center in Maryland and launch its communications satellite in 1982-1983. {AvWk, Mar 31/80)
