NASA transferred operation and management of its Landsat system to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NESDIS) during ceremonies at Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC). Beginning in 1972 with the launch of Landsat 1 (Erts 1, the Earth-resources technology satellite), the Landsat program was a research and development effort to determine the usefulness of satellite multispectral data from synoptic views of the Earth’s surface for agricultural and urban planning, geologic exploration, land management, and snowmelt and flood-runoff analysis. Over the following 10 years NASA had operated four Landsats, including Landsat 4, launched in July 1982, and a ground system at GSFC. Landsat 1 and Landsat 2 were no longer operating; Landsat 3 would be retired later in 1983 because of degradation related to age. In 1979 the Reagan administration told NASA to transfer operation to NOAA so that the latter agency could work toward eventual commercialization of the system. NASA had relinquished operation of Landsat 4 (except for the thematic mapper, which NASA would continue to use), the control center at GSFC, and the multispectral-scanner data-processing facility, also at GSFC, and would hand over control of the thematic mapper early in 1985. NOAA would also take over the Landsat 4 backup spacecraft (the Landsat D now in final checkout by General Electric) that would replace Landsat 4, probably in mid-1985. NOAA would reimburse NASA for the use of buildings and utilities. (NASA Release 83-7) JPL would go ahead with efforts to reestablish contact, which would be unsuccessful if the lander had multiple problems. No telemetry dala were available to diagnose the situation. The 64-meter Deep Space Tracking Network antenna, near Canberra, had bombarded the lander on Mars with 80-to 100-kilowatt signals, said George Gianopulos, Viking team leader at JPL. Gianopulos said that commands from JPL through Australia could be up to 40° off the receiving line into the leader’s antenna dish and still be picked up. Getting into the lander to reset the switch “is going to be a neat trick,” he added. Launched August 20, 1975, and designed for a 90-day mission, Viking 1 had shown “incredible stamina” in the harsh environment of Mars. Radioisotope thermoelectric generators (RTGs) could provide power for years, but in 1982 its four nickel-cadmium batteries began to show their age. Viking could be instructed to charge or discharge batteries to keep them functioning longer. A command sent November 19 to repeat this exercise apparently got into the antenna-pointing subroutine and switched the crucial communications antenna to point away from Earth. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Feb 16/83; JSC Roundup, Jan 28/83, 1)
NASA launched at 11:00 a.m. EST the Space Shuttle Columbia (STS-9) from KSC. Columbia carried the largest space crew ever, which consisted of John Young, commander; Brewster Shaw, pilot; Dr. Robert Parker and Dr. Owen Garriott, mission specialists; and Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and West Germany’s Dr. Ulf Merbold, payload specialists. The crew would operate in two shifts to permit 24-hour operation of experiments. The mission was originally scheduled to get under way September 30 but was delayed to October 28 to give engineers additional time to check out a communications satellite needed to relay data to Earth from Spacelab, carried on Columbia. The flight was postponed again when an examination of the booster rockets used for the Space Shuttle mission in August revealed serious erosion of the insulation lining one of the rocket nozzles. The rocket was replaced. Columbia carried Spacelab, designed and built by ESA, which marked Europe’s first major entry into a manned space program. Other firsts associated with the flight was that it carried the heaviest payload on a Shuttle, the 33,584-pound Spacelab and pallet, and that it would include more experiments and spacecraft maneuvers than did any previous flight. Immediately after liftoff, Columbia rolled over and turned northward to put itself into an orbital path that would range from as far north as Scotland and Leningrad to as far south as Tierra del Fuego at the tip of South America in order to take pictures of Europe. The orbit would also take Columbia over Moscow and many militarily sensitive areas of the Soviet Union, the first time a U.S. manned spacecraft had flown over the Soviet Union in daylight. No pictures or other sensing would be taken of the ground while Columbia passed over the Soviet Union. The $l-billion Spacelab’s 23-foot-long laboratory was sealed and pressurized so that the scientists/astronauts could work in shirtsleeves as they carried out more than 70 experiments on 38 sets of equipment. Operating Spacelab were Merbold and Lichtenberg, a new breed of astronaut—payload specialists—who were not career astronauts but scientists trained to operate the science instruments on the mission. Wired with sensors, the scientists were guinea pigs in a number of experiments designed to explore how the body adapted to space and how it performed in the absence of gravity. Blood samples were taken three times so that scientists could study how the ratio of red to white blood cells changed once the body was weightless. Several experiments were conducted to measure eye movements; in another experiment, Garriott was given mild electric shocks to see how the muscles in his body responded to a sudden jolt that was the bodily equivalent of a sudden movement in weightlessness (doctors believed that one of the causes of space sickness might be abrupt movements that disoriented the inner ear). In another experiment, the crew in shifts pushed two balls identical in shape and size, although of different weights, to determine how quickly humans would distinguish weight from size in weightlessness. Other Spacelab studies were concerned with the growth in space of sunflower seedlings, a fungus, and four types of microbes. Exotic metal mixes were melted, and crystals were grown in three Spacelab furnaces. There were experiments intended to determine the practicality of orbiting factories to produce products not possible in the gravity of Earth. During the flight, two antennas failed on the TDRS-1 that was used to relay data from Spacelab to Earth. The failure meant that Litchtenberg and Merbold had to share the voice link to Mission Control Center in Houston with the four astronauts in Columbia’s cockpit, and it meant that the two scientists got their instructions from the ground via a teleprinter aboard Spacelab. Columbia landed December 8 at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. (NASA MOR M-977-09-83-01 [prelaunch], Oct 83; NASA Releases 83-163, 83-176; NASA Dly Actv Rept, Nov 29/83; W Post, Nov 22/83, A-8, Nov 28/83, A-l, Nov 29/83, A-l, Nov 30/83, A-l; USA Today, Nov 29/83, 1A; W Times, Nov 22/83, C—1; B Sun, Nov 29/83, A-l)
NASA launched ESA’s X-ray observatory, Exosat, from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 3:18 p.m. GMT on a Delta. Designed to study cosmic X-ray sources from 0.04 to 80 Kev, the craft carried four instruments: two imaging telescopes, a large-area proportional counter array, and a gas-scintillation spectrometer. It reached a planned highly elliptical orbit with 192,000-kilometer apogee, 340-kilometer perigee, and 72.5° inclination. ESA’s operations control center (ESOC) took over shortly after liftoff. (NASA MOR M-492-304-83-01 [prelaunch] May 20/83; ESA Infos 18, 20)
