The information gathered by several Space Shuttle missions underscored the need for improved weather forecasting at Kennedy Space Center (KSC). NASA along with the U.S. Air Force developed a plan to improve the quality of weather data available at KSC as well as the manner in which it was presented to the forecaster, Spaceport News reported. KSC officials recently held a ribbon cutting ceremony at the Range Control Center on Cape Canaveral Air Force Station to inaugurate the new Cape Canaveral Forecast Facility (CCFF), marking completion of a $3 million three-year effort by NASA, the Air Force, and contractor Pan Am World Services. The facility was the first important tool for improving the efficiency of the weather forecaster during launches and landings of the Space Shuttle. The facility housed a system called MIDDS, meteorological interactive data display system, which animated and overlaid data from various forecasting tools in color graphic displays. For example, a forecaster could begin with display of a current satellite picture; over that he could place a color enhanced radar display of shower activity. Next he might add a graphic presentation of indications from wind towers around KSC; and over that he could display locations of lightning potential as well as where lightning was striking cloud-to-ground. Motion added to the entire composite picture would illustrate trends in weather activity over a period of time. The system could overlay maps of upper wind data or barometric pressures collected from weather balloons or sounding rockets. The forecaster could also display figures from the data network of other weather stations around the country or the world. Although the console was at the Cape Canaveral facility, the new rotating antenna was at Patrick Air Force Base to compensate for the blind spot directly above the radar. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration radar located in Dayton Beach supplemented the Cape radar. A forecaster could call up a current graphic display of any official weather radar in the U.S. A lightning location and protection (LLP) system would show cloud-to-ground strikes up to 100 miles away, from which antennas were located ten miles north of the vehicle assembly building and at Melbourne Regional and Orlando International Airports. These antennas supplemented an existing network of 30 area field mills that detected lightning potential. NASA officials hoped within five years to have at the facility a clear air doppler radar, of which there were only six in the country. It would reduce the number of wind towers needed and improve forecasting efficiency. In the meantime, Space Shuttle weather officer Scott Funk said, "We haven't tapped the full potential of the new MIDDS system. Most weather forecasters have never seen anything like this. But there are still a number of potential capabilities the system has which we will add next year." (Spaceport News, Oct 11/ 85, 7)
Peoples Republic of China astronautics minister Li Xue said China would put their Long March 2 and 3 rockets on the international market to provide satellite launching services for local and foreign clients, FBIS Beijing XINHUA Hong Kong Service in Chinese reported. The decision resulted from the October 21 launch by a Long March 2 rocket of an earth surveying satellite and an April 8, 1984 launch by a Long March 3 rocket of China's first experimental telecommunications satellite. Li Xue said the recent Long March 2 launch was its seventh consecutive success, indicating the two-stage liquid-propellant rocket could reliably put a satellite of about two tons into a near-earth orbit from the Jiuquan launching center, in addition the Long March 3 launch from the Xichang launching center of a satellite into geosynchronous orbit showed China had mastered the technology for placing a satellite in that orbit. He added that in addition to launch services from the two centers, China could provide satellite orbital control and support from the Xian control center, which had an ocean-based survey vessel component. And he pointed out that China could provide preferential prices for foreign customers, would train technicians, and had the capability, through the Chinese People's Insurance Co., to underwrite satellites that were launched. In conclusion, he said that, after the Long March 2 and 3 rockets were on the international market, they would promote international technical and economic cooperation in the astronautics field and contribute to the maintenance of world peace. (FBIS, XINHUA Kong Hong Service in Chinese, Oct 26/85) January 1Ch Four years after cancellation of the National Oceanic Satellite System (NOSS), the U.S. Navy had begun to develop a simple, low-cost system to monitor ocean conditions routinely from space, Aerospace Daily reported. Budgeted at about a third the estimated cost of NOSS, the Navy Remote Ocean Sensing System (NROSS) would have nearly the same capability as NOSS by 1989, lacking particularly the synthetic aperture radar, and would use many of the ocean observation capabilities NASA's Seasat program demonstrated in 1979. The Pentagon had avoided $591.5 million in FY 1981-88 costs by cancelling NOSS (NASA and NOAA contributions would have made the total over $1 billion). NROSS would use a single-satellite system with no backup; the Navy would resolve later the issue of replenishment satellites. NROSS would also use existing or already planned data-processing equipment at the Navy's Fleet Numerical Oceanography Center and the USAF's Defense Meteorological Satellite Program command and control facilities. The Navy expected to spend about $200 million from FY 85 development through a launch in 1989, with a NASA contribution of $115 million ($35 million for the satellite program and $80 million in research). The Office of Management and Budget had vetoed use of NOAA's NOAA-D spacecraft as the NROSS bus, so NROSS would use a Block 5D-2 DMSP spacecraft. The Navy had planned an Atlas E launch, but was considering a refurbished Titan II ICBM. Planners rejected a Space Shuttle launch as too expensive.
On the fourth and final day of his U.S. visit, Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, accompanied by Vice President Bush, toured the Johnson Space Center's mission control center and then climbed into the commander's seat of a Space Shuttle mockup to dramatize his commitment to high technology, the Washington Post reported. Later Gandhi said the spinoffs of space technology "have become part of our daily lives," and that India needed to keep abreast of technological advances in agriculture, communications, meteorology, and prospecting. Earlier in the week, the NY Times reported the U.S. and India were scheduled during Gandhi's visit to announce a joint space effort that would include the launching in 1986 aboard the Space Shuttle of an Indian payload specialist and a satellite that was partly designed to expand the uses of radio and TV in Indian villages. Gandhi's visit was intended to ease strains with the U.S., reach a series of space and technology agreements, and open a nationwide cultural program, the Festival of India. The previous year the Soviet Union launched an Indian astronaut into space on an eight-day mission. (WPost, June 16/85, A12, NYT, June 9/85, A3) Jl. MFD The Atlas Centaur-63 was the 2nd of the new stretched version of the vehicle, able to lift from 159 to 227 kg (350 to 500 lb.) more than the previous design for a total of 2,318 kg (5,100 lb.) NASA had extended the first-stage Atlas by about 2.05 m (81 in.) to accommodate more propellant. This would be the 1st Intelsat V-A spacecraft launched by an Atlas/Centaur. The Intelsat V-A satellites were similar to the Vs except for improvements that increased reliability and boosting communications-carrying capacity by 25% from 12,000 to about 15,000 simultaneous telephone calls and two TV programs. NASA would for several weeks station the satellite over the equator at about the longitude of Paris for in-orbit testing; once operational, the spacecraft would be in geosynchronous orbit over the Atlantic Ocean. Lewis Research Center (LeRC) managed the Atlas Centaur development and operations, and the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) managed vehicle checkout and launch. (NASA Release 85-22)
NASA announced that its Administrator selected Dr. Charles Chappell of Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) and Dr. Dirk Frimout of the European Space Agency (ESA) to serve as alternate payload specialists for the first Earth Observation Mission (EOM), which would use the Spacelab scheduled for launch on the Space Shuttle orbiter Atlantis in the latter half of 1986. Chappell and Frimout would serve as backups to flight payload specialists Dr. Byron Lichtenberg and his alternate, Dr. Michael Lampton. Chappell was chief of the Solar Terrestrial Div., Space Science Laboratory at MSFC and was responsible for directing a research group that studied the physics of the sun-earth environment. He served as mission scientist for the 10-day Spacelab 1 mission, during which 70 investigations were carried out. Frimout was the senior engineer supporting European researchers who would have experiments on the mission, and he had served as ESA crew coordinator and operations manager for Spacelab 1. Chappell and Frimout would train with the flight crew and serve as members of the mission management team in the Payload Operations Control Center during the flight. They would communicate directly with the crew on orbit, assist the payload operations team during normal operations, and aid in trouble shooting problems and in changing crew procedures when necessary. They would also advise the mission scientist, Dr. Marsha Torr, of the possible impact of problems and timeline changes. The EOM flight was the first in a series of Space Shuttle missions primarily dedicated to measuring solar irradiance and the chemical composition of the earth's stratosphere and mesosphere during an 11-year solar cycle. NASA would refly several instruments originally carried on the Spacelab 1 and 3 missions to accomplish these measurements. The mission would use the short version of the Spacelab module, in which a single Spacelab pallet and special support structure would hold instruments that required exposure to the space environment. The mission would consist of 15 experiments conducted in six disciplines—atmospheric science, solar physics, plasma physics, earth resources, astronomy, and life sciences. The international mission included experiments sponsored by Belgium, France, Japan, Federal Republic of Germany, and the U.S. ESA would provide operations support for the European investigations. The Investigators Working Group (IWG), which consisted of the principal investigator for each of the mission experiments, recommended alternate payload specialist candidates for selection by NASA's administrator. (NASA Release 85-179) External Tank November 27r The U.S. Senate awarded Martin Marietta Corp. the United States Senate Productivity Award for the state of Louisiana for manufacturing improvements and costs savings in production of the Space Shuttle's external tank, Defense Daily reported. The Senate cited the company for its innovative across-the-board productivity program that included plant modernization, installation of automated production processes, and development of an employee participation program that led to a number of improvements in the manufacturing process. "Estimates are that this increased productivity will save NASA and ultimately the American taxpayer more than a billion dollars over the long run," said Louisiana Senators J. Bennett lohnston (D) and Russell Long (D) in a joint statement. The two also cited the "flawless performance" of the tanks in Space Shuttle missions to date. (D/D, Nov 27/85, 142) Launch and Landing Facilities
NASA announced that its AST-3 communications satellite, located at 105° west longitude, was providing communications support through its control center at Malabar, Florida, to American Red Cross and Pan American World Health Organization rescue and relief efforts following Mexico City's earthquake. The voice communications link with the outside world was crucial, since the earthquake disrupted all other forms of communications in the city. George Manno, director of media relations for the Red Cross, said "the ATS-3 is providing us with the most critical communications link. Although ham radio operators have been doing a swell job, they are serving as our backup communications system, while we rely primarily on the ATS as our main communications vehicle." Immediately after the earthquake occurred, NASA implemented the ATS emergency preemption plan; within 24 hours ATS-3 was on the air, giving priority to satellite communications traffic for the emergency rescue operations. (NASA Release 85-133)
Continuing a project begun in 1984, some of the world's most prominent lightning experts gathered during the summer at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) to study lightning strikes and their effects, the Spaceport News reported. KSC attracted scientists with a variety of research interests because it was one of the nation's areas of highest frequency of strikes and the presence of French experts who had mastered the technique of triggering lightning. Taking part in the summer's project were representatives of NASA, the U.S. Air Force's Wright Aeronautical Lab, the Federal Aviation Administration, the U.S. Naval Laboratory, France's Center for Nuclear Studies, three U.S. universities, and two industry organizations. Since late May, the 36 lightning investigators had conducted studies at a specially equipped lightning research facility located on the shore of Mosquito Lagoon about nine miles north of the vehicle assembly building. The facility included a launch site for the three-foot rockets used to trigger lightning and two nearby trailers that housed the research teams and their equipment. From their control center, the French experts triggered lightning events by launching a small rocket that trailed a thin copper wire to an altitude of about 2000 feet. The wire acted as a trigger, attracting a stroke, which vaporized the wire while traveling down an electrical pathway to the ground. Special instruments and cameras near the launch site recorded the strike in detail. The triggered lightning events allowed researchers to obtain ground measurements that they could use in atmospheric and lightning research. Researchers might eventually use information from the studies to design advanced lightning protection systems for KSC facilities and for greater protection for aircraft such as the Space Shuttle that contained electronic flight control systems. Other research at the facilities included using a Convair C-580 to obtain measurements on a lightning strike; a study to determine how lightning strokes gained access to power lines; investigation of the Maxwell Current, which developed in a particular pattern before, during, and after thunderstorms; and attempts to obtain three-dimensional photos of lightning strikes. In addition to hosting the project, KSC was contributing funding to some of the university research. Project managers hoped to attract more participants in the future with the promise of research leading to tangible benefits in lightning protection and prediction. (Spaceport News, Aug 16/85, 7)
The waste products of two monkeys and two dozen rats continued to float through the cabin of the Space Shuttle Challenger [see Space Transportation System/Missions, Apr. 29], forcing crew members to rearrange their tight schedules and operate in full surgical gear to clean up, the Washington Post reported. "Be advised we now have feces in the crew compartment and it isn't much fun, guys," commander Robert Overmyer said to the mission control center in Houston. "How many years did we tell them these cages would never work?" With TV cameras recording the activity, Overmyer and mission specialists William Thornton, Norman Thagard, and payload specialist Lodewijk van den Berg, wearing surgical smocks, gloves, and masks, floated about the Spacelab cabin using vacuum cleaners to suck the waste out of the cabin air. At one pont Thagard said, "Even the vacuum cleaners aren't enough." The problems began on the day after liftoff with feeding the animals food and water. One rat had to be hand-fed a gelatin bar to get water into him; when physician-astronaut Thornton tried to press food bars into the cage, the bars would crumble and a cloud of tiny particles would scatter in the cabin. "I'm not exaggerating," Thornton told mission control, "but there are food particles flooding out of every crack in those cages. I don't see any way we can stop this except if we had a seal over the entire cage." Monkey and rat feces also leaked out of the cages. The five scientists also could not deploy a French-built camera, intended to survey for 17 hours hot stars in distant galaxies, because an airlock hatch failed to open. And physicist Taylor Wang was unable to run an experiment to test behavior of drops of fluids in weightlessness because circuit breakers continually popped open. Nine of the 15 Spacelab experiments were running even better than hoped, and the crew described the monkeys and rats as "real clean and real happy." On May 1, however, one of the monkeys got spacesick. "We can tell by the way he's behaving that one of our monkeys is not feeling well," said Dr. Paul Callahan of Ames Research Center. "The other monkey was under the weather his first day in space but he's adapted very well since, which is an almost identical reaction we get from human astronauts." Callahan noted "Monkey No. 1" was not eating and drinking normally, seemed to have a headache, and was generally lethargic and dispirited. "He's just not moving around and the other monkey has begun to do somersaults." Eleven of the Spacelab experiments were running by that time, although mission specialist George Fichtl said "One is a hit-and-miss kind of thing and three look very doubtful." He added the astronauts had proposed to give up on the French-built wide-field camera and that it was doubtful NASA would extend the mission to give the crew additional time to try to deploy it. On May 2 Fichtl explained that the rats' and one monkey's vigorous movement, which was "much more than expected," was likely the main reason their waste was escaping the cages. "We designed those cages with an airflow control to keep the waste in the cages," he explained. "Our best guess now is that the animals are so spirited and are enjoying weightlessness so much that they induced turbulence in the cage that's too turbulent to contain the waste." The problems with the animals cast some doubt over future animal flights on Spacelab, the Washington Post continued. NASA had scheduled for 1986 a flight to carry 48 rats and four squirrel monkeys. However, Spacelab mission manager Joseph Cremin insisted that research on animals was crucial to the future of the permanent space station where men and women would have to work in orbit for months at a time. (W Post, May 1/85, A3, May 2/85, A11, May 3/85, A3)
At the halfway point in Space Shuttle mission 61-A in which the orbiter Challenger carried Spacelab D-1 [see Space Transportation Sys-tem/Missions, Oct. 30], a slow air leak in one of Spacelab's vacuum chambers developed, but flight controllers in Houston did not consider it serious, the NY Times reported. Terry White, a public affairs officer at Mission Control, said the oxygen leak was so slight that, "provided there are no additional fluctuations, we have enough gases to go to the end of the mission." After encountering some Spacelab equipment malfunctions during the mission's first two days, Challenger's crew indicated they had achieved encouraging success with nearly all of the Spacelab's 76 scientific experiments on the effects of microgravity on metals, biological growth, and human physiology. Mission planners in Houston and scientists at the West German science control center near Munich were studying the possibility of extending the flight by a day to permit more time for experimentation. The crew reported preliminary results showing that, as expected, seedlings growing in the virtual absence of gravity developed roots that curved in odd directions. "The roots, lacking gravity, do not seem to know which way to go," a crew member commented. In another experiment, the Bacillus subtilis bacteria showed a higher rate of growth than anticipated. Mission control scientists said this "may be taken as an indication that bacteria do react differently in space." Most of the studies in processing metal alloys and growing crystals for electronics were still underway, so results were unavailable until completion of the mission. Earlier in the mission, crew member Dr. Ernst Messerschmid, a West German physicist, reported being "disoriented" when he awoke, a symptom of the space motion sickness that had plagued nearly half of all Space Shuttle astronauts. (NYT, Nov 3/85, A27)
Soviet scientists from the Interkosmos Institute in Moscow together with scientists from the European Space Agency (ESA), the Universities of Utrecht (Netherlands), Birmingham (Great Britain), and Tuebingen and the Max Planck Institute for Extra-terrestrial Physics in Garching, West Germany were planning to launch in spring 1986 an observatory to investigate X-rays in space, the magazine Geo reported. The observatory would carry four instruments intended to investigate the X-ray stars of the Milky Way, the remnants of dying stars (supernova), and nuclei of other active galaxies. They called the project "Salyut-Hexe," in which Salyut referred to the Soviet space station and Hexe to the English abbreviation for high-energy X-ray experiment. The magazine noted that Dr. Claus Reppin of the Max Planck Institute said it was not clear whether the observatory would be coupled to the existing Soviet Salyut 7 space station or to a new space station, Salyut 8. Reppin confirmed that the German scientists would not, for reasons of secrecy, be present at the installation and assembly of the instruments. Soviet scientists had spent two weeks in West Germany to familiarize themselves with the instruments so that they would be able to assemble and install them. Reppin also said the West European scientists did not know whether they could be present at the launch, which would probably be at Baykonur, but he indicated it was probably more important that they be at the ground control center in or near Moscow by a few days after launch, when measuring instruments would begin operation. The experiment, the magazine added, was part of the Soviet effort to set up a permanently inhabited large space station. At the beginning of 1986, the Soviets planned to launch the new station with several coupling connections for attachment of various modules. In this way, a settlement in space would grow gradually according to a building block principle; up to 30 cosmonauts were in training to serve as crew on the new station. (FBIS, Hamburg DPA in German, Dec 14/85) C UNITED KINGDOM
Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester of Marshall Space Flight Center's (MSFC) Spacelab Payload Project Office said today that the Spacelab 2 payload was declared "ready for installation" into the orbiter Challenger, the Marshall Star reported. Spacelab 2 would be the second of two Spacelab missions designed to demonstrate the performance of hardware received from the European Space Agency (ESA). The Spacelab 1 mission verified the majority of Spacelab systems including the habitable module, tunnel, scientific airlock, and pallets. For the second verification mission, Spacelab would not use a habitable module but only a pallet configuration. The crew would operate experiments from Challenger's aft flight deck. Spacelab 2 consisted of a pressurized igloo approximately the size of a five-gallon oil drum and three pallets, two of which joined to form the train needed to support several experiments. Also new on the mission was the instrument pointing system for pointing four of the onboard solar experiments. Spacelab would carry 13 experiments in 7 scientific disciplines. Primary objective of the mission was to demonstrate the performance of the igloo, the two-pallet train, and the instrument pointing system. John Thomas, manager of the MSFC Spacelab Program Office, said NASA had removed Spacelab 3 hardware from Challenger's cargo bay and was reconfiguring the bay for Spacelab 2. "We expect to begin installation of the Spacelab 2 payload on June 3," he noted. The last major test for the hardware before July 12 scheduled launch would be an end-to-end test planned for June 10, in which NASA would test all systems connecting Challenger, Spacelab 2, and the MSFC-operated payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center. Thomas said the other primary effort was to complete training of the payload team. (Marshall Star, May 29/85, 1)
19 a.m. today a three-stage, Taurus-Nike-Tomahawk sounding rocket that left several colored clouds high over the mid-eastern U.S. coastline. The objective of the experiment was to provide baseline data on expected yields, vapor expansion velocities, and other parameters for the chemical release canisters for the Combined Release and Radiation Effects Satellite (CRRES), scheduled for launch in July 1987 from the Space Shuttle. The 157-lb. payload ejected balls of greenish-white titanium-boron-barium and barium-cupric-oxide at an altitude of 230 statute miles, one as the rocket ascended and one as the payload descended. The barium clouds rapidly expanded, while ejecting barium ions along the earth's magnetic field to form a visible streak more than 62 miles long. Another red titaniumboronlithium cloud released at 325 miles expanded to a diameter of several hundred kilometers in less than a minute. Goddard Space Flight Center's (GSFC) Wallops Range Control Center received reports of cloud sightings from as far north as Waterville, Maine, as far south as Wilmington, North Carolina, and as far west as South Bend, Indiana. (NASA Release 85-148; GSFC Release 85-39) Upper Atmospheric Research
Soviet cosmonauts Vladimir Vasyutin, Viktor Savinykh, and Aleksandr Volkov continued their work aboard the Salyut 7/Soyuz T-14 orbital station following the October 2 docking with Cosmos 1686, FBIS Moscow in English to North America reported. Soviet space officials designed Cosmos 1686 to function as a heavy transport vehicle, an inter-orbit tug, or as a specialized module for research or production. During docking, the Soviet's flight control center and crew on the orbiting complex guided search for the satellite, approach, and mooring. Cosmos 1686 delivered equipment and various other cargo for continued functioning of the complex; the cosmonauts would test satellite equipment and elements of its construction and develop methods of controlling orbital complexes of large dimensions and masses. Soviet science correspondent Boris Belitskiy said of the Cosmos 1686 mission: "The experience gained in recent years in operating such modular spacecraft with the Salyut 6 and Salyut 7 stations showed that such satellites can considerably extend the active life of future orbital complexes and make their operation more fruitful. Satellites of this new type have an advanced computerized control system, a large supply of propellant, and a power system incorporating solar batteries. The satellite's control system makes possible the automatic search for an orbital station, rendezvous, and docking, all in an unmanned mode. The onboard computer enabled mission control to transmit flight assignments that would over several days, if necessary months, assure the autonomous functioning of the satellite's control system. "Also, the satellite's control system is highly economical," Belitskiy continued. "The control system itself could select an optimal mode dictated by considerations of saving propellant. A previous heavy satellite of this new type, Cosmos 1443, was tested in 1983 as a transport craft of large cargo capacity. It was fitted with a recoverable capsule which returned a 350-kg payload to earth. The present Cosmos 1686 is a modular version. Such a modular design of future extraterrestial colonies is particularly promising because long-term orbiting stations can most reasonably be assembled directly in orbit from separate modules. "Can such automatic craft make space research significantly more efficient?" Belitskiy continued. "That is the question the flight of Cosmos 1686 is expected to answer. The total weight of the craft with its payload exceeds 20 tons, and it's almost as long as the Salyut 7station. The diameter of its widest part exceeds four meters and it carries over three tons of propellant and five tons of cargo. Docked with the Salyut 7 station, Cosmos 1686 has almost doubled the working space available aboard the orbital station and made conditions for the crew more comfortable. Its flight program provides for extensive research for economic needs." (FBIS Moscow in English to North America, Oct 17/85, Oct 2/85)
Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) announced its researchers completed at KSC a series of three intensive tests that verified the compatibility of Spacelab 2 experiments in space. Known collectively as the "mission sequence test," the tests determined for the first time that actual experiment flight hardware for the mission operated in tandem with the Spacelab flight systems. MSFC's Spacelab 2 mission manager Roy Lester said they learned they “could operate this complex system with high efficiency within acceptable Spacelab resource allocations." MSFC had responsibility for managing the first three Spacelab missions in a series of Spacelab flights that extended over several years. The first mission flew in 1983; the next would fly later in April. "This third and last test was a simulated six-hour slice of the actual on-orbit timeline," Lester said. "It simulated the commanding of experiments as if they were being done both from the payload operations control center (at Johnson Space Center) and from the flight deck of the orbiter." The period chosen was one that would put maximum stress on the computer, "a worst-case scenario," Lester explained. "Without a situation like that, we wouldn't have gotten the confidence we have now that we're ready to go." The 13 Spacelab 2 experiments, covering seven scientific disciplines, would rest on three pallets and a special support structure. Unlike the other two Spacelab missions managed by MSFC, there was no habitable laboratory. Spacelab 2 crew would operate the experiments from the aft deck of the orbiter interior. (MSFC Release 85-19) During April: NASA announced that Space Shuttle flight 51-B/Spacelab 3, an ESA<Jeveloped Spacelab carrying 15 experiments [see Spacelab, Apr. 17], was scheduled for launch April 29 from KSC. The mission's main objective was to provide a high-quality microgravity environment for materials processing and fluid experiments. For the second time in U.S. space history, crew members would perform scientific investigations continuously. Two scientists who developed Spacelab 3 experiments, payload specialists Dr. Lodewijk van den Berg, a materials scientist from EG&C Energy Management Corp., and Dr. Taylor Wang, a fluid physicist from JPL, would conduct onboard research during the mission. Mission specialist Dr. Don Lind, a high-energy astrophysicist, and Drs. Norman Thagard and William Thornton (both medical doctors making their second Space Shuttle flight) would also do scientific research. The payload operations control center (POCC) at Johnson Space Center would manage all Spacelab 3 operations. Members of the Marshall Space Flight Center mission management team and the investigator teams that developed Spacelab 3 experiments would monitor, direct, and control experiment operations from the ground control center. The mission control center in the same building as POCC would control the orbiter and basic Spacelab systems. (NASA Release 85-60)
NASA announced that its associate administrator for space science and applications, Dr. Burton Edelson, in a speech today at the 36th Congress of the International Astronautical Federation in Stockholm warned his audience that the earth's environment as was presently known might be in jeopardy and called on the world's scientific community to accelerate its study of the planet. "Resources, once thought to be limitless, are slowly being depleted," Edelson said. "Earth's atmosphere is changing, and some of its life forms are threatened. It is imperative that we, as scientists and engineers, take action now to maintain the quality of life on our planet and improve its biological productivity." Edelson cited the many accomplishments of planetary science since the beginning of spaceflight 28 years ago. "We have examined most of the planets in the solar system at close range and have performed systematic studies of our closest neighbors, Venus and Mars, through telescopes and more recently, through data and imagery received from planet-orbiting spacecraft," he said. "We still lack synoptic, systematic, and temporal knowledge, predictive skills, and an understanding of the mechanisms underlying earth's global processes," he pointed out. Calling for an international study effort, Edelson said, "Our sophisticated spacecraft; new air, sea, and spaceborne sensors; and enormous computing capability will enable us to measure, monitor, model, and finally begin to understand the earth as a system. This mission to planet earth could unlock the secrets of life itself . . . and could well prove to be the most important ever undertaken by humankind." Edelson called particular attention to the problems of water pollution in rivers, lakes, and streams; potential depletion of the ozone layer; growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide; and a sharp increase in the levels of carbon monoxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. "Economic development over large portions of the earth have significantly changed the patterns of land and water use," he said. "The results have been mixed—while in some cases the benefits have been significant—we have paid a substantial price. We must study the land and learn to use it properly." To emphasize the importance of his proposal, Edelson said, "The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has reviewed the scientific merit of the global habitability concept and has found it to be both sound and worthy. The Academy is now participating in the broader efforts of the International Council of Scientific Unions in a program called Global Change. NASA and several other government agencies, notably the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation, also will participate." Edelson said he envisioned multifaceted investigations with oceanographers, meteorologists, biologists, and foresters studying the land, sea, atmosphere, and the air-sea and solar-terrestrial environments. "This is truly an international challenge," he concluded, "involving many scientific disciplines. Everyone on earth has a stake in our success." (NASA Release 85-142)
Members of the House of Representatives, former astronauts, and assorted other government people would depart on October 10 for a five-day stay in Moscow to interest Soviet officials and scientists in a joint manned mission to Mars, the NY Times reported. The Soviets invited the group, and the White House cleared the visit. Heading the 40-member delegation was Rep. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.), who was chairman of the House space science subcommittee and scheduled to fly aboard the Space Shuttle in December. Former astronauts Thomas Stafford and Donald Slayton, also in the group, would join in a celebration in Moscow of the 10th anniversary of the Apollo-Soyuz space mission. Nelson noted that the formal space cooperation agreement between the two countries expired in 1982 and said that he hoped the Congressional mission would open the way to a "new spirit of scientific cooperation." Under the sponsorship of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, the group would visit the space research institute, the cosmonaut training center, and the mission control center in Kaliningrad. A U.S. request to visit the Baikonur Astrodrome, the launching facility in Tyuratam outside the city of Leninsk, was pending. (NYT, Oct 9/85, B14) Military Programs
Three quarters of a million gallons of water flooded Space Launch Complex-6 at Vandenberg AFB during a March test to determine whether the system, intended to suppress sound waves from the Space Shuttle during a launch, would operate properly, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Sound waves, reflected off the launch mount and flame ducts, could seriously damage the orbiter and its payload. To prevent such damage, nozzles on the mount would begin spraying water into the three pad exhaust ducts seven and a half seconds before the Space Shuttle's main engines ignited. By ignition time, the spray system would reach its full flow rate of 985,000 gallons per minute and maintain that rate for nearly 30 seconds before tapering off after the Space Shuttle left the pad. Although Vandenberg officials had tested the spray system six times previously, the March test was the first time the nonflying prototype orbiter Enterprise, inert solid-fuel rocket boosters, and an external tank were in place on the mount during a test. Remotely controlled by the launch control center, the splash pattern of the gravity-fed water system resulted in no water splashing up into the main engines, where ice might form before ignition. The system sprayed water exactly where it would be needed at launch—down into the flame ducts and out over the concrete pad surface. George O'Gorman, site manager for complex-6, said most of the complex's construction work was complete, although some modifications were scheduled before the orbiter Discovery would arrive in September for launch in January 1986. The Air Force expected to make about four Space Shuttle launches a year by the late 1980s from Vandenberg AFB. The facility could handle as many as ten launches a year. (AFCS Newsreview, Apr 12/85, 3)
Kennedy Space Center (KSC) awarded ASEA Robotics Inc. a $1,143,622 contract to build a robotic development prototype system to be installed in the Robotic Applications Development Laboratory (RADL) and serve as KSC's control center for robotics, Spaceport News reported. KSC currently had two labs for robotics research: Lab A was a test facility for training devices, sensor and end-effector development, and small robotic projects; Lab B functioned as a control center made up of complex work cells and "smart systems" (independent control systems integrated into one coordinated system) for large robotic applications. The objective of the new system was to permit engineers to combine existing and new technology to create advanced independent and semiindependent machines and machines with independent decision-making capabilities or a "computer brain," which could accomplish more on their own without step-by-step instructions from human supervisors. The initial thrust of the new system would be to develop the technology and techniques needed to automatically load and unload hazardous fuels aboard space vehicles and payloads during prelaunch ground operations. Future challenges included application of these refueling techniques to other fuels such as cryogenic propellants. RADL would have an electrically driven articulated robot composed of a six-axes arm and interchangeable end-effectors or "hands," a computer with user-friendly software, and a vision tracking system. The facility would serve as the focal point for combining robotics hardware, algorithms, software, sensors, and control systems. Leon Davis, a development engineer and electrical lead for the Robotic Control Systems, said of the new system, "This is not a manipulator that is teleoperated by a man, but a robot with a computer brain capable of memorizing the contours and panels of its intended subject and carrying out its functions autonomously." Because NASA would be asking KSC to design processing facilities for new-generation launch vehicles such as the second generation Space Shuttle and the heavy lift launch vehicles, KSC would need these state-of-the-art robotics to provide the most efficient and effective processing methods. Hazardous, time critical, and repetitive Space Shuttle and payload operations all had potential uses for robotics. A special feature of the system was a "real time" tracking system using "closed-loop" responsive adaptive control commands, feedback, and error signals. "Adaptive control" meant that the robot altered its path automatically in response to sensory feedback from its environment. The KSC robot's servo-controls and software utilities would allow its arm to operate adaptively to control positions and orientation of all six axes, not only the end-effector as found in standard applications. An electrically driven, servo-controlled robot had several advantages over hydraulic robots, the major one being that smooth motion, speed, and trajectory controls were possible when the robot handled loads up to 200 lb. As Davis said, "We really don't have applications for hydraulic robots. Hydraulic robots can leak, proving a potential hazard to the tile and other sensitive areas of the orbiter." KSC's robotics research would progress in four phases: phase one was the development of the robotic arm in static work cells; phase two proposed advancing the robotic capabilities to operate in dynamic work cells; phase three would include off-line programming using 3-D graphics and simulated work cells; and phase four entertained the possibility of employing artificial intelligence. Possible future capabilities of robots were three-dimensional scanning; higher order processing; artificial intelligence; sonic, laser, and other ranging systems; and "touch" and mobility systems. (Spaceport News, Nov 7/85, 6) Langley Research Center
NASA announced that it had selected Rockwell Shuttle Operations Co. for negotiations leading to award of the $685 million four-year space transportation system operations contract (STSOC) at Johnson Space Center (JSC). Follow-on awards could result in a total contract period of 15 years at a value of about $5.5 billion. JSC would manage the work under a cost-plus-incentive/award-fee contract that included incentive fee on sound cost management and an award fee on the basis of performance. Other team members included Bendix Field Engineering Corp., System Development Corp., Omniplan Corp., RMS Technologies, Inc., and System Management American Corp. Under the contract, Rockwell would have responsibility for six major STSOC functions: project management; maintenance and operations; sustaining engineering; flight preparation requirements and analysis; flight preparation production; and direct mission operations, testing, and support. Work would be done for such facilities as the mission control center, shuttle mission simulator, shuttle avionics integration laboratory, software production facility, central computing facility, and the mockup and integration laboratory. The selection represented NASA's consolidation into one contract of work previously performed by 16 firms under 22 contracts. Other firms submitting proposals were Ford Aerospace and Communications Corp., Space Information Systems Division, Grumman Space Operations Corp., and Lockheed Space Flight Co. (NASA Release 85-128)
The Space Shuttle Challenger on mission 61-A landed at 9:44 a.m. today at Edwards Air Force Base, the NY Times reported, before an estimated audience of 9,000. "The bird fspace flight, said at a post-landing news conference. "The brakes look like it's in good shape," Jesse Moore, NASA's associate administrator good coming in and we are very, very pleased with the results of the nosewheel steering test." During the landing, Challenger commander Henry Hartsfield tested a new steering mechanism built to reduce tire and brake damage that had occurred during several Space Shuttle landings. An orbiter had not landed at Kennedy Space Center (KSC) since the previous April, when both main landing gears collapsed and one tire blew out. The test called for Hartsfield to engage the new steering mechanism seconds after the nosewheel touched down on the runway so he could steer Challenger 20 feet off course and then bring it back to the centerline. One more successful test later in the year would clear orbiters to resume landing in December at KSC. Officials in West Germany, which paid NASA $64 million to fly Spacelab D-1 on Challenger, called the mission "highly successful" and predicted that 90 to 95% of all the science studies would be completed. Earlier, a West German official at the science control center near Munich said only one study, a heat diffusion test on a sample of salt, would be unfinished by the time Challenger returned to earth. Crew members Dr. Bonnie Dunbar, Col. Guion Bluford Jr., Dr. Ernst Mes-serschmid, Dr. Reinhard Furrer, and Dr. Wubbo Ockels did not attend a postflight press conference, the Washington Post reported, but traveled to Dryden Flight Research Center where researchers would run tests on them to determine how well they readapted to gravity after a week in weightlessness. Later the five would go to Kennedy Space Center for more elaborate tests. The European Space Agency (ESA) announced after the flight that it was particularly satisfied with results from Spacelab D-1, on which ESA had 38% of the payload in terms of critical resources (mass, energy, and crew time). All ESA facilities on Spacelab D-1—the Space Sled, for studies of man's behavior under microgravity conditions; the Biorack, a multi-purpose facility for biological investigations of microgravity and cosmic radiation effects on life forms; and the Fluid Physics Module, for studies of basic fluid phenomena in space—performed perfectly with no operational or technical failures. (NASA FOR M-989-61-A [postflight] Nov 8/85; NYT, Nov 7/85, A21; W Post, Nov 6/85, A4; ESA release Nov 11/85)
