The $3 billion launch site at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California was deemed unsafe according to a Senate report released on this date. The salient feature cited was the closed exhaust ducts that could fill with hydrogen gas in the event that a Shuttle's main engines were shut down to abort liftoff or at the end of a flightreadiness testfiring. The report also noted that fog, high winds, and cool temperatures were common to the area and that the proximity of the launch pad to the control center put support personnel at risk. Because the Department of Defense required the California site to achieve polar orbit for reconnaissance satellites, it was recommended that they adopt the "new" Titan missiles. (W Times, Jun 18/86; LA Times, Jun 18/86; Jul 9/86)
The Johnson Space Center (JSC) in Houston, Texas, announced plans to build, and open by 1989, a $40 million visitor's center near its complex. The center would include a large geodesic dome, two hightech movie theaters, a simulated lunar landscape, a Mission Control Center simulation, and an exhibit hall featuring past achievements. (LA Times, Oct 23,86)
The European Space Agency's spacecraft Giotto encountered Halley's Comet as it passed within 335 miles of the body's nucleus. The craft transmitted pictures of the comet every four seconds up until two seconds and 930 miles away, when its camera was damaged by dust particles traveling 50 times the speed of a bullet. These were the closest pictures by far taken of the Comet. Multinational scientists at the West German control center were jubilant about data gathered by sophisticated instruments. The mission was the most spectacular taken on by the European Space Agency, and the international cooperation `"among scientists was lauded by the media. (B Sun, Mar 14/86; NY (#Times, Mar 14/86; W Post, Mar 14/86; W Times, Mar 14/86)
The Soviet Union invited foreign correspondents into its mission control center for a conference concerning orbiting cosmonauts and a live television interview with them. The Soviet Union set still another precedent when it allowed coverage of its space program by a large group of foreign press. The invitation followed a pattern of a more open Russian space agency, the televising of the recent liftoff of the cosmonauts on March 13, and the opening of the Soviet Space Research Institute to foreign visitors when the Vega spacecraft approached Halley's Comet were also first time events. (W Post, Apr 8/86; W Times, Apr 8/86)
