An article criticized NASA for abandoning its big space plans and instead engaging in some rather abstruse scientific studies as a result of its Mission to Planet Earth. (W Post, Oct 26/94)
NASA announced that the System Design Review (SDR) for the International Space Station Program was to be held March 23 and 24 at the Johnson Space Center, Houston. The following were to be present: NASA managers and those from the Canadian Space Agency, the European Space Agency, the Italian Space Agency, the Japanese Space Agency, the Russian Space Agency, the prime contractor Boeing, and Tier I subcontractors Rocketdyne and McDonnell Douglas. Randy Brinkley, Space Station Program Manager, said the SDR was scheduled to "lock in the key technical elements of the system as well as the schedule and cost." (NASA Release 94-45)
On the occasion of the 25th anniversary of the first moonlanding mission, the Italian newspaper La Repubblica published an interview with NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin. In it he complimented Italy for its good space knowhow, saying Italians were magicians in the area of space communication. He also mentioned ways in which Italy was cooperating with NASA such as the Italian astronaut who was to help complete the testing of the tethered satellite system and the Italian Space Agency's work with NASA on the Cassini Space Mission. He pointed out that above all NASA counted on Italy for the construction of logistic pressurization modules and that this construction would give Italian firms a technological capacity that would have an impact on all Italian industries. (La Repubblica, Oct 11/94)
NASA announced that it would continue to study how the Earth's environment was changing and how human beings affected that change during the upcoming flight of Space Shuttle Atlantis. This, the third flight of the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science (ATLAS) was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Also during the mission astronauts would deploy and retrieve a free-flying satellite designed to study the middle and lower thermospheres and would perform various experiments covering life sciences research and microgravity processing. The flight, commanded by Donald R. McMonagle, was scheduled for launch on November 3. (NASA Release 94-175)
Space Shuttle Endeavour, which had been rescheduled to lift off on April 8, was launched April 9 because of bad weather. In its cargo bay was the Space Radar Laboratory, weighing 23,000 pounds and containing $366 million worth of imaging systems. The system was to bounce radar waves off Earth in three frequency bands to produce three-dimensional maps of ocean currents, river valleys, forests and farm lands, the geology of volcanoes, and features under desert sands. NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and the German and Italian space agencies developed the equipment. The radar developed a glitch after the first day, but ground control was able to repair it and the results were most successful. (NY Times, Apr 8/94; W Post, Apr 8/94; B Sun, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 8/94; USA Today, Apr 8/94; AP, Apr 8/94; UP, Apr 8/94; Reuters, Apr 9/94; AP, Apr 9/94; W Post, Apr 10/94; NY Times, Apr 10/94; B Sun, Apr 10/94; P Inq, Apr 10/94; UPI, Apr 10/94; Reuters, Apr 10/94; AP, Apr 11/94)
One of the results of the data produced by the U.S.-French TOPEX-Poseidon satellite, part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was the mapping of ocean circulation, one of the least understood areas of climate research. Data had shown that the El Nino remnant wave was pushing the current northward off the coast of Japan, raising the temperature of the northwest Pacific. (W Post, Oct 3/94)
Bill Townsend, Deputy Associate Administrator for NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, was quoted as saying that with NASA starting the new fiscal year with a smaller budget, the Space Radar Laboratory might have mapped its last mountain range. Diane Evans, the radar's U.S. project scientist, indicated that the world was waiting to see what NASA would do with the Space Radar Laboratory, which to date had mapped only 5 percent of the Earth's surface, in comparison with the extensive coverage of the topography of Venus. (O Sen Star, Oct 12/94)
Space Shuttle Atlantis was launched and after reaching a 184-mile high orbit, the astronauts activated the Atmospheric Laboratory for Applications and Science and began collecting data concerning the depletion of Earth's protective ozone layer. Jacques Cousteau was on hand to watch the launch, at the invitation of several astronauts. French astronaut Jean-Francois Clervoy planned to launch a German satellite November 4 to study the ozone layer and the effects of solar radiation. A new approach was to be used to retrieve the satellite, comparable to a procedure to be used ultimately in docking with Mir. On November 5 it was reported that a German ozone monitor was not operating despite efforts to cool it and then rewarm it. Other instruments aboard, however, were able to monitor the ozone. At one point on November 6 the Shuttle briefly lost contact with NASA's control center because of crossed radio signals. The astronauts also studied the seasonal hole in the ozone layer over Antarctica. On November 9, for the third time, Atlantis astronauts aimed solar-energy monitors at the sun seeking clues about the dwindling ozone layer and global warming. A German satellite released from Atlantis the previous week had produced a first-of-its-kind global map of oxygen particles that scientists believed help cool the Earth. On November 10 scientists in Germany and Russia as well as those in the United States launched ozone-mapping balloons and rockets as Atlantis and its satellite passed overhead. NASA had launched 18 weather balloons and 20 small rockets from Wallops Island, Virginia, thus far in an experiment to verify the spacecraft's data. The astronauts successfully retrieved the German ozone-measuring satellite on November 12. Bad weather at the Kennedy Space Center, Florida caused NASA managers to divert Atlantis's landing on November 14 to Edwards Air Force Base, California. (Reuters, Nov 3/94; W Post, Nov 4/94; NY Times, Nov 4/94; USA Today, Nov 4/94; W Times, Nov 4/94; H Chron, Nov 4/94; AP, Nov 4/94; Fla Today, Nov 4/94; UPI, Nov 4/94; Reuters, Nov 4/94; W Post, Nov 5/94; Reuters, Nov 5/94; LA Times, Nov 6/94; W Post, Nov 6/94; NY Times, Nov 6/94; AFP, Nov 6/94; UP, Nov 6/94; Reuters, Nov 6/94; USA Today, Nov 7/94; W Times, Nov 7/94; W Post, Nov 7/94; C Trib, Nov 7/94; AvWk, Nov 7/94; NY Times, Nov 8/94; W Post, Nov 8/94; W Times, Nov 8/94; AP, Nov 8/94; NY Times, Nov 9/94; W Post, Nov 9/94; USA Today, Nov 9/94; AP, Nov 9/94; NY Times, Nov 10/94; W Post, Nov 10/94; USA Today, Nov 10/94; Daily Gleaner, Nov 10/94; AP, Nov 10/94; W Times, Nov 11/94; NY Times, Nov 12/94; Salt Lake Tribune, Nov 12/94; H Chron, Nov 12/94; AP, Nov 12/94; Reuters, Nov 12/94; W Post, Nov 13/94; NY Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 13/94; W Times, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; AP, Nov 14/94; UP, Nov 14/94; Reuters, Nov 14/94; LA Times, Nov 15/94; NY Times, Nov 15/94; W Post, Nov 15/94; AP, Nov 15/94)
NASA's attempts to streamline its management of space programs and cut costs were highlighted with details of personnel cuts and commendation of the efforts of Jeremiah Pearson who had served as associate administrator for space flight. An example of Shuttle and Space Station mergers was the Johnson Space Center's new $250 million Mission Control Center. The Center could handle Shuttle missions, activities aboard the Mir, and the new International Space Station simultaneously. (H Chron, Dec 4/94)
The Italian Foreign Ministry announced that Italy and the United States would launch a spacecraft in October 1997 on a seven-year voyage to Saturn. The Cassini would leave a special probe, called Huygens, on the surface of Saturn's largest moon, Titan, to gather data on the atmosphere, magnetosphere, and chemical make-up of the rings of Saturn and the movements of its satellites. An agreement to conduct the mission, which was being developed by NASA and the Italian Space Agency, was signed by Italian Foreign Minister Antonio Martini and U.S. Ambassador to Italy, Reginald Bartholomew. (Reuters, Jul 21/94)
NASA unveiled its new Mission Control center in Houston with a flight simulation that pretended to rendezvous a Space Shuttle with a satellite. The demonstration went well and provided an opportunity to identify additional equipment needed, such as more display facility. The new center should be directing the Shuttle in orbit by the summer of 1995. (Federal Computer Week, Dec 20/94; H Post, Dec 21/94)
NASA announced that more than a decade after affecting climate on a global scale, residual signs of a powerful El Nino were still visible from space. Oceanographers using data from the U.S.-French TOPEX/Poseidon satellite were tracking the remnant wave of the 1982-83 El Nino as it moved across the Northwest Pacific Ocean, where some scientists theorized it might still be affecting weather in the region. TOPEX/Poseidon, a joint program of NASA and the Centre Nationale d'Etudes Spatiales, the French space agency, used a radar altimeter to precisely measure sea-surface height. The study was part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. Launched August 10, 1992, the satellite had completed two years of its three-year prime mission. (NASA Release 94-162; W Post, Oct 3/94)
NASA and the California Institute of Technology (CIT) signed a five-year, five-billion-dollar, cost-plus-award-fee contract to manage NASA's 7,300-member Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). This contract consolidated two previous contracts for CIT, which has managed JPL since NASA's inception in 1958. JPL, NASA's lead site for solar-system exploration, designed and built the Wide Field/Planetary Camera (WF/PC II) recently installed on NASA's Hubble Space Telescope (HST). It also runs programs such as NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, its Galileo mission to Jupiter, and the Magellan mission to Venus, as well as the U.S. half of the NASA/ESA Ulysses mission to the sun, the NASA/CNES TOPEX/POSEIDON, and the SIR-C/X-SAR radar system on the Shuttle. (NASA Release C94-c)
The condition of the Russian space program was described in view of Russia's new space cooperation with the United States. Russian policy was to activate the control center for Space Station Mir only when the ground was in contact with Mir. Otherwise the center was closed and personnel returned to their primary employment: moonlighting jobs. The primary Russian contractor on the Space Station, NPO Energia, had made progress toward privatization, but upper management remained committed to the traditional Soviet pattern of secrecy and exclusion of outside supervision. (O Sen Star, Jul 3/94)
NASA and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) announced their agreement to put their space cooperation on a long-term basis. The arrangement provided for expanded cooperation in space science, microgravity research, and the Mission to Planet Earth, as well as Canada's continued full partnership in the International Space Station program. (NASA Release 94-89)
Intermetrics, Inc., of McLean, VA, was awarded an $81 million, 10-year contract as part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. It provide Independent Verification & Validation (IV&V) of the Earth-Observing system (EOS) Data and Information System (EOSDIS), for the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Greenbelt, Maryland. EOS was projected to generate about 1 trillion bytes of new data per day, offering access to data on the Earth's ecosystem, permitting scientists to distinguish natural from human-made changes. (NASA Release C94-b)
Carl Pilchner, who works on advanced planning issues in NASA's Office of Space Science, told the agency's Space Science Advisory Committee that top NASA managers were drafting a 12-20 page strategic plan giving highest budget priority to the Mission to Planet Earth (MTPE). The MTPE was due to the insistence of Vice President Gore, reflecting messages NASA Administrator Goldin was receiving from the White House in response to his submitted proposals. (Def Daily, Jan 21/94)
NASA announced that some 50 U.S., Canadian, and European scientists had begun the second phase of a detailed ecological study of the forests of Canada and the role these forests played in climate change. The Boreal Ecosystem-Atmosphere Study (BOREAS) was a large-scale, ground-based, and remote-sensing investigation of the way the forests and the atmosphere exchange energy, heat, water, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases. From April 11 to May 2, scientists were to study the forests during the annual snowmelt. The Focused Field Campaign-Thaw, the second of five parts of BOREAS, was to build on spaceborne data resulting from the first flight of the Space Radar Laboratory (SRL) aboard Space Shuttle Endeavour. BOREAS and SRL formed part of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth. (NASA Release 94-65)
NASA Associate Administrator Charles Kennel visited the University of North Dakota's (UND) Center for Aerospace Science (CAS). Kennel was in charge of NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, for which UND's Associate Dean George Seielstad said UND had a small contract. Kennel stated that CAS was well equipped and positioned to make data about the Earth available to nontraditional users. (Grand Forks Herald, Jun 23/94)
NASA scientist Michael Van Woert discussed plans for a satellite in NASA's Mission to Planet Earth, which was to be a follow-on to the U.S./French topex/Poseidon then in orbit. The successor, to be launched in 1998, would be smaller and cost $200 million. However, NASA cannot find the $120 million for its share, which was to include building the spacecraft bus and integrating the instruments. The French space agency, CNES, offered to build the bus if NASA would help with integration and launch it, which should save the United States some $50 million. (AvWk, May 30/94)
The Hammer award, developed by Vice President Al Gore as part of the Clinton Administration's "reinventing" government, was presented to John Muratore, chief of the Johnson Space Center's Control Center Systems Division, and his staff. They were honored for their innovative approach to establishing a high-speed, high-data-rate computer system that would enable the new NASA Mission Control Center to control a space shuttle, the Russian Mir Space Station as well as the planned International Space Station. They developed a strategy linking smaller, less expensive computers within the nearly 200 flight control work stations. (H Chron, Sep 30/94)
Following what NASA Administrator Daniel Goldin described as two successful days of talks with Russian Space Agency officials about the International Space Station, Goldin said the Station was still on track despite problems with Russia's Mir orbital laboratory. Goldin said the United States was paying Russia more than $300 million to place its astronauts aboard Mir over the next two years. The Russian segment of the Station was to be run by the mission control center in Kaliningrad near Moscow. Joint training was already being condcted at the Russian and American control centers. The Russian newspaper Krasnaya Zvezda said that the United States put the cost of the Space Station at $20 billion and added that it was not known what the cost would be to Russia or how the cost would be funded. The current situation in Russia was particularly difficult and Russia would need to rely on its own efforts and could not count on funds from abroad. (Itar-Tass, Nov 11/94; Moscow Tribune, Nov 12/94; Izvestiya, Nov 12/94; Krasnaya Zvezda, Nov 15/94)
NASA announced that Space Shuttle Endeavour was to be launched in April to study Earth's global environment. The Space Radar Laboratory was to consist of the Spaceborne Imaging Radar-C/X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar and the Measurement of Air Pollution from Satellite. Of these instruments, the German Space Agency (DARA) and the Italian Space Agency (ASI) were to provide the X-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar. An international team of 49 science investigators from 13 nations were to conduct the experiments. In addition, the mission was to include NASA's Get Away Special experiments that allow average persons a chance to perform experiments in space; it was also to be the first cooperative initiative with the National Institutes of Health using a special cell culture system. (NASA Release 94-38)
NASA was consulting researchers in Canada, Europe, and Japan on how best to build on two successful Earth surveys by a Shuttle-borne set of complex, multifrequency radar instruments carried by the Space Radar Laboratory. NASA had asked the National Academy of Sciences to recommend the next step, such as the possibility of a reflight of the Laboratory. But a major objective was by international consultation to determine the potential for combining international efforts into a joint project to orbit a highly capable space radar system, according to William Townsend, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator in charge of the Office for the Mission to Planet Earth. (AvWk, Oct 17/94)
Students and teachers at Alvin High School in Texas, with the assistance of a neighboring community college and members of the Consortium for Aerospace Technology Education (CATE), were building their own space center similar to that at the Control Center Complex of NASA's Johnson Space Center (JSC). Frank Hughes, chief of the Flight Training Division at JSC, initiated the CATE program, which integrated cooperation from industry (Rockwell) with that of community colleges and universities. (H Chron, Dec 14/94)
NASA announced the selection of astronaut Kenneth D. Cameron to manage NASA operational activities at Star City, Russia, and at the Russian control center at Kaliningrad. (NASA Release 94-27)
