NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin and President of the Italian Space Agency Sergio DeJulio signed a framework for cooperation agreement for the construction of the habitation module for the ISS. The ISS partners planned the module to house the ISS crew, providing a galley and a Treadmill Vibration Isolation System among other features. In exchange for designing and manufacturing the habitation module, the Italian Space Agency received a commitment from NASA to provide Italian astronauts with access to the Shuttle and the ISS, as well as to help train Italian astronauts for their time in space. The bilateral agreement continued the trend of cooperation among nations, making the ISS a truly international endeavor.(NASA, “NASA Administrator Goldin and ASI President Dejulio To Sign Framework for Cooperation,” news release N01-24, 19 April 2001; NASA Watch, “NASA/ASI International Space Station Habitation Module Project Framework for Cooperation,” http://www.nasawatch.com/iss/04.19.01.nasa.asi.hab.html (accessed 24 July 2008).)
NASA opened a new command and control center that would allow researchers on Earth to participate in scientific research conducted aboard the ISS. The new facility, located at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama, featured state-of-the-art communication and research technologies. Director of MSFC Arthur G. Stephenson described the new center as a significant part of NASA’s ongoing plan to make space research more efficient and useful: “From this facility we will manage fundamental scientific research that can only be done in spaceresearch that will lead to knowledge to benefit all humanity here on Earth.” NASA planned to staff the 13,000-square-foot (1,200-square-meter) facility 24 hours per day to support research aboard ISS. In addition to its link to the ISS, the new facility was equipped to monitor payload resources, facilitate data transfer, and communicate with universities and research centers throughout the world. The new command post opened only days before Space Shuttle Atlantis’s scheduled trip into space to carry the Destiny research laboratory module to the ISS.(NASA, “NASA Opens Space Station Command Post,” news release 01-15, 2 February 2001; Shelby G. Spires, “MSFC Opens Science ‘Mission Control’ Today,” Huntsville Times (AL), 2 February 2001.)
Space Shuttle Endeavour STS-100/ISS-6A launched into orbit carrying a Canadian-built robotic arm for the ISS and one of the most diverse crews ever assembled. The Canadian Space Agency had developed and built Canadarm2 at a cost of nearly US$1 billion. With a reach extending to 57 feet (17 meters), Canadarm2 was the centerpiece of Canada’s contribution to the ISS. Once in place, the new robotic arm would allow the ISS crew to lift spacewalkers to every part of the ISS’s exterior to perform maintenance and repairs. During the mission, the crew planned to install the arm, as well as to transport to the ISS a logistics carrier developed by the Italian Space Agency. The seven-person crew―Commander Kent V. Rominger, Pilot Jeffrey S. Ashby, and Mission Specialists Chris A. Hadfield, Scott E. Parazynski, John L. Phillips, Umberto Guidoni, and Yuri V. Lonchakov―included astronauts representing the space agencies of Canada, Europe, and Russia. STS-100 was the Shuttle’s fifth flight in six months, setting a record for the most spaceflights performed during such a short period in NASA’s history.(NASA, “Space Shuttle Mission Archives: STS-100,” http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/shuttle/ shuttlemissions/archives/sts-100.html (accessed 2 February 2009); NASA, “Endeavour’s International Crew Delivers Space Station Helping Hand,” news release 01-73, 16 April 2001; Mark Carreau, “Endeavour Lifts Off To Attach Arm to Space Station,” Houston Chronicle, 20 April 2001; NASA, “Endeavour’s Mission Will Extend Space Station’s Reach with Next-Generation Robotics; Launch Set for April 19,” news release 01-67, 6 April 2001.)
Russian cosmonauts Vladimir N. Dezhurov and Mikhail Tyurin performed a spacewalk outside of the ISS, the first time ISS crew had walked in space without a Shuttle present. Two tethers attached each cosmonaut to the ISS as the pair departed and reentered the station through the 16- foot (4.9-meter) Russian module Pirs, added to the ISS in September 2001. During the 5-hour spacewalk, the two cosmonauts hooked up a 40-foot (12.2-meter) crane, a ladder, handrails, and other equipment to the exterior of the ISS. American astronaut Frank L. Culbertson Jr. monitored the two cosmonauts’ work from inside the station, and Mission Control Center in Moscow supervised the spacewalk.(Marcia Dunn, “Cosmonauts Work Outside on Station; Spacewalk from New Module Is First Without Shuttle Present,” Washington Post, 9 October 2001.)
Space Shuttle Discovery landed at NASA’s KSC in Cape Canaveral, Florida, returning to Earth the crew of Expedition 1―Commander William M. Shepherd, Flight Engineer Sergei K. Krikalev, and Soyuz Commander Yuri P. Gidzenko. The Expedition 1 crew had lived and worked aboard the ISS since 31 October 2000. Commander James D. Wetherbee and Pilot James M. Kelly guided Discovery to a smooth night landing, the 17th night landing in the history of the Space Shuttle program and the 12th in the history of KSC.(NASA JSC, “STS-102, Mission Control Center Status Report # 27,” 21 March 2001, http://spaceflight.nasa.gov/spacenews/reports/sts102/STS-102-27.html (accessed 2 February 2009).)
