At 8:47 p.m. (EST), Soyuz TMA-2 landed safely in the steppes of Kazakhstan, returning to Earth the ISS Expedition 7 crew, American astronaut Edward T. Lu and Russian cosmonaut Yuri I. Malenchenko. Spanish astronaut Pedro Duque of ESA was also aboard the flight, returning from a 10-day mission performing scientific experiments in the ISS lab. The Soyuz TMA-2 flight was equipped with a GPS and satellite phones, which NASA had donated to prevent a disruption in communications between the crew and Mission Control Center in Moscow. Such a disruption had occurred in May 2003, when a Soyuz craft returning from the ISS had landed 250 miles (402.3 kilometers) off course because of a computer malfunction.(Mara D. Bellaby of Associated Press, “Soyuz Crew Safely Returns to Earth from Space Station,” 27 October 2003.)
NASA released topographic data collected during its Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), which had lasted from 11 to 22 February 2000, producing three-dimensional measurements of more than 80 percent of Earth’s landmass between 60° north and 56° south of the equator. Because of South America’s proximity to the equator and its frequent tropical cloud cover, traditional satellites had encountered difficulty acquiring imagery of its topography, but the cloud-penetrating radar on board the SRTM had produced information with scientific and commercial value that would help improve life on the continent. SRTM Project Scientist Michael Kobrick of NASA’s JPL remarked that the data would assist governments to prepare for natural hazards like earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, and floods. In addition, the information would help improve aviation safety in mountainous areas, and would help land-use planners make better-informed decisions about the development of critical infrastructure. The mission was a cooperative project of NASA, the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) of the U.S. DOD, and the German and Italian space agencies.(NASA, “South America Shines in NASA’s Latest Space Radar Map Release,” news release 03-204, 19 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_03204_S_Amer_Space_Radar.html (accessed 12 December 2008).)
Returning from the ISS aboard Soyuz TMA-1, American astronauts, Kenneth D. Bowersox and Donald R. Pettit, and Russian cosmonaut Nikolai M. Budarin, touched down in the steppes of Kazakhstan 276 miles (444 kilometers) off course. The landing was the first time American astronauts had returned to Earth in a foreign spacecraft. Budarin, Bowersox, and Pettit had arrived at the ISS in November 2002 aboard Endeavour, scheduled to return to Earth aboard another Shuttle flight on 11 March. However, the Columbia disaster in February had grounded the remaining three Shuttles in NASA’s fleet, prolonging the crew’s stay aboard the ISS. Russian search teams took 2 hours, using a helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft, to find the crew. The last radio contact between the capsule and Mission Control Center in Moscow had occurred after the craft’s parachutes opened, about 15 minutes before landing. Failure to reestablish contact had caused concern for the trio’s welfare. Russian Space Agency spokesperson Sergei Gorbunov announced that a special commission would investigate the causes of the malfunctions during landing.(Mark Carreau, “Anxiety as Astronauts Miss Target for Landing,” Houston Chronicle, 5 May 2003; Sharon LaFraniere, “Space Station Crew Returns Home in Russian Soyuz,” Washington Post, 5 May 2003.)
Nikolai I. Zelenschikov, who had led the investigation into the off-target landing of Soyuz TMA- 1, announced that a technical malfunction, rather than crew error, had caused the craft’s unexpectedly steep and off-course landing on 4 May, when the craft returned two astronauts and a cosmonaut to Earth. Zelenschikov, Deputy Chief Designer of RSC Energia (S.P. Korolev Rocket and Space Corporation), stated that specialists had found no problems with the new software on Soyuz TMA-1 and had discovered no errors attributable to the crew. Instead, investigators had found that a 25-year-old instrument had failed to control the spacecraft’s descent. Soviet engineers had a plan for modifying the instrument to ensure its reliability. Investigators had also recommended that the Russian Space Agency position more airplanes and helicopters along the trajectory of landing Soyuz craft, but cosmonaut Pavel V. Vinogradov, a member of the commission investigating the accident, noted that chronic underfunding had led to a shortage of aircraft available for this purpose. The commission further recommended equipping Soyuz craft with satellite communication technology. Because several of the craft’s antennas had failed, the Soyuz TMA-1 crew had lost radio contact with Mission Control Center in Moscow during landing and had not regained it. Zelenschikov stated that the Russian space industry would make all necessary modifications to the Soyuz TMA-3 craft but could make no repairs to Soyuz TMA-2, which had already docked at the ISS. However, the Russian Space Agency planned to ferry a satellite phone to the ISS aboard a cargo mission, for use on the return flight of to TMA-2.(Mara D. Bellaby for Associated Press, “Rough Soyuz Landing Blamed on Malfunction,” 26 May 2003; Agence France-Presse, “Officials Promise To Fix Fault in Russia’s Soyuz Craft Before Next Space Mission,” 26 May 2003. 446 NASA, “Chief of Staff Courtney Stadd Announces Plans To Leave Agency,” news release 03-177, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03177_stadd.html (accessed 20 November 2008); NASA, “NASA Names New Chief of Staff,” news release 03-178, http://www.nasa.gov/home/ hqnews/2003/may/HQ_03178_schumacher_chiefofstaff.html (accessed 20 November 2008).)
The Dutch-Italian satellite known as BeppoSAX reentered Earth’s atmosphere and splashed into the equatorial Pacific Ocean seven years after its launch into orbit on 30 April 1996. The Italian Space Agency and the Netherlands Agency for Aerospace jointly operated the 3,086-pound (1,400-kilogram) x-ray satellite, best known for its discovery of 50 gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). The Italian Space Agency had estimated that as much as 1,325 pounds (601 kilograms) of the craft could survive reentry, with individual pieces weighing 220 pounds (99.7 kilograms) and had, therefore, notified 39 countries that pieces of the spacecraft could potentially land in their territory. However, the debris falling closest to land splashed into the ocean 186 miles (299 kilometers) northwest of the Galapagos Islands.
NASA announced that it had awarded the contract to manage the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) Science and Operations Control Center to a nonprofit consortium, the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy (AURA). The contract, valued at US$162.2 million, stipulated that AURA manage the Science and Operations Control Center at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore, Maryland. AURA would provide products and services required to prepare the science program, develop ground systems, provide science and engineering support, provide integration and test support, perform educational and public outreach, and perform flight and science operations during the launch and commissioning of JWST, scheduled for launch in 2011.(NASA, “Webb Spacecraft Science and Operations Center Contract Award,” contract release c03-r, 6 June 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2003/jun/HQ_c03r_Webb.html (accessed 6 June 2003).)
