Donald R. Puddy, longtime NASA Flight Director who had supervised numerous human spaceflight missions, died at the age of 67 in Houston, Texas. Born in Oklahoma, Puddy had joined NASA’s JSC in 1964 and had spent 22 years at JSC’s Mission Control Center. Puddy was only the 10th person to become a NASA flight director. He had later served in many other positions at NASA’s JSC, ARC, and Headquarters. As JSC Flight Director, Puddy had led flight- control teams during the Apollo Program, the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project, and the Skylab missions, as well as serving as Flight Director for the first Space Shuttle mission. He had also created and managed projects related to aircraft-safety procedures and had played a significant role in early cooperative efforts between the space programs of the United States and the U.S.S.R. Among the numerous awards Puddy had received for his achievements were the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the NASA Outstanding Leadership Medal.(Mark Carreau, “Donald Puddy, Veteran NASA Flight Director,” Houston Chronicle, 24 November 2004; NASA JSC, “NASA Honors Memory of Mission Control Veteran Don Puddy,” news release J04-054, 23 November 2004.)
Passing by Saturn’s furthest moon Phoebe, the Cassini spacecraft returned analyses of the moon indicating that Phoebe’s chemical composition is similar to the composition of comets, a finding that supported previous scientific theories about the enigmatic Phoebe. Because Phoebe has an unusually dark appearance and orbits Saturn in a direction opposite that of the planet’s other moons, scientists had theorized that the moon is a captive object of Saturn. Cassini’s analyses of Phoebe indicated that the diminutive moon’s surface is composed of carbon dioxide, water ice, water-bearing minerals, and various organic chemicals. The results indicated possible chemical similarities between Phoebe’s composite materials and materials observed in comets. The Cassini spacecraft was one of two in the Cassini-Huygens mission, a joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA. Besides Cassini―an orbiter designed to orbit Saturn, studying the planet and its system of moons―the project included the probe Huygens, created to examine Saturn’s largest moon Titan. (Richard A. Kerr, “Dirty Old Ice Ball Found at Saturn,” Science 304, no. 5678 (18 June 2004): 1727; Warren E. Leary, “Craft Confirms a Comet Link for Peculiar Moon of Saturn,” New York Times, 24 June 2004.)
Cassini-Huygens became the first spacecraft to successfully navigate Saturn’s rings and to orbit the planet. A joint project of ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA, the mission comprised two spacecraft: the orbiter Cassini and the probe Huygens. The space agencies had planned for Cassini to conduct 76 orbits of Saturn during a four-year survey of the planet and its moons. They had designed the Huygens probe to analyze the atmosphere of Titan, Saturn’s largest moon. If the probe survived its descent to Titan, it would analyze the moon’s surface, as well.(ESA, “Cassini-Huygens Enters Orbit Around the Ringed Planet,” ESA news release 36-2004, 1 July 2004; Guy Gugliotta, “Cassini First To Orbit Saturn,” Washington Post, 1 July 2004.)
NASA launched the Swift satellite from the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. NASA and an international team of participants had designed the spacecraft to detect and analyze gamma-ray bursts (GRBs)―ephemeral explosions that occur throughout the universe, usually far from Earth. GRBs may indicate a number of significant cosmological events, such as the collision of extremely dense celestial bodies or the formation of black holes. Swift was equipped with three telescopes to study GRBs, including the Burst Alert Telescope, which could detect and locate GRBs, and the X-ray Telescope (XRT) and Ultraviolet/Optical Telescope (UVOT), two telescopes that could study the bursts’ afterglows. Among the many participants in the Swift mission were the Italian Space Agency and the Particle Physics and Astronomy Research Council of the United Kingdom.(NASA, “NASA Successfully Launches Swift Satellite,” news release 04-382, 22 November 2004; New York Times, “NASA Starts Hunt for Celestial Bodies,” 21 November 2004.)
The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft completed the closest approach ever made to Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, as well as the only moon in the solar system known to have an atmosphere. Soon after Cassini pierced Titan’s viscous atmosphere, the spacecraft beamed images of the moon’s surface to mission scientists at NASA’s JPL. ESA, the Italian Space Agency, and NASA had launched the mission in 1997 to study Saturn and its moons. Even though it is too cold to support life, scientists remain greatly interested in Titan, because they suspect that conditions on the planet are similar to those on Earth before the development of life.(ESA, “Cassini-Huygens Makes First Close Approach to Titan,” ESAnews release, 26 October 2004.)
