STS-118 Mission Specialist Dafydd R. “Dave” Williams and ISS Expedition 16 Flight Engineer Clayton C. Anderson made the fourth and final spacewalk of STS-118. Over the course of 5 hours, the pair installed the antenna of the External Wireless Instrumentation System, attached a stand for the extension boom of the Shuttle’s robotic arm, and retrieved two materials experiment containers for return to Earth aboard Endeavour. Mission Control had cancelled approximately 2 hours worth of tasks from the EVA to enable the crew to close the hatch between the ISS and the Shuttle in preparation for an early departure. NASA managers had rescheduled the return flight to enable Endeavour to land a day early, in case Hurricane Dean headed toward Houston. The hurricane could have forced an emergency relocation of flight controllers from Houston to a makeshift control center in Cape Canaveral, Florida. A temporary control center would have been neither as organized nor as large as the Houston operation.(NASA KSC, “STS-118”; Marcia Dunn for Associated Press, “Astronauts Hurriedly Complete Spacewalk,” 19 August 2007.)
The People’s Republic of China released the first image of the Moon that its Chang’e-1 lunar probe had captured, marking the formal start of China’s mission to document the lunar landscape. China unveiled the image at a ceremony at the Beijing Aerospace Control Center. China’s Premier Wen Jiabao described the event as a major step in his people’s 1,000-year-old dream of exploring the Moon. Chang’e 1 had become China’s first circumlunar satellite on 5 November when it successfully entered the Moon’s orbit.(Associated Press, “China Shows First Image from Lunar Probe,” 26 November 2007; Xinhua News Agency, “China’s First Lunar Probe Enters Moon’s Orbit,” 5 November 2007.)
NASA announced that its SSC in Mississippi had broken ground for the construction of a new rocket-engine test stand, which would provide altitude testing for the J-2X engine. The J-2X would power the upper stages of the Ares-1 and Ares-5 rockets. NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale spoke at the groundbreaking ceremony for the new test stand, recalling that the first stand erected at NASA’s SSC had tested the Saturn-5 rocket for the Apollo program. NASA had first tested the Space Shuttle engines at SSC in the 1970s. The new test stand for the new spacecraft signaled the beginning of a new era of exploration. The 19-acre site in SSC’s A Complex would contain the 300-foot-tall (91-meter-tall), open-steel-frame A-3 test stand; a test- control center; propellant-barge docks; and access roadways. Engineers would generate steam to reduce pressure in the test cell, using the test stand to simulate conditions at different altitudes.(NASA, “NASA’s Stennis Space Center Marks New Chapter in Space Exploration,” news release 07-180, 23 August 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/aug/HQ_07180_Stennis_groundbreaking.html (accessed 14 June 2010).)
