ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS,
IN TEN
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED itONAUY 8LAM8
January
January 6: Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) reported testing the thermal performance of a helium cooling system to be used on the large infrared telescope experiment planned for flight on Spacelab 2 in 1984. For the MSFC-managed experiment to work, the cooling system must keep the infrared detectors at a supercold temperature. The liquid-helium coolant stored during the mission in a 250-liter container would vaporize as withdrawn to circulate through telescope channels and keep the instrument near absolute zero, coldest possible temperature, at which all molecular action stops. One objective of the tests was to see how long the system could store the cold liquid; the container would be filled one or two weeks before launch, then undergo a seven-day mission. Tests would continue until March. (MSFC Release 82-2)
January 8: NASA said that it was relocating the Applications Technology Satellite (ATS) ATS 1 from its station at 149 °W to a new position about 50 farther west, at 162 °E. Maintaining orbit position in its present location required maximum use of its thrusters; moving to the new station would put ATS 1 into a more stable position and substantially reduce the stationkeeping power requirement.
Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had considered several options to conserve on-board fuel supplies, which had been estimated adequate until mid-1982.The new location should prolong stationkeeping through 1983 and reduce the need for center contract from biweekly to quarterly. (NASA Release 82-4)
January 15: NASA launched RCA-C from the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) at 8:55 p.m. on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,116-kilometer apogee, 182-kilometer perigee, and 27.5° inclination, from which it would assume a geosynchronous station at 83 °W. Called Satcom 4 in orbit, the 2,385-pound craft with a 10-year design life carried 24 transponders, each able to handle an FM/color television transmission. (NASA Release 82-3; NASA MOR 0-492-206-82-05 [prelaunch] Jan 11/82, [postlaunch] May 13/82; NASA wkly SSR, Jan 14-20/82; D/SD, Jan 19/81, 83)
• MSFC shipped the induced environment-contamination monitor back to Kennedy Space Center (KSC) after servicing it in preparation for the third Shuttle flight. The desk-sized detector consisted of 10 instruments to check the environment in and around the Shuttle cargo bay for contaminants that might damage or interfere with sensitive equipment. The monitor would play a dual role on the next mission: besides carrying out its normal functions, the
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED filAMB 32i
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1982
1,000-pound package would serve as a load to exercise the remote-manipulator arm. All instruments on the monitor operated successfully in its first flight on the second Shuttle mission; data collected then were still being analyzed. (MSFC Release 82-7)
—A month-long analysis of the data produced by the monitor on the second Shuttle flight clearly identified every contamination-producing activity (such as thrust firings and water dumps). On future missions, the monitor could differentiate contamination from other sources. It recorded low humidity in, and successful sealing of, the cargo bay from engine byproducts during ascent and descent; few particles of matter larger than five micrometers, but a number of smaller particles well above expectations; a 90% reduction of water molecules and other early-mission contaminants after about 35 hours in orbit; and a temporary cloud of particles from using the attitude-control system or from dumping of water. Project scientist Edgar Miller of MSFC said that, when the orbiter flew with the cargo bay pointing ahead, molecular readout was high because orbiter-generated particles were deflected back into the bay; action would be taken to keep this from happening while using sensitive instruments.
The third Shuttle flight, planned for seven-days, would test the monitor in high temperatures from the planned solar orientation of the cargo bay, compared to the mild levels produced by the Earth orientation of the second flight. The remote manipulator would move the monitor to selected points for readout during the flight. (MSFC Release 82-14; NASA Release 82-13)
January 19: MSFC said that it had shipped the external tank for the fourth Shuttle mission from Michoud Assembly Facility on the NASA barge Orion for a five-day trip to KSC. The fourth launch was set for mid-1982. (MSFC Release 82-12)
—MSFC reported shipment of the monodisperse latex reactor, an experiment “with major medical and industrial applications,” to KSC for flight on the third Shuttle mission. Dale Kornfeld of MSFC’s space sciences laboratory said that the instrument would produce identical-sized microspheres of polystyrene latex, resembling tiny beads, to measure the size of intestinal pores for cancer research and of pores in the eye for glaucoma research and to act as a carrier of drugs and radioactive isotopes for treatment of cancerous tumors. On Earth, the beads could be produced only up to about 3 microns in size; the low gravity of space would permit them to “grow” up to 20 microns while remaining identical. The National Bureau of Standards had indicated interest in using the beads to calibrate medical and scientific equipment. (MSFC Release 82-9)
January 20: Ames Research Center (ARC) released new findings about Venus from 30 experiments of the Pioneer Venus missions and reported that the orbiter was still returning daily information. The data were available only now
322
JANUARY 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
because of the complexity of the missions and the large amounts of data returned, combined with the value of comparisons with Soviet data on Venus.
The new data included evidence for two major currently active volcanic areas on Venus; findings that Venus had a thicker crust than Earth and was a “one-plate” planet with little plate-tectonic movement; and models of the Venus cloud system and greenhouse effect that were complete and consistent.
The research also found strong new evidence of former Venus oceans on the scale of Earth’s. Data indicated that the Earth would become “a virtual Venus if you stopped its rotation, removed the moon, and moved [it] slightly closer to the sun.” Although Venus’s atmosphere and environment might have been Earthlike during the solar system’s early history, evidence of the lost oceans remained only in the ratio of deuterium to hydrogen (100 times as much deuterium relative to hydrogen on Venus as on Earth). Earlier, abundant water could have sustained life; the greenhouse effect “wiped out most existing phenomena” on Venus, replacing them with the current furnace-like environment. (ARC Release 82-1; NASA Release 82-9)
January 21: MSFC reported a joint-endeavor agreement signed by NASA’s Office of Space Sciences and GTI Corporation of San Diego that might lead to flight of a GTI materials-processing device on four future Shuttle flights. The agreement was a new NASA approach to government-industry partnerships in developing future applications or technologies for space-flown devices. The agreement would have three phases: design by GTI of a low-cost multichamber alloy-solidification furnace operable in low-gravity space; development, testing, and integrating the GTI furnace into the Shuttle; and flight on the Shuttle.
GTI’s interest was in the manufacturing in microgravity of space alloys that would not be immiscible on Earth, where many theoretical alloys were not possible because of the density variations of the elements and the effect of gravity on the heavier elements. GTI would fund development and testing; NASA, the integration and flight. (MSFC Release 82-13; NASA Release
82-10)
•	Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands and Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, the Spacelab payload specialists representing the European Space Agency (ESA), had arrived at MSFC to complete training for the first Spacelab flight set for September 1983, a seven-day joint U.S.-ESA mission to carry out 70 investigations in five different disciplines. Of the four payload specialists in training, one American and one European would actually go into space; the other two would provide ground support to those in orbit. (MSFC Release 82-11)
•	Marine Col. Jack Lousma and Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton, the astronauts scheduled to fly the third Shuttle mission, told a news conference in Houston that the flight was now set for March 22. A major objective of the
323
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JANUARY 1982
mission would be to see how well the Shuttle systems withstood the extreme heat and cold of space. Sections of the ship exposed to the Sun would experience temperatures up to 250°F; sections in shadow, down to -250°F. The Shuttle would also be subjected to slightly higher dynamic pressures during launch and landing, to gain additional knowledge about its flight characteristics and limits. {W Post, Jan 22/81, A-16)
During January: NASA named Dr. Burton I. Edelson, a senior vice president of Comsat General Corporation, as its associate administrator for space science and applications, effective February 14. He would succeed Andrew J. Stofan, who had been in an acting capacity and would remain as advisor until NASA appointed him to another management position. Edelson, before joining Comsat, had been an engineering officer in the U.S. Navy with assignments on the staff of the National Aeronautics and Space Council at the White House and the Office of Naval Research. (NASA anno Jan 13/82; NASA Release 82-7)
324
February
February 1-5: George Bush, U.S. vice president, unveiled at KSC the flight version of Spacelab, a reusable scientific-research facility designed to fly on the Shuttle.
At the ceremony, Mr. Bush called the Spacelab “an extraordinary engineering achievement. . .the largest cooperative space project ever.” Noting that more than 2,000 persons, from 50 European firms and 10 member nations, helped to build it, he added: “If today can be considered Spacelab’s birthday, then there are a great many proud parents celebrating... Let us continue to be partners,” he concluded, “and let me take this opportunity to assure you that we intend to continue our international cooperative programs, just as President Reagan recently reconfirmed the commitment of the United States to a vigorous space program.”
The joint venture of NASA and ESA was a cylindrical module built to fit into the Shuttle cargo bay, where both astronaut mission specialists and civilian scientists (payload specialists) would work in a shirtsleeve environment, with a series of unpressurized pallets to support experiments requiring direct exposure, to space. The first Spacelab flight, planned for a seven-day Shuttle mission in September 1983, would carry out some 70 investigations in 5 different disciplines.
About 50 firms in ESA’s participating nations had supplied parts to ERNO, prime contractor in Bremen, West Germany, for assembly and integration. The program, which cost ESA about $1 billion, would provide NASA, at no charge, with one engineering model and one complete flight version of Spacelab with associated ground-support equipment and some computer software. NASA was buying, for about $300 million, a second flight-model Spacelab to be delivered in mid-1982. MSFC would manage the first mission with ESA and had been in charge of U.S. development of flight-hardware items, such as the transfer tunnel and other operating equipment. MSFC would manage the second and third (NASA-only) missions alone. (Ofc of VP anno, Feb 5/82; NASA Release 82-14; MSFC Release 82-15; ESA Info 6, Feb 2/82, Feb 3/82)
• Dr. Stephen P. Synnott of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced evidence for the existence of four (possibly as many as six, new satellites of Saturn in data from Voyager 2’s Saturn encounter. This brought the number of known Saturnian satellites in between 21 and 23; the two “possible” satellites had only one observation each, and their orbits were not yet confirmed. In 1979, Synnott, a member of the Voyager navigation team, had found two new satellites of Jupiter in images studied after the Voyager encounters.
325
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1982
Some of the new “moons” seemed to be influenced by the gravity of larger moons as well as by Saturn itself: while orbiting between the planet and its larger moons, they would move faster than the large ones because of the strong pull of Saturn’s gravity. But, while closing from behind on the larger moons, the gravity of those bodies would pull them into orbit outside the larger moons, where Saturn’s pull was weaker, and they would slow and drop back into inner orbit. Scientists called this type of track “horseshoe orbits.” (JPL Release Feb 1/82; W Post, Feb 3/82, A-6)
February 2: ESA announced that it would develop a more powerful version of its Ariane launcher to “enhance its competitiveness on the space transportation systems market over the period 1986 to 1993 by reducing the cost per kilogram in orbit and providing greater adaptability to user requirements.”
Ariane 4 would differ from Ariane 3 in enlargement of the first-stage tanks, increasing on-board propellants from 140 tons to 220 tons; addition of liquid-or solid-fuel boosters in various combinations of two or four; and a new fairing fitted as necessary with a new dual-launch system, use of which was expected to increase steadily. Six versions of this new Ariane would permit launch of a wide range of spacecraft with masses between 1,100 and 4,300 kilograms; maximum lift would be twice that of the initial Ariane 1.
The development schedule called for a demonstration flight late in 1985 and an operational flight beginning early in 1986. Cost was estimated as $241 million U.S. (1981 prices). ESA has given France’s Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) technical direction and financial management of the development program. (ESA Info 5)
February 3: On the basis of data acquired in support of its mission objectives, NASA declared successful the Viking extended mission conducted from the end of its primary mission in 1976 until August 1980. Viking’s mission was to explore the planet Mars using two instrumented orbiters operating in conjunction with two instrumented landers on the surface. Identical spacecraft launched in 1975, each consisting of an orbiter and a lander, began operating at Mars in 1976. The design life of the spacecraft was 90 days following orbit insertion or landing on the Martian surface; however, the Viking flight team found “ingenious ways” to extend the operating lifespans and obtain the maximum possible science data.
When the extended mission began November 15, 1976, Orbiter 2 operated until July 24, 1978 (another 20 months), when a small leak in its attitude-control system depleted its gas supply. Lander 2 operated on the planet’s surface for 41 months, until April 12, 1980; its transmitter was turned off when its batteries could no longer hold a charge. Orbiter 1 lasted even longer, a total of 45 months after orbital insertion, and completed is operations August 7, 1980, when its control gas was also exhausted. The end of Orbiter 1 operation was to be the official end of the Viking extended mission; however, Lander 1—designated the Mutch Memorial Station January 7, 1981—was still
326
FEBRUARY 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
operating in a continuation automatic-mission mode and providing important science data.
Extended-mission objectives were “to obtain seasonal variations, long-duration sampling for statistically important experiments, and to obtain data not possible during the primary mission due to time constraints or observational limitations.” Mission results were “far in excess of those expected.” The program now consisted of Lander l’s acquiring and storing imaging, meteorology, and engineering data in a seven-plus day cycle and transmitting to Earth on command. Data should continue until the end of 1994, when the radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) could no longer power the transmitters. (NASA MOR S-815-75-01/02 [postlaunch] Feb 3/82; NASA Release 82-36)
February 5: NASA announced a week-long series of Shuttle checks to verify readiness for launch. Prime and backup crew members would fly a mock liftoff, return to launch site, and descend from orbit to a simulated landing on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The first 99 hours would be checkout of individual orbiter systems (electrical distribution, environmental control, instrumentation, flight control, and propulsion), the external tank (power, instrumentation, range safety, and tumble-valve systems), and solid-fuel rocket boosters (hydraulic, electrical, instrumentation, and range-safety systems) as well as critical electrical and mechanical connections between Shuttle elements.
The second part of the tests would simulate portions of the mission, the launch, a return-to-launch-site abort with the orbiter’s system in control, and descent from orbit. (NASA Release 82-19)
February 8: The Office of Science and Technology Policy in the Executive Office of the President released budget figures showing funds for all federal research and development as $43 billion in FY83, $4.2 billion over FY82. NASA’s portion of the research and development (R&D) budget ($6.5 billion for FY83, $672 million over FY82) would “assure timely transition of the space shuttle to an operational system [and] continue the highest priority research and space exploration projects,” namely the Space Telescope, the gamma-ray observatory, and the Galileo mission to Jupiter. (NASA anno, Feb 8/82)
—James M. Beggs, NASA’s administrator, said in a budget message that “given the tightly constrained fiscal environment. . .1 believe we did well.... [T]hough there are no new starts, we are continuing with most of our ongoing activity in what we consider to be a balanced way.” (Text, Feb 8/82)
February 10: The Washington Post reported that the U.S. Air Force would have to build a $40 million windscreen around its Space Shuttle launch pad at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California to protect the orbiter while the external tank was being attached.
327
astronautics and aeronautics
FEBRUARY 1982
The Air Force was building a second launch complex in California to put the Shuttle into north-south or polar orbit that, combined with Earth’s rotation, would carry it over the entire surface of the Earth. This would not be possible at Cape Canaveral for reasons of safety; from Vandenberg, however, the orbiter’s route would be over the Pacific ocean.
Hans Mark, deputy NASA administrator, told the House Committee on Science and Technology that the windscreen would be a huge three-sided sheet of metal around the launch pad to protect the orbiter from gusts while attaching the fuel tank. Winds off the Pacific at that location averaged 9 mph year-round and up to 47 mph from January through March, more than enough to break connections between Shuttle and tank. At the Cape, mating took place inside the Vehicle Assembly Building (VAB); Vandenberg had no such
building. (W Post, Feb 10/82, A-5)
February 16: NASA announced that Donald K. (Deke) Slayton, 58, last of the Mercury Seven astronauts selected in 1958, would leave after 23 years with the space agency. He had retired from NASA in February 1981 but had worked since that time on a temporary basis as a retired annuitant managing the Space Shuttle orbital flight tests at Johnson Space Center (JSC). He planned to work as a consultant to Aerospace Corporation, El Segundo, Calif., and to Space Sciences Inc. of Houston, Tex.
Slayton joined the U.S. Air Force in 1942, flying 56 combat missions in Europe and 7 over Japan as a B-25 bomber pilot; he was a test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base when selected as a Mercury astronaut. Grounded in August 1959 because of a suspected heart condition, he was later approved for flight and was part of the U.S. crew in the Apollo-Soyuz mission of July 1975. (NASA Release 82-23)
—The New York Times said that friends and associates “wondered why matters were not handled better”: NASA never responded to a JSC request for another year’s extension of Slayton’s employment. His departure reduced the number of the astronaut corps to 79. Several were doctors or scientists without piloting skills; 6 were women. “Many,” the New York Times added, “are young enough to be Slayton’s children.” There had been 108 U.S. astronauts “but only one Original Seven.” (NY Times, Feb 2/82, A-14; Feb 28/82, 30; W Post, Feb 18/82, A-21)
• Presidential Science Adviser Dr. George A. Key worth announced the names of 13 U.S. scientists and engineers to a White House Science Council.
Chairman of the council was Solomon J. Buchsbaum, executive vice president, Bell Laboratories; vice chairman was Edward Frieman, vice president, Science Applications Inc. Other members were Harold M. Agnew, president, General Atomic Company; John Bardeen, emeritus professor, engineering and physics, University of Illinois; D. Allan Bromley, professor of physics, Yale University (chairman, American Association for the Advancement of Science); George A. Cowan, senior fellow, Los Alamos Scientific
328
FEBRUARY 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Laboratory; Edward E. David, president, Exxon Research and Engineering (former science adviser to President Nixon); Donald S. Frederickson, resident fellow, National Academy of Sciences (former director, National Institutes of Health—NIH); Paul E. Gray, president, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); Robert O.. Hunter, president, Western Research Company; Arthur K. Kerman, director, MIT Center for Theoretical Physics; David Packard, chairman, Hewlett Packard; Edward Teller, Hoover Institute, Stanford University. Lt. Col. Thomas H. Johnson, special assistant to Key worth, said that the council would meet up to six times per year and would study issues with “significant technical components”; it was not meant to be demographically representative of U.S. science but rather would consist of “people with first-rate technical credentials and excellent judgment.”
The New York Times noted that in an interview last summer Keyworth said that “good judgment is hard to find” among scientists because “our profession is one of the few where arrogance has been condoned if not nurtured.”
A presidential science advisory committee formed in 1957 was abolished in 1977 by President Nixon, angry when some of its members took public stands against his policies. The new council, known by its initials WHSC (whisk), was meant to be more modest, the New York Times said. It would have its first meeting in March. (OST Policy Release, 2-16-82; NY Times, Feb 18/82, A-12)
February 19: A JSC release described a space operations center (SOC) concept completed by a special JSC study team. A manned center in space to exploit the Shuttle and allow incremental growth was the “essential next step in exploitation of space”; it would become a space-base and marshaling yard for large and complex payloads, including an upper-stage propulsion system in low Earth orbit. It would serve as “garage space” for reusable cryogenic stages for easier access, lowering costs of geosynchronous space operations. It could be a manned base with Department of Defense (DOD) military capabilities or a manned platform for science and applications research. It could provide a manufacturing facility in a weightless environment.
The JSC design was for an SOC operating continuously, with maintenance and resupply, for 10 years; parts would be delivered and assembled by the Shuttle orbiter in a low Earth orbit (230 to 280 statute miles). An 8- to 12-man center, about 435 feet long tip to tip, would weigh about 245,000 pounds. Initial launch would put into orbit an energy section, a short cylinder carrying two booms with solar arrays, antennas, reaction-control system, and radiators, weighing in total between 34,000 and 43,000 pounds. A second launch would bring a command module to be joined to the energy section, completing phase 1; this module would have one docking and nine berthing ports, airlocks, command station, guidance and control, data management, open-loop lift support, and accommodations for two (but able to support a crew of four, in an emergency). Weight would be between 40,000 and 50,000 pounds. The next launch would bring a second command module to the other end of the energy section.
329
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
FEBRUARY 1982
Each of the next two launches would bring a habitat module able to accommodate a crew of four; the two habitats would provide emergency accommodations and life support for a crew of eight. Each habitat would weigh between 25,000 and 28,000 pounds.
After phase 3, the SOC would be ready for long-term manned occupations by eight to twelve persons; the platform could now handle full flight support, satellite servicing, and space construction. (JSC Release 82-009; AvWk, Feb 15/82)
February 22: JPL reported the selection of Martin Marietta Aerospace for negotiations on study of spacecraft suitable for a Venus radar-mapping mission. Hughes Aircraft, which also submitted a proposal, had been selected in November 1981 as the radar-instrument study contractor for the mission. (NASA Release 82-26)
February 26: NASA launched Westar 4, first of a series of second-generation 24-transponder domestic commercial communications satellites built by Space Communications Company for Western Union, from ESMC on a Delta into a suborbital trajectory. An apogee kick motor would put it into orbit at 99 °W, 19,300 nautical miles over the equator to relay voice, data, video, and facsimile communications to an area covering the United States from Hawaii to the Virgin Islands.
Westar 4, with a design life of 10 years would join three other Western Union communications satellites: Westar 1 and Westar 2, launched in 1974, and Westar 3 launched in 1979. It was twice their si2:e and had four times their capacity. (NASA Release 82-17; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-06 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] May 13/82)
330
March
March 1: A robot craft, Venera 13, fifth from the Soviet Union to land on Venus, sent the first color pictures of that planet’s surface and scooped up a soil sample for the most detailed analysis to date of Venus chemistry, Tass reported.
A module detached from Venera 13 plunged through Venus’s dense carbon dioxide atmosphere to an area called Phoebe, south of its equator. A Venera 14 identical lander was scheduled to arrive March 5 at an area east of the Phoebe site. Soviet mission planners had consulted scientists and radar maps from the U.S. Pioneer Venus project in deciding where to aim the Veneras; they promised to share Venera data at future international scientific conferences. U.S. scientists familiar with the Soviet plans said that the Veneras were equipped for “much more sophisticated” studies of Venus soil chemistry than previous probes; these were the first craft able to drill into the crust, extract a sample, and analyze it, as the Vikings had on Mars.
Pioneer Venus 1 had been orbiting Venus since December 1978, mapping the planet by radar. Pioneer Venus 2 deployed five probes to sample the planet’s atmosphere, only one of them surviving to transmit an hour of data on surface temperatures. Soviet studies of Mars failed, but Venera 9 and Venera 10 in 1975 transmitted the first images from the Venus surface, and Venera 11 and Venera 12 in 1978 collected data on radioactive soil. After separation and landing, Venera 13 had survived to send surface data relayed by the mother ship for 127 minutes. (FBIS, Moscow, Tass in English, Mar 1/82, Mar 2/82; NY Times, Mar 2/82, C-l; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-10)
•NASA announced the crews for the fourth, fifth, and sixth Shuttle flights. On STS^4, Thomas K. Mattingly would be commander, and Henry W. Hartsfield, pilot. Scheduled for launch early in July, the seven day STS-4 would be the last of four orbital flight tests to verify Shuttle hardware and software. Mattingly, 47, orbited the Moon 10 years ago on Apollo 16: Hartsfield, 48, was a rookie.
STS-5, a five-day mission planned for mid-November to deploy commercial communications satellites, would be the first to use mission-specialist astronauts. Vance D. Brand, 50, who was command-module pilot on 1975’s Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, would be mission commander. This would be the first spaceflight for Robert F. Overmyer, 45, the pilot. Mission specialists would be Dr. Joseph R Allen and Dr. William B. Lenoir. Columbia would be the spacecraft for both STS-4 and STS-5.
STS-6, planned for January 1983, would be the first flight of the orbiter
331
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1982
Challenger, a two-day mission to deploy NASA’s Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System (TDRSS), one of an eventual two-satellite system providing comprehensive voice and data coverage between orbiting shuttles and the ground. Commander would be Paul J. Weitz, 49, who was pilot on Skylab /; copilot would be U.S. Air Force Col. Karol J. Bobko, 44, another rookie. Donald H. Peterson and Dr. Story Musgrave would fly as mission specialists.
NASA would no longer assign Shuttle backup crews; its pool of experienced pilots at JSC would readily permit interchange of crewmen. (NASA Release
82-33; JSC Release 82-012; W Post, Mar 2/82, A-9)
March 2: NASA said that it would change the Shuttle’s solid-fuel rocket boosters, reducing weight and increasing payload capability about 6,000 pounds (2,720 kilograms) by replacing 8 of the 11 metal booster motor-case segments with 4 segments made of composite filament. Other components, such as the metal forward and aft domes and the external-tank attachment area of the metal case, would remain. NASA had issued a request for proposals to develop the filament-wound case.
The lightweight case would be needed in high-performance launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base into near-polar orbit, helping to compensate for the loss of lift in west coast launches that could not use Earth’s rotation to boost their velocity. The lightweight case could also boost extra-heavy payloads into orbit from KSC. First use of the motor would be in 1985. After plan approval NASA would have Thiokol Corporation make test firings directed by MSFC of solid-fuel rocket motors with filament-wound casings. (NASA Release 82-32; MSFC Release 82-19)
• ARC reported changes in the Shuttle’s thermal protection system. New materials developed at ARC, stronger, lighter, and costing less than the original ones, would be installed gradually on the four orbiters over the next few years. Some new materials had been installed on Columbia; others were planned for Challenger, which was under construction for delivery this summer, and for Discovery and Atlantis, scheduled for delivery in 1983 and 1984.
Thermal protection of the Shuttle consisted of tiles and other heat-resistant materials applied to the outside to protect its aluminum and epoxy-graphite skin from extreme temperatures ranging from-170°F (-110°C) in space up to
3,000	°F (1,648 °C) during reentry. A growing knowledge of reentry problems had brought changes in the system: the original materials had served beyond expectations, but research had provided new answers. Columbia now had a glass-fiber quilt over 20 square feet of its elevon cove, replacing the felt reusable insulation that was inadequate to the 1,500 °F (816 °C) temperature in that area.
This new material would be used on Challenger, Discovery, and Atlantis. The new orbiters would also use a fibrous refractory composite insulation lighter and stronger than the current tiles that would save about 1,000 pounds
332
MARCH 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
on Discovery and Atlantis; the new insulation was developed by ARC and manufactured by Lockheed. (ARC Release 82-05)
• ARC noted that Pioneer 10 had been in space 10 years as of March 2. Launched in 1972, the first spacecraft to fly by Jupiter had crossed the asteroid belt, survived the radiation near Jupiter, and operated almost flawlessly on its way out of Earth’s solar system. It had traveled 3.27 billion miles, received more than 40 thousand commands, and transmitted more than 125 billion bits of scientific data. Now more than halfway between orbits Uranus and Neptune, 2.5 billion miles from the Sun, Pioneer was currently defining the extent of the solar atmosphere, a bubble in the interstellar medium called the heliosphere.
By June 1983, Pioneer would be at a point outside all of the planets of Earth’s system, in their current positions. Its transmissions, traveling at the speed of light, already needed 3 hours and 42 minutes to reach the operations center at ARC, and this time was increasing 1 minute every four days. Nearly all of its systems were still performing well; its magnetometer shut down in 1975, but experimenters could use correlations from five other instruments. Data showed that the heliosphere was far larger than predicted; Pioneer was seeking the boundary between the solar atmosphere and true interstellar space, probably 5 to 10 billion miles from the Sun. Experts at the Deep Space Network hoped to track Pioneer as far out as 5 billion miles.
The solar wind had been expected to slow with distance from the Sun, but this had not happened; almost no motion energy was lost as heat. Turbulence in the heliosphere was caused by solar storms, not solar-wind collisions. As solar storms increased in strength, the heliosphere seemed to alter shape, more oval at the Sun’s equator than its roundness at solar minimum. Pioneer 10's sun-sensor could no longer furnish position data because of its great distance from the Sun and the resultant decline in solar brightness. However, mission controllers would use the Pioneer camera (photopolarimeter) to make star maps that would provide the rotation and attitude data needed to define Pioneer’s position. (ARC Release 82-04; NASA Release 82-34)
March 4: NASA launched Intelsat 5-F4 for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT) from Cape Canaveral at 7:23 p.m. EST on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,953-kilometer apogee, 165. 8-kilometer perigee, and 24° inclination. INTELSAT would fire an apogee motor to put the communications satellite into a near-geosynchronous orbit for testing before moving it over the Indian Ocean to provide communications between Europe, the Middle East, and the Far East.
This fourth of the Intelsat 5 series built by Ford Aerospace had a capacity of 12,000 voice circuits plus two television channels. INTELSAT’s global system consisted of a space segment (10 satellites in synchronous orbit) and a ground segment (295 communications antennas at 242 ground stations in 129 countries and territories). The combined system provided more than 800
333
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1982
links between ground stations, with about 8,500 international voice circuits in full-time use, plus telegraph, telex, and television. (NASA MOR-491-203-82-04 [prelaunch] Feb 25/82, [postlaunch] Mar 25/82; INTELSAT Release 82-4-1)
March 10: The Observatory for Geophysical Monitoring of Climatic Change at Mauna Loa, Hawaii, on March 3 said that scientists doing a routine weather scan had discovered a huge cloud orbiting the Earth and had tracked it for five weeks, but could not explain what it was. The cloud, about 10 to 12 miles high (just above the flight paths of most commercial jets), had probably circled the Earth four or five times. The best guess was that it resulted from an unnoticed volcanic eruption.
On March 10 NASA said that the “mystery cloud” detected over Hawaii definitely came from a volcanic eruption. Chemical analysis of samples showed that it consisted entirely of sulfuric acid, ruling out nuclear explosion or a meteorite, either of which would have produced fragments of rocky material. The cloud had been measured from the equator to Germany, about
50-f8-N, with the heaviest concentration of particles found by a Langley Research Center (LaRC) research aircraft at 20 °N.
No volcanic source for the cloud had been identified. Scientists from ARC were studying atmosphere-circulation patterns to see how gas from an equatorial source could spread over the northern half of the Earth. Sulfur gases injected into the stratosphere by volcanic eruptions tended to remain for months, as there would be no rain to remove them; changing gradually into drops of sulfuric acid, the volcanic cloud would increase over time in depth and density as more sulfur compounds arrived. Highly reflective clouds of the acid, like those on Venus, could prevent solar heat from reaching the ground, but the current cloud apparently had not produced any climate changes.
A NASA research plane flying from Wallops Flight Center (WFC) to Costa Rica carried a remote-sensing laser radar that mapped the cloud content while doing previously scheduled data-gathering on local volcanoes. LaRC would continue taking radar data; also, an ARC U-2 aircraft would make follow-on flights beginning March 23. (ARC Release 82-11; LaRC Release 82-12; NASA Release 82-45; W Post, Mar 6/82, A-4; NY Times, Mar 7/82, P-24)
March 17-30: NASA began the countdown for the third test flight of Space Shuttle orbiter Columbia scheduled for launch March 22, although runways at Edwards Air Force Base in California were too rainsoaked to permit an emergency landing. STS-3 would use a runway at White Sands, N.M., for landing. Marine Corps Col. Jack Lousma and U.S. Air Force Col. C. Gordon Fullerton had frequently practiced landing jet aircraft at White Sands, where the two gypsum-based desert runways were as wide and almost as long as the seven mile-long runway at Edwards. They had also practiced landing on a three-mile-long concrete runway at KSC, to be used only in case of losing an engine during the first four minutes of flight from that location.
334
MARCH 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Heavy rains all day March 17 left more than an inch of water on the “dry” lake beds at Edwards, where Columbia had landed after its first two flights. NASA said that it was cheaper to move landing equipment to White Sands than to postpone the flight until Edwards dried out: each day of delay in launching the Shuttle cost the agency $3 million. A special landing team immediately began loading support equipment on a 23-car train that would carry it the 1,000 miles from Edwards to White Sands. The equipment should be in place late on Sunday, March 21, ready for use should an emergency occur after liftoff.
The upcoming flight, third of a series of four test flights before the Shuttle began carrying payloads into space later in 1982, would subject the spacecraft to temperature extremes to see how it endured long exposure to dark and light. It would also include further tests of the 50-foot robot arm designed to handle Shuttle payloads. Exposure of the Shuttle tail would test pumping of fuel and restarting rear engines under extremely high or low temperatures.
Exposure of the 65-foot-long cargo bay carrying more than 21,000 pounds of instruments and experiments to the extreme heat encountered in space would show how materials carried into space over the next 10 years would survive. The open cargo bay aimed at the Sun would also seek exposure to solar flares, for which scientists were still seeking explanations.
Lousma and Fullerton flew from JSC at Houston to Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., near KSC in T-38 jet trainers Saturday, March 20, and planned to spend most of Sunday in preflight briefings. KSC said that the countdown had been virtually trouble-free and ahead of schedule.
Liftoff from pad A, launch complex 39, took place Monday, March 22, at 10:59 a.m.; EST after an hour’s delay caused by failure of a protection circuit in the controller, for the heated nitrogen purge of the main engines, required before introduction.of cryogenic fuel. Countdown stopped for reestablishment of heater'control. Initial orbit elements were 240-kilometer apogee and perigee, 89-minute period, and 38° inclination. Operations began in the fourth hours of flight with the opening of payload doors, removal of ejection suits, and activation of the Office of Space: Sciences experiment package (OSS-1). Later reports indicated that the crew suffered from motion sickness after the exertion of removing the space suits; incidence of motion sickness had been less on Mercury and Gemini when astronauts had less area to move in, and both Soviet and U.S. crews had taken time on longer flights to get used to weightlessness before active exertion.
Scheduled for the second day was deployment of the robot arm; for the third was practiceiin grappling payload packages and extending a set of sensors over the edges of the cargo bay to measure plasma (electrically charged gases) in Earth orbit. The fourth and fifth days would see further tests of the arm, more thermal testing, and two brief ignitions of the maneuvering rockets to see how they performed after long periods of cold. The sixth day would have more thermal tests and experiments on solar radiation; the seventh day would be for shutdown and landing preparations.
335
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MARCH 1982
All activities planned for day one were accomplished; OSS-1 experimenters reported “excellent data.” Thermal attitude tail-to-sun prevailed throughout the sleep period. A survey with the remote manipulator system (RMS) camera showed several low-temperature white tiles missing or damaged on the nosecone. Also, three pieces of black tiles (about 1 1/2 tiles) had been found 700 feet south of the launch pad; others had been found on and near the beach. All had been sent to JSC for identification and analysis.
On Tuesday, the first day in orbit, the “wrist” camera on the manipulator arm went dark, and flight directors postponed the critical grappling test to devise a way to do the test without it. That camera served as the crew’s eyes whenever the end of the arm took hold of an object in the cargo bay. Planned use was to raise an 82-pound package and move it around the bay; the instrument inside would measure electrical disturbances caused by the spacecraft and its motion through the electronically charged ionosphere. Instead, the crew extended the robot arm far over the cargo bay and used the “elbow” camera to transmit “the best television ever seen of the earth” from 150 miles up.
The crew turned on the monodisperse latex reactor [see January 19] for 14 hours; the solution would be stirred every 30 minutes for the rest of the mission. Ground control changed the activity schedule to allow for crew rest and troubleshooting; day four activities would be done on day three and vice versa, a prelaunch-planned option. Problems were reported with the environmental control and life-support systems and with the waste-control “slinger”; NASA said it had initiated “backup procedures.”
Besides suffering from motion sickness, Lousma had been kept awake by loud radio static, probably from a Soviet radar at Rostov on the Black Sea, said to be the most powerful in the world; it was called Woodpecker by radio ham operators because of its noise, heard from Spain to parts of China.
STS-3 lost three main radio links to Earth Friday, March 25, through the Shuttle’s transponders that locked on and amplified ground signals and carried nearly all data on Shuttle condition and its speed and location. Two ultra-high-frequency (UHF) radio channels carried voice transmission, however, and the astronauts were using the remaining transponder, a backup UHF voice line, and the FM-radio line to relay information to Earth.
Gene Kranz, deputy flight director at JSC, said that the mission would go full time unless the high-power transponder link was lost. A premature end to the mission would require a landing somewhere other than at White Sands, because of bad weather with overcast skies and high winds that blew dust across the runways and created haze thick enough to obscure the landing site.
Two days away from the scheduled landing, the crew had completed all the thermal tests on Columbia: baking tail, nose, and top in unimpeded sunlight and chilling the same parts in the icy cold of space for hours. They had restarted the Shuttle engines hot and cold, opened and closed cargo-bay doors under both conditions, and repeatedly tested the mechanical arm under varying conditions with excellent results.
336
MARCH 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
In the last possible opportunity, less than a day before the end of the mission, the crew pointed their solar telescope directly at the Sun and got a solar flare (an event on the Sun’s surface they could not have predicted) “almost as if it were planned.” Dr. Robert Novick of Columbia University, where the X-ray polarimeter was built, said that this was the first time that an instrument in space with this sensitivity had witnessed a solar flare.
On Sunday night, March 28, the crew went to sleep two hours earlier than usual in preparation for landing Monday. About 40 minutes before the time scheduled for touchdown, astronaut John Young in a Grumman Gulfstream jet tried a practice landing on the White Sands runway and found visibility completely obscured. The Columbia crewmen were about to fire rockets to begin descent. “That’s the first time I’ve seen it this bad,” Young told mission control in Houston. “I think we ought to knock this thing off.” Less than 15 minutes later, mission control ordered a day’s delay. The two astronauts unpacked to await word from mission control on where and when they would return.
Landing finally occurred at 9:04 a.m. MST on Tuesday, March 30, on a dry lake bed at White Sands. Touchdown point was 1,092 feet past the runway threshold; rollout distance was 13,732 feet. The crew left the orbiter 45 minutes after landing, and postflight operations proceeded without incident. (NASA Release 82-29; NASA MOR M-989-82-03 [prelaunch] Mar 13/82, [postlaunch] May 5/82; NASA MOR E-835-03-82-01, OSS-1, [prelaunch] Mar 17/82, [postlaunch] Sept 20/82; Spacewam SPX-341; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Mar 24, 25, 29/82; NY Times, Mar 18/82, A-18; Mar 20, 7; Mar 21, 1; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 30, A-l; WPost, Mar 19/82, A-7; Mar 21, A-l; Mar 22, A-l; Mar 25, A-2; Mar 27, A-2; Mar 29, A-l; Mar 30, A-l)
March 25: MSFC reported Heao 2, second in a series of three high-energy astronomy observatories launched in the late 1970s and the last to reenter, fell from orbit at 1:27 a.m. CST and burned up in the atmosphere. John Stone, project manager a MSFC, said that tracking stations indicated that it broke up over the South Pacific east of Australia. Heao 1 had reentered in 1979; Heao 3, in December 1981. Heao 2 had not been operational for almost a year, as it had expended its control-gas supply in April 1981, so that it could not maintain attitude and had to be powered down.
Launched in September 1979 and nicknamed Einstein, Heao 2 had operated for nearly 2 1/2 years, carrying the largest X-ray telescope ever built. It had made detailed imaging and spectroscopic observations of about 300 known X-ray sources and discovered thousands of faint new ones. It also made the first X-ray photographs of supernova remnants, pulsars, galactic X-ray sources, and diffuse emissions from galactic clusters. Scientists said it would take three years longer to analyze the data from the Heaos. (MSFC Release 82-31)
During March: NASA said that Dr. John F. McCarthy, director of Lewis Research Center (LeRC) would return July 1 to MIT as professor of
337
astronautics and aeronautics
MARCH 1982
aeronautics and astronautics. Before becoming director at LeRC in October 1978, McCarthy directed MIT’s center for space research. From 1962 to 1971 he was with North American Rockwell. (NASA anno, Mar 2/82; NASA Release 82-35)
—Daniel J. Fink, senior vice president at General Electric Company, was named chairman of the NASA advisory council by James M. Beggs, administrator. He assumed the chair March 11. As general manager of General Electric’s space division, Fink had received the Collier Trophy for his contributions to the Landsat program. (NASA Release 82-39)
—Administrator Beggs changed the titles of officials in charge of three programs at NASA Headquarters: Harriett G. Jenkins would be assistant administrator for equal opportunity; Stuart J. Evans, assistant administrator for procurement; John F. Murphy, assistant administrator for legislative affairs. (NASA anno Mar 2/82)
—A Thomas Young, director of GSFC, would leave NASA March 20 to become vice president of research and engineering at Martin Marietta Aerospace. He had joined the Langley laboratory in 1961 and in 1975 become Viking mission director. He was deputy director of ARC from February 1979 until taking over at GSFC in February 1980. Acting director at GSFC until the appointment of a successor would be Dr. Leslie H. Meredith, who had been director of applications there since 1976. (NASA annos Mar 1/82, Mar 23/82; NASA Releases 82-31, 82-48)
—Andrew J. Stofan, who was acting associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters until Dr. Burton Edelson took over last month, would become director of LeRC, succeeding Dr. John McCarthy as of July 1. Before assignment to Headquarters in 1978 as deputy associate administrator for space science, Stofan was director of launch vehicles at LeRC, where he had begun as a research engineer in 1985. (NASA Release 82-47; LeRC Release 82-14)
338
April
April 2: The Los Angeles Times said that Dr. Bruce Murray would resign later in 1982 as director of JPL. In “an emotional speech” televised to all 5,000 JPL employees, Murray said that he was leaving to move on “to the next phase of my own professional career.” He reminded his audience that from the time he arrived at JPL he planned to stay for only 5 to 10 years. The announcement came at the start of his seventh year as director; he had served since April 1, 1976. The California Institute of Technology (CalTech), operator of JPL under contract to NASA, had not chosen a successor. (LA Times, Apr 3/82, 1)
April 9: NASA announced the selection of American Airlines to negotiate a contract for a new helicopter-simulation system to be installed at ARC, funded by the U.S. Army and used by both agencies.
The $16 million system, designed to duplicate cockpit configurations and flight handling of helicopters, would aid in rotorcraft design and allow simulation of experiments, flight tests, and evaluation of improvements in basic helicopter technology. Pilots and engineers could simulate sight, sound, and motion of helicopter flight, using the system either stationary or in the vertical-motion simulator. (NASA Release 82-52; ARC Release 82-13)
April 10: NASA launched the Indian Department of Space payload INSAT-1A from ESMC at 1:48 a.m. EST on a Delta into an orbit with 35,985-kilometer apogee, 166-kilometer perigee, and 28.4° inclination. An apogee boost motor fired April 11 and 12 put Insat 1 into synchronous orbit at 74 °E over the equator. Attempts to release the C-band (uplink) antenna were unsuccessful; ground control deployed it by blasting it with the reaction-control jets. The S-band (downlink) antenna deployed without difficulty, but the solar sail would not release as planned. (NASA Release 82-44; NASA MOR 0-492-214-82-01 [prelaunch] Mar 30/82, [postlaunch] May 18/82; CTrib, Apr 12/82,' 4)
April 14: Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC since 1972, said that he would retire from NASA after the fifth (and first operational) Shuttle flight, now scheduled for November. He had begun working at the Langley laboratory of the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) in 1945.
When NASA was established in 1958, he was selected as an original member of the space task group to manage the Mercury project: that group was the nucleus of NASA’s manned spacecraft center, which became JSC in 1973. Kraft was flight director of all the Mercury missions and many of the Gemini missions; in 1972 he succeeded Dr. Robert Gilruth, who had been the
339
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
APRIL 1982
first director of JSC. Kraft said he had no definite plans for the future. (NASA Release 82-62; NY Times, Apr 15/82, B-4; W Post, Apr 15/82, D-2)
•	NASA reported that its Kuiper airborne observatory (a Lockheed C-141 Starlifter aircraft carrying a 36-inch infrared reflector telescope) had captured an image of Columbia’s reentry heating pattern at the end of its third spaceflight.
The procedure, known as IRIS (infrared imagery of Shuttle), was part of an orbiter experiment program using the Shuttle to collect data of value in advancing aerospace technology. The Kuiper plane, operated by ARC, had taken off for observation without knowing whether the Shuttle would land at White Sands or KSC; an update 15 minutes before landing ensured success. A similar attempt on the first flight had failed. (NASA Release 82-56; ARC Release 82-14)
April 15: NASA said that it had turned off the SAGE (stratospheric aerosol and gas experiment) after the spacecraft’s battery failed. A joint project of LaRC and GSFC, SAGE was the first to perform extensive vertical measurements of aerosols in the stratosphere and first to detect volcanic dust in that region, 9 to 40 kilometers (6 to 25 miles) above Earth’s surface. Launched from WFC in February 1979 with a 1-year design lifetime, it had tracked plumes from five volcanic eruptions, including Mt. St. Helens, and had mapped ozone in the Earth’s atmosphere from data taken during more than 13,000 sunrises and sunsets. Its orbit was not expected to decay until about 1984, when it would burn up during reentry. (NASA Release 82-59)
•	ESA said that it would begin a follow-on program with Spacelab. Financial contributions from member states for this purpose had reached 80% of the goal April 15, permitting work to start immediately. Part of the new program would be development of a European retrievable carrier (EURECA) to be launched and retrieved by the Space Shuttle as well as a core payload for the first mission consisting of microgravity research emphasizing material and life sciences, with first flight scheduled for the end of 1986.
Weighing about 1,500 kilograms, EURECA would have a design life of six months or more in orbit, providing services for its payload including electrical power and heat protection. Its low gravity-disturbance level would be essential to microgravity research. After deployment, an on-board propulsion unit would put it in a higher orbit with less drag on its large solar arrays. Once in orbit, its experiments, although highly automated, would be operated by remote control and monitored from the ground. It would reassume low orbit for recovery by the Shuttle and return to Earth for refurbishment. (ESA Info 12)
April 16: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced the reorganization of Space Shuttle management. Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, who had
340
APRIL 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
joined NASA in November 1981 on loan from the U.S. Air Force, would be associate administrator for the Space Transportation System (STS). He would take over the office of Space Shuttle operations formerly headed by Stanley Weiss, named chief engineer for NASA to succeed Walter Williams. The combined offices of space transportation systems and space transportation operations, effective May 15, would be responsible for the final Shuttle development flight and the operational flights that followed and for procuring more shuttles and expendable launch vehicles.
Gerald D. Griffin, formerly Apollo flight director, was named director of JSC to succeed Dr. Chirstopher C. Kraft, who would retire later in 1982. Griffin, who had also been deputy director at KSC and Dryden Flight Research Center (DFRC) and had held other positions at NASA Headquarters, had left in August 1981 to become vice president of Scott Science and Technology. He would return to NASA Headquarters briefly to assist Abrahamson. (NASA anno Apr 16/82; NASA Release 82-58; NY Times, Apr 19/82, A-7)
April 19: The Soviet news agency Tass reported that the Soviet Union had launched space station Salyut 7 apparently to replace Salyut 6, home in space for cosmonauts since September 1977, for a joint French-Soviet manned flight this summer. Orbital parameters were 278-kilometer apogee, 219-kilometer perigee (between 136 and 172 miles), 89.2 minute period, 51.5° inclination. Agence France-Presse said that a Soviet-French team would shortly be launched in a Soyuz-T craft to link up with Salyut 7.
Lt. Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, France’s “spacecraft” who had had “intensive training in Soviet facilities” with his backup, Col. Patrick Baudry, would fly to Salyut 7 with two Soviet cosmonauts about June 22. The report said that the French preferred the neutral word spacenaut because the Soviets used “cosmonaut” and the Americans “astronaut.” (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/82; Paris AFP in English, Apr 20/82; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-18)
The New York Times reporter in Moscow said that the French-Soviet mission would be the first launch of a noncommunist in a Soviet spacecraft and the first East-West spaceflight since Apollo-Soyuz in 1975. Flight commander Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov would occupy Salyut 7 a few days earlier. An three-man crew on another spacecraft—two cosmonauts, Leonid Kizim and Vladimir Solovyev, and Jean-Loup Chretien—would join them. The Soviet Union had released few details on the mission.
The USSR’s goal was said to be deployment of a 12-man station weighing more than 100 tons, permanently occupied by rotating crews. Salyut 6’s lifetime had included two “marathon missions” of 185 and 175 days; the U.S. record was 84 days during the Sky lab program of 1973 and 1974. Soon after the last mission on Salyut 6 the Soviet Union had sent a large craft (Cosmos 1267) to link with it and test “methods of assembly of orbital complexes of great size and weight.” No one said what would become of the Salyut-Cosmos; Western observers believed that the assembly, even with a combined weight of 36 tons could safely burn up on reentry. The U.S. Skylab that scat-
341
astronautics and aeronautics
APRIL 1982
tered debris on western Australia in 1979 during its uncontrolled plunge to Earth had weighed 77.5 tons. (FBIS Moscow Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Apr 19/83; NY Times, Apr 21/82, A-12)
April 20: NASA’s Solar Max satellite had detected an 18-month decrease in solar-energy output that might have caused an unusually harsh winter in 1981 and 1982, said JPL. In the first direct observation of cause-and-effect between solar output and changes in Earth’s climate, a solar telescope—Solar Max’s active-cavity radiometer irradiance monitor—recorded a steady decrease from February 1980 to August 1981 of a tenth of 1% in total solar energy reaching Earth.
Systematic increases or decreases as small as 0.5% over a century had produced vast changes in Earth’s climate: the “Maunder minimum” in the 17th century, when sunspot activity almost vanished, had coincided with a period known as Europe’s little ice age. A 1% decrease could lower mean global temperature by more than 1,000 (2°F), and less than 10% decrease could freeze Earth’s entire surface. Earth lifeforms existed in the bioshell, an area 10 kilometers (6.2 miles) on either side of mean sea level, with temperatures fed by solar-energy input and interaction between atmosphere, ocean, and land masses. The time needed to cool down the atmosphere and ocean would allay short-term changes in solar input. JPL’s Dr. Richard C. Willson noted that “if you turned off the sun tomorrow, you wouldn’t see its full effects on earth for three years.”
Solar activity peaked about every 11 years. The current cycle peaked about the time Solar Max was launched early in 1980; the decrease might represent the general decline since then but might also indicate a longer term lowering of solar input. (Telescope at the High-Altitude Observatory, Boulder, Colo., had recorded images of what seemed to be a shrinking sun that might have grown as much as a tenth of 1% smaller every 100 years for the last four centuries.) Solar Max had lost pointing capability in December 1980, and only three of its seven instruments were still returning data. It had been designed for retrieval by the Shuttle, and NASA was seeking authorization for a Solar Max repair mission. (NASA Release 82-57; W Post, Apr 20/82, A-6)
During April: Dr. Noel W. Hinners, director of the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, would become director of GSFC June 14, succeeding A. Thomas Young. Dr. Hinners was associate administrator for space science at NASA Headquarters from June 1974 to April 1979, when he took over at the museum; he had also been director of lunar programs in NASA’s Office of Space Sciences. He had joined NASA in 1972 as deputy director and chief scientist of Apollo lunar exploration. (NASA anno Apr 1/82; NASA Release
82-49)
—Col. Joe H. Engle, commander of STS-2 in November 1981, was temporarily assigned to the STS office at NASA Headquarters in conjunction with recent organization changes. As deputy associate administrator for manned
342
APRIL 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
space flight under Gen. James A. Abrahamson, his special experience would help simplify the integration process for Shuttle users and ensure maximum use of its manned capabilities. He would retain astronaut status and return to JSC to train for his next flight. (NASA Release 82-71)
343
May
May 1: The first Maritime European Communications Satellite, Marecs A, launched December 20, 1981, began service at midnight. The spacecraft and its payload, leased to the International Maritime Communications Satellite (INMARSAT), was working well and already improving communications between land and ships and oil rigs in the Atlantic.
The Marecs program would lease two satellites to INMARSAT: Marecs A would cover the Atlantic ocean; Marecs B, the Pacific. Launch of Marecs B on an Ariane L5 had been put off to September 1982 to allow time for modifications reducing the effects of electrostatic discharge that had caused the Marecs A command system to malfunction during tests in February. (ESA Info 15)
May 2: The New York Times said that the Soviet Union had assembled six, possibly eight, intelligence-gathering satellites over the south Atlantic to watch Argentine and British military movements around the Falkland Islands. U.S. sources said that they assumed information from the satellites was being relayed to the Argentine government but had no proof of this. A senior official at the State Department said that leaders in Argentina had told Security of State Alexander Haig that they would not accept such help from the Soviet Union. The United States had two satellites over the area and was passing information from them to the British.
The Soviet satellites were communications interceptors Cosmos 1346 and 1354; radar-sensing craft Cosmos 1345 and 1351; and photoreconnaissance craft Cosmos 1347 and 1352, and possibly 1350 and 1353. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-14; AvWk, May 3/82, 22; W Post, Jun 7/82, A-20)
May 3: An analysis of NASA’s 1983 budget for research and development, prepared for Sen. William Proxmire (D-Wis.) by the General Accounting Office (GAO), said that more than 25 % of it was for military programs. The New York Times said that the report would lead to more criticism from Congress that NASA was becoming increasingly militarized, at the expense of civilian science and technology.
Proxmire said that he asked for the report to “determine the extent to which NASA was merely acting as an agent” for DOD. As nearly half the Shuttle flights would take military payloads, more than $1 billion of the $3.5 billion requested for the Shuttle in FY83 was considered military: $1.1 billion of an R&D budget of $5.33 billion (20.5%) and $400 million support funds (7.77%) could therefore be military related. NASA’s total 1983 budget request was $6.6
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED *J^L«T£NTK)NAUr HUM w
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
MAY 1982
billion; total Pentagon direct spending on space was not known but was probably as much as or more than NASA’s annual budget.
Proxmire said that he did not object to use of the Shuttle for military purposes, but paying for DOD activities through the NASA budget was “not the way to ensure that dollars spent on national security are spent with maximum effect.” NASA said that it had been tasked with developing the Shuttle as a national endeavor, and reimbursement by other agencies for use of the Shuttle did not change the cost to the government. (NY Times, May 3/82, A-15)
May 14: MSFC announced the choice of two firms, Hercules Inc. and Votaw Precision Tool Inc., to negotiate a contract for development of a filament-wound case for the solid-fuel rocket motor used in the Shuttle boosters. The contract to produce the filament-wound item [see March 2] would cover design, manufacture, test, and delivery of four flight cases at an estimated cost of $33 million.
The new case segments would replace portions made of steel, improving performance by reducing Shuttle-liftoff weight about 66,000 pounds (29,937 kilograms). First use would be in late 1985. (NASA Release 82-80; MSFC Release 82-52)
May 20: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs established a space station task force, directed by John D. Hodge, to be responsible for developing program aspects, including mission analysis, definition of requirements, an program management. Hodge would report to Philip E. Culbertson, associate deputy administrator, and would draw on space-station activities at each program office and field center. (NASA anno, May 20/82)
• JPL said that it had joined Australia’s commonwealth scientific and industrial organization in a first-time operation of five radiotelescopes in Australia and a sixth in South Africa as a single instrument “half a world wide” for observing astronomical radio sources. The Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) project could point telescopes located great distances apart at the same object, achieving angular resolution equivalent to a single radiotelescope several thousand miles in diameter. The two-week program observed about 30 quasars and galaxies. (JPL Release 993; NASA Release 82 -99)
May 23: At 9:57 local time May 23 the Soviet Union launched supply ship Progress 13, which docked automatically with Salyut Ts service module at 11:57 Moscow time May 25, bringing 660 kilograms of fuel and 290 liters of water as well as air, food, equipment, and mail. On May 28, Tass described the unloading and refueling procedures. (FBIS, Tass in English, May 13-28/82; NY Times, May 19/82, A-4)
346
June
June 4: The Soviet Union launched Cosmos 1374 from Kapustin Yar into a “round orbit” at 225-kilogram altitude and 50.7° inclination. Press reports said that Australian aircraft watched a seven-ship Soviet task force retrieve from the Indian Ocean an object that might be either a nuclear test craft or a “fairly small” shuttle. United Press International (UPI) said an Australian spokesman claimed to know what kind of craft was recovered but gave no details because the information was “classified”; also, U.S. scientists said that the spacecraft had “an unusually low trajectory.”
Associated Press (AP) quoted U.S. government sources “who asked to remain anonymous” that the Soviet Union had launched and recovered, after 1 1/4 orbits, its first space-shuttle type of vehicle; they did not know whether the craft was manned. A Reuters report said that Maj. Gen. Alexey Leonov, who had been one of the cosmonauts on the Apollo-Soyuz mission, hinted that the shuttle guess was right but would give no details. (FBIS, Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 4/82; W Post, June 9/82, A-7; June 10/82, A-26; June 11/82, A-35; W Times, June 11/82, 6; AvWk, June 14/82, 18-19)
•	Esther C. Kisk Goddard, 81, widow of U.S. rocketry pioneer Dr. Robert H. Goddard, whom she married in 1924, died in Worcester, Mass. She had been secretary and photographer for his research; since his death in 1945 she had worked to make his discoveries known. (NY Times, June 7/82, D-ll; Goddard News, June 15/82, 3; Ntl Sp Clb bllton, June 82, 3; Wore Sndy Tig, June 6/82, 19B) '
•	The Soviet Union said that Soyuz T-5 cosmonauts Anatoliy Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, in their fourth week aboard Salyut 7, had finished unloading Progress 13, launched May 23 to refuel and replenish the orbiting station, and undocked it to make room for a spacecraft carrying a French-Soviet crew later in June. Progress 13's propulsion unit had served twice to adjust the orbit of the Spyuz-.Salyut complex. Tass reported that ground control had reoriented the Progress June 6 to reenter and burn up over the Pacific Ocean. (FBIS, MscWldSvc in English, Tass in English, June 4/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, June 6/82)
June 8: NASA launched Western Union’s Westar 5 commercial communications satellites from ESMC at 8:23 p.m. EDT on a Delta into a transfer orbit with 36,469-kilometer apogee, 167-kilometer perigee, and 27.5° inclination. Firing of a booster at 5:20 p.m. June 11 would move it to station at 123°W over the equator.
347
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1982
Westar 5, heaviest of the series of satellites owned and operated by Western Union, weighed 585 pounds in synchronous orbit, was double the size of Westar 1, Westar 2, and Westar 3, and had about four times their capacity. Like Westar 4 it had 24 transponder channels, all under lease; a 10-year design life; and 40% more transmitting power than most domestic communications satellites. It would replace Westar 2 in service. (NASA Release 82-82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, June 9/82; NASA MOR 0-492-203-82-05 [postlaunch] July 6/82; NASA Wkly SSR, June 10/82; NY Times, June 10/82, D-4)
June 11: NASA said that a team of astronomers led by Dr. Michael Werner of ARC had mapped the Orion nebula using infrared data from NASA’s Kuiper airborne observatory. The nebula, 1,500 light-years from Earth, was one of the closest known regions in the galaxy where stars were currently forming. Since its discovery 17 years ago, infrared images had shown the total power output of the group of new stars invisible to the naked eye to be more than
100,000	times the power output of Earth’s sun. (NASA Release 82-88; ARC Release 82-86)
June 14: LeRC announced the start of a seven-year $45 million test program to increase engine durability for U.S. jet fleets. Aimed at improving analysis methods and prediction techniques, the program would be a pioneering effort in five areas: structure analysis, surface protection, instrumentation, combustion, and turbine-heat transfer. LeRC would award 25 to 30 contracts for this work, about half the research to be done directly by LeRC staff. (NASA Release 82-89; LeRC Release 82-33)
June 21: NASA announced signing of agreements with Telesat Canada for launch of five Anik communications satellites, four on the Shuttle and one on a Delta. The launches would cost Canada’s domestic satellite communications corporation about $75 million; the spacecraft would be worth about $130 million. The third-and fourth-generation Anik C and Anik D communications satellites would be the backbone of Canada’s system until the 1990s, carrying new pay-television, voice, video, and data links, private business networks, and other special services. First of the D series would be launched in August from KSC; the next Telesat launch would be an Anik C, one of two communications satellites scheduled for the Shuttle’s fifth flight and first commercial mission. (NASA Release 82-101)
June 21-23: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and former astronaut Sen. John Glenn (D-Ohio) were speakers at the 18th National Joint Propulsion Conference in Cleveland, sponsored by the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Society of Automotive Engineers, and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. In attendance were more than 800 technical professionals and key managers representing worldwide organizations in research
348
JUNE 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
and development, manufacture, and use of propulsion systems for aircraft and space, surface, and marine vehicles. Glenn, keynote speaker, received an award commemorating the 20th anniversary of his orbital flight. Representatives of European and Asian firms presented papers, and a group from the People’s Republic of China attended.
Beggs, luncheon speaker, said that foreign competition in high-tech research required a new partnership between government and industry. Although NASA-industry cooperation over the past 25 years was a major factor in U.S. world leadership, many foreign firms had been able, with “far-sighted planning [and] government-industry cooperation,” to move from idea to manufacture to delivery in half the time the United States needed.
The world edge once enjoyed by the United States in many high-tech areas has “been eroded,” he said: France was ahead in nuclear power; West Germany, in chemicals; Japan, in optics and metallurgy. “The Japanese have managed to capture some 70% of the American market for the 64K random-access memory, which can store 64,000 information units.” The Harvard Business Review had even suggested that U.S. firms look abroad—even to Iron Curtain countries—to tap foreign technology. What was needed, Beggs said, was a more balanced cooperation between government and industry, geared to investment in projects leading to speedy adoption of new technologies.
“No one ever ran a race by standing still. And we are in a race, a dead serious one. The stakes are high. They include not only our own economic security but the economic security of the Free World,” he concluded. (LeRC Releases 82-30, 82-34)
June 23: Three astronomers at the University of Hawaii, using NASA’s infrared telescope facility on Mauna Kea and data from Voyager 2, announced the first measurement of the sizes of four of the five known moons of Uranus. Voyager 2 was heading for Uranus after a successful flyby of Saturn 10 months ago, and the new calculations would be useful in planning the scientific studies to be done after arrival. Uranus was so far from Earth, about 3 billion kilometers (2 billion miles), that it was visible only through telescopes. Sizes of the moons were figured from their infrared (heat) radiation. NASA had built the Mauna Kea telescope, most sensitive in the world for measuring faint infrared sources, to provide support for spacecraft exploring the planets; Dr. David Morrison of the University of Hawaii team, also a member of the Voyager project, said that the Moon data were exactly the sort of support NASA had in mind.
The moons of Uranus, smaller than Earth’s, were all as large as any of Saturn’s except Titan, the giant moon that was the only planetary satellite found to have an atmosphere. Oberon, largest of the Uranus moons, had a diameter of about 1,690 kilometers (1,100 miles). Besides measuring the Uranus moons, the astronomers reported that Triton, largest moon of Neptune, and the planet Pluto were both too small and too cold for any heat radiation to be detected; the weakness of the sources led them to decide that Triton
349
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JUNE 1982
must be smaller than Earth’s Moon. Triton and Pluto, “based on our current knowledge,” might be very similar; past speculation suggested that Pluto might have been a escaped moon of Neptune. (NASA Release 82-104)
• WFC announced the launch of a Nike Orion sounding rocket at 11:40 a.m. to measure magnetosphere instabilities induced by very low-frequency (VLF) waves produced in the troposphere. Its measurements would coincide with a satellite overpass to detect particle precipitation triggered by VLF waves from a high-intensity transmitter. (WFC Release 82-3)
June 24: At 8:30 p.m. Moscow time (4:30 p.m. GMT), the Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-6 carrying cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Alexandr Ivanchenkov, with French “spationaut” Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, to spend a week with cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, the Soyuz T-5 crew who had been occupying orbiting laboratory Salyut 7 since May 13. This was the first time a five-man crew would occupy an orbital station. Initial orbit elements were 277-kilometer apogee, 248-kilometer perigee,
89.6-minute period, and 51.6° inclination.
Chretien, who had trained with his French backup Maj. Patrick Baudry in the Soviet Union for 21 months, was the first westerner to take part in a Soviet space mission. (The last east-west venture was the U.S.-Soviet Apollo-Soyuz linkup in July 1975.) The mission had been approved by French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing in 1979.
This was also the first Soviet life television coverage of a launch, beginning two hours before liftoff with taped views of crew training, Salyut assembly, Soyuz rollout, departure of the crew by bus, interviews with the crew orbiting in the Salyut, and ending with a live broadcast of the liftoff plus 10 minutes. During the two-hour broadcast, all three crew members gave speeches praising the trip as symbolic of friendship between French and Soviet peoples. (FBIS, Moscow Tass in English, June 24/82, June 28/82; Mosc DomTVSvc in Russian, June 24/82; NY Times, June 25/82, A-9; W Post, June 25/82, A-22; Spacewam SPX-344, June 29/82)
June 27: NASA launched STS-4, fourth test flight of space shuttle Columbia, from KSC at 11 a.m. carrying Ken Mattingly as commander and Henry Hart-sfield as pilot. This was the first time that the Shuttle had lifted off on schedule, but the chase planes televising separation did not show the opening of parachutes on the two reusable solid-fuel booster rockets, and there was no sign on the ocean surface of any of the six main chutes or either of the boosters, which cost $24 million each. Boosters from earlier launches were towed to KSC for refit. After disassembly and cleaning, the first six motor-igniter-nozzle assemblies were returned to Thiokol’s Utah plant for rebuilding at $7 million each; this procedure had saved NASA $36 million per flight for the first three flights.
The launch was imperiled the night before by a one-hour hailstorm with
350
JUNE 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
pellets “the size of golf balls” denting about 400 of the black protective tiles on the Shuttle’s undersides. Workmen on hastily erected scaffolds had applied a hardener to strengthen the tiles. Enough water soaked the tiles to make the crew need to bake the underside of the Shuttle in the sunlight for 10 hours to dry it out, so that low temperatures on the night side of the Earth would not freeze and further damage the tiles. Mattingly and Hartsfield had begun to power up the 2,000-pound cargo put in the payload bay by the Air Force as well as four experiments managed by MSFC, including the first use of the Shuttle by a commercial firm. Press reports called it “an open secret” that the U.S. Air Force instruments included an extremely sensitive infrared telescope, an ultraviolet telescope, and a new space sextant designed to navigate spy satellites without ground command.
Hartsfield, on his spaceflight, suffered nausea but was later able to eat dinner. Instead of televising a view of the payload bay as other crews had done, or using the camera on the end of the 60-foot robot arm to show the Earth as they saw it from space, the crew merely described the view, expressing surprise at the amount of detail discernible. The seven-day mission would “wring out the wrinkles” in the Shuttle not dealt with on the first three flights. NASA said that it would name a board to review “in excruciating detail” how the boosters could sink in 3,500 feet of water although the drogue parachutes were found floating 150 miles downrange. (NASA Release 82-87; MSFC Release
82-56; NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [prelaunch] June 18/82; W Post, June 28/82, A-l; June 29/82, A-2; Dtln Gd, June 28/82; Marshall Star, June 30/82, 1)
During June: NASA announced that Dr. Walter C. Williams, chief engineer since July 1975, would retire in July. Dr. Stanley I. Weiss, associate administrator for space transportation operations, would succeed him. Williams began his career with NACA, NASA’s predecessor, in August 1940 and worked during the war to improve U.S. fighter planes. He was founding director of the organization that became NASA’s Dryden facility. He went to Langley Field, Va., in September 1959 as associate director of the new NASA space task group created to carry out Project Mercury and later was director of operations for the project. He then became associate director of NASA’s manned spacecraft center in Houston that later was JSC. He went to NASA Headquarters in January 1963, leaving in April 1964 to work for Aerospace Corporation’s vehicle systems. He became NASA’s first chief engineer in 1975. (NASA anno, June 1/82; NASA Release 82-86)
—NASA announced the appointment of George F. Page as deputy director of KSC effective July 5. He had directed Shuttle operations there since 1979 and was launch director for the first three launches of Columbia. From 1964 to 1975 he directed KSC operations planning for 19 Gemini and 25 Apollo spacecraft launches, ending with the lunar landings and the successful Apollo-
351
astronautics and aeronautics
JUNE 1982
Soyuz project. He directed unmanned launch operations from 1975 to 1979, with more than 54 major launches from both KSC and the Western Test Range (WTR) at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (NASA anno June 21/82; NASA Release 82-102)
352
July
July 1: “A clever bit of rewiring. . .with the skill of an automobile thief’ enabled the astronauts aboard Columbia (STS-4) [see June 27] to bypass a defective circuit and turn on the power for part of its payload called the “getaway special.” The University of Utah students sponsoring the experiment had given up hope but now planned to accomplish nearly all of their objectives. A thank-you message from the students said, “One small switch for NASA, a giant turn-on for us.”
Engineers at JSC and GSFC had transmitted 10 possible corrective measures after figuring out that a cable from a control panel was faulty; on the first try, everything began to work, and the conclusion was that launch vibrations could have loosened a connection.
A more serious problem arose when the clamshell doors of the payload bay refused to shut snugly after exposure to the heat and cold of space had expanded and contracted the aluminum fuselage and graphite epoxy doors. A similar problem on the preceding flight was solved by putting Columbia into a slow roll (the so-called barbecue mode), turning the surface toward and away from the Sun to equalize temperatures around the ship. Columbia had been circling the Earth for most of the last two days with its underside facing the Sun, as a means of baking out moisture trapped in the insulating tiles from a hail storm the night before liftoff. Harold Draughon, a flight director, said that data from the flight showed that all the tiles had baked dry. (NASA MOR MR-004, 3; NY Times, July 1/82, B-8)
July 2: Larry Walters of Los Angeles went for a 3-mile-high ride in an aluminum lawn chair borne aloft by 45 weather balloons and ballasted with jugs of water, ending with his unusual craft wrapped around power lines in Long Beach about 20 miles from his starting place in San Pedro. During his 45-minute flight he reached an altitude of 16,000 feet, got so cold he became numb, and had to shoot some of the balloons with a BB gun to make his flying chair descend.
He was also sighted by pilots of Delta Air Lines and Trans World Airlines jets. A safety inspector for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) said that Walters had broken “some part of the Federal Aviation Act, and as soon as we decide which part it is some type of charge will be filed.” Walters later said, “you couldn’t pay me a million dollars to do it again.” (NY Times, July 4/82, 22)
• The French-Soviet crew of Soyuz T-6 that had visited Salyut 7 and its Soyuz T-5 occupants for a week returned safely to Earth at 6:21 p.m. Moscow time,
353
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
JULY 1982
landing near Arkalyk with cosmonauts Vladimir Dzhanibekov and Aleksandr Ivanchenkov and their visiting spacenaut from France, Col. Jean-Loup Chretien, “in good health.” Tass said that the research planned by Soviet and French scientists was “accomplished in full.” Work aboard Salyut /continued with cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 2/82)
July 4: Crowds estimated at half a million watched Columbia’s fourth return to Earth, the first to use a concrete runway at Edwards Air Force Base. Among about 30,000 guests invited by NASA to the occasion were President and Mrs. Reagan. His comment at the touchdown was “Happy Fourth of July, and you know this has got to beat firecrackers.”
The fourth flight, STS-4, was classified as the last of four test flights but carried more than 22,000 pounds of cargo, including a secret military payload. Although security considerations kept it from being photographed for viewers, the 50-foot mechanical arm designed to move objects in and out of the cargo bay and capture objects in space had been in use on this flight to move an 800-pound contamination monitor around the cargo bay.
The runway, about 300 feet wide and 15,000 feet long, was about the size of the one at KSC made for routine Shuttle use after the seventh flight. The fifth (and first operational) flight scheduled for November would carry two commercial communications satellites, one for Canada and one for Satellite Business Systems; each .customer would pay NASA $21 million if the spacecraft reached orbit safely. Shuttle Program Manager Glynn S. Lunney said that NASA would do well to achieve one launch per month by the late 1980s and, ultimately, 24 to 30 per year. (NASA MOR M-989-82-04, July 19/82; NY Times, July 5/82, A-l, 8; WPost, July 4/82, A-l, A-ll; July 5/82, A-l; July 6/82, A-9)
July 19: With the end of the four-flight orbital test program using the Shuttle Columbia, Maj. Gen. James A. Abrahamson, NASA’s associate administrator for space transportation systems, announced that the STS-4 mission was a success “under conditions more demanding than STS-3 conditions.” He said that the test-program flights were “accomplishments of international significance” and a credit to the Shuttle development team. (NASA MOR M-989-82-04 [postflight] July 19/82)
July 20: Marine Col. Robert F. Overmyer, named as copilot with Vance D. Brand on the STS-5 flight, told a JSC preflight press conference that the mission would carry four astronauts, the largest number to fly on any U.S. spacecraft; the other two would be physicists Joseph P. Allen and William B. Lenoir, both making their first spaceflight. Overmyer said that it would take four men to launch the two communications satellites set for deployment from STS-5 over the Pacific between Hawaii and Chile.
The Shuttle’s two ejection seats would be replaced with three nonejectable
354
JULY 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
cockpit seats. The fourth crewman would ride in a seat installed in the middeck of Columbia’s cabin next to the airlock leading to the cargo bay, designed for use in the first Shuttle space walk. The report said that the crew did not seem bothered to be “the first to fly the shuttle without being able to eject if the spaceliner is damaged during liftoff.” (W Post, July 21/82, A-l)
July 23: NASA said that Landsat 4, launched July 16, was “in excellent condition” and ready for a week’s orbit-adjustment maneuvers. The multispectral scanner, one of its two sensor systems, was turned on July 19; the first image had been processed at GSFC, results indicating “flawless operation of the instrument and spacecraft systems.” Transmission of data from the new, more powerful thematic mapper began July 20; images of the area around Detroit should be available in a week. (NASA Release 82-112)
July 27: NASA reported the failure at 9 a.m. of a high-speed tape recorder on Nimbus 5 collecting Antarctic and Arctic radiometer data for the U.S. Navy. The loss of the last recorder on Nimbus 5 meant that future operations would have to be in real time, subject to the communications satellites view of the Alaska ground station. NASA had agreed to provide Nimbus 5 data through FY83, and the Navy had reimbursed NASA as a source of data for polar sea-ice calculations. NASA would review real-time operation with the Navy. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, July 30/82)
July 30: Cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev made a space walk from the orbiting station Salyut 7 to disassemble and partially replace wornout equipment on the station’s exterior and study opportunities for doing various jobs outside it. After they donned space suits, Lebedev left the station for the “zone” of operations, while Berezovoy remained in the open manhole to film his walk for television. They dismantled and passed into the station a micrometeorite-measuring instrument and some panels with optical and various structural materials that had been outside the station since its launch April 19. They also tested the station after exposure of thermomechanical and threaded connections made of different metals that might be used in assembling future craft in orbit. (FBIS, Tass in English, July 30/82)
During July: Press reports said that astronauts Margaret Rhea Seddon and Robert I. Gibson were parents of a baby boy, Paul, born July 26 in Houston. Seddon, 34, and Gibson, 35, joined the astronaut program in January 1978 and were married in May 1981. Also, Dr. Sally K. Ride, selected for the seventh Space Shuttle mission as first female U.S. astronaut, announced her marriage to colleague Steven Hawley at her hometown, Salina, Kans. Hawley, an astronomer, had not yet been selected for a mission. (WPost, July 27/82, C-3; St. L P/Dsp, Aug 15/82)
355
August
August 3: NASA announced that ARC and LaRC were cooperating in the acquisition of data on the giant stratospheric cloud produced by the eruption of El Chichon volcano in March and April, now covering much of the Earth’s northern hemisphere, to define the cloud’s effect on global weather patterns. The centers were using satellites, U-2 aircraft, and lidar (light-intensification detection and ranging) for the study. The lidar equipment, mounted in a Lockheed Electra aircraft, would shoot laser pulses into the atmosphere and monitor reflections, “painting” the spatial and vertical extent of cloud layers above the aircraft. Lidar measurements in mid-July confirmed earlier findings of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) that the volcano had put up to 50 times (500 times in some areas) the normal amount of aerosols into the upper atmosphere; that the material layers had spread to different latitudes, depending on altitude; and that sunlight reaching Earth’s surface could be reduced several percent.
The cloud, a mixture of dust and sulfuric acid, would offer “a once-in-a-lifetime chance” to form an information base for prediction of dispersion, changes in temperature, and dynamic and photochemical changes, according to Dr. M. Patrick McCormick, head of LaRC’s aerosol research branch. Dr. Brian Toon, atmospheric physicist at ARC, said that the most likely effect of the cloud would be a gradual reduction in northern hemisphere temperature over the next two years. (NASA Release 82-115; ARC Release 82-31; LaRC Release 82-57)
August 6: GSFC astronomers said that a new comet, Austin 1982G, brightest since 1979, should arrive in view of sky watchers later this month. The comet, the first,one visible to the naked eye since 1976, would be six times as bright as the faintest star. It would pass closest to the Earth August 10 and closest to the Sun August 24. Long before then, NASA’s international ultraviolet explorer (jue) would be photographing it in the ultraviolet spectrum to detect its composition. Astronomers hoped to define the content of the comet to compare it with short-period ones previously observed and with Comet Halley, due to appear in 1985-86. (NASA Release 82-118)
August 9: NASA announced that it would try to salvage the two solid-fuel rocket boosters that sank in the Atlantic June 27. Underwater cameras carried by the Scarab 2, a remotely controlled submersible vehicle operated by technicians from Ocean Search, Inc., Lanham, Md., from the deck of the United Space Boosters recovery ship UTC Freedom, showed the boosters on the ocean floor, broken up by the impact. The debris had no built-in lifting points, but
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
slamb 357
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1982
the Scarab could attach recovery lines to the sunken objects for hydraulic lift by the salvage ships.
Vessels used for recovery would include, besides the Scarab, the UTC Freedom and UTC Liberty (the designated boos ter-recovery ships). A remote station on a recovery ship would navigate Scarab, using bridge displays to show range and bearing, heading, depth, and pitch-roll of the submersible. Radar had located the boosters at about 3,500 feet, too deep for humans in hardshell diving suits to inspect; Scarab could operate in underwater currents up to 0.5 knots at 6,000 feet using three television cameras and one still camera with six quartz-diode floodlights to illuminate the ocean-floor.
The solid-fuel rocket boosters’ parachutes failed to open properly because explosive bolts on half the parachute risers fired prematurely. Premature firing separated half of the risers from each main parachute, allowing the parachutes to stream instead of filling with air. NASA did not know why the explosive bolts fired prematurely. (AvWk, Aug. 9/82, 20; Spaceport News, Aug 19/82, 1 & 2; W Post, Aug 2/82, 3)
• NASA said that it had selected eight companies to negotiate fixed-price contracts of less than $1 million each for space-station mission studies. The companies were Boeing Aerospace, General Dynamics, Grumman Aerospace, Lockheed, Martin Marietta Aerospace, McDonnell Douglas, Rockwell, and TRW.
The eight-month studies to be covered by the contracts would identify and analyze the scientific, commercial, national security, and space operations missions that could be conducted most efficiently by a space station. Contractors would use the studies to develop alternative concepts for the station, with specific mission requirements and architectural options to be incorporated in NASA’s Shuttle-tended permanent orbiting facility. (NASA Release 82-121; MSFC Release 82-75)
August 10: NASA said that Administrator James M. Beggs had signed in Vienna, Austria, a memorandum of understanding with Hans-Hilger Haunschild of the Federal Republic of Germany ministry for research and technology to cooperate in an astrophysics mission called ROSAT (Roentgensatellit), to be launched in 1987. ROSAT would join Galileo and the active magnetospheric-particle tracer explorer missions as another cooperative project between NASA and West Germany.
ROSAT would study X-ray emissions of nonsolar celestial objects, surveying specific sources for extended periods. Operating in both a survey and a pointed mode, ROSAT would compile an X-ray source catalog. The Federal Republic of Germany would provide the spacecraft; NASA, the high-resolution imaging detector and Shuttle-launch services; the United Kingdom’s science and engineering research council would provide an XUV wide-field camera. NASA and West Germany would invite proposals from the international scientific community for investigations. (NASA Release 82-119)
358
AUGUST 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
August 13: An ESA team of' 17 engineers arrived at MSFC to prepare for the first Spacelab launch on the Shuttle, now scheduled for September. Preparations would include extensive training and simulations with the Spacelab payload specialists, including two Europeans already based at MSFC and the NASA payload-operations engineers supporting NASA experiments on the mission. Several months before launch, the NASA/ESA team would begin to support operations from the payload-operations control center (POCC) at JSC.
The ESA team had been working for five years on computer software and displays, crew procedures, experiment simulators to train the crew and the POCC team, and establishing a data base. The team, representing 6 different countries, would support experiments from 11 European countries. The 38 experiments on Spacelab 1 in five scientific disciplines would include 25 ESA experiments. (NASA Release 82-76; MSFC Release 82-77)
• ARC reported the effects of disruption of the body’s circadian (24 hour) rhythms on test groups subjected to weightlessness, rapid shifts in darkness and light, and social isolation, conditions similar to those encountered on manned space missions. These effects were important, said Dr. Charles Winget, ARC physiologist, because similar conditions on Earth were associated with boredom, irritability, negative moods, and withdrawal; the desynchronosis could also cause fatigue, insomnia, anxiety, gastrointestinal and other physical symptoms, and resulting decreased performance.
Experimental subjects showed abnormal temperatures and brain waves during circadian disruption; neither measurement returned to normal in less than two weeks. Upset rhythms caused problems with physical health, emotions, behavior, sleep, altered responses to medication, and increased susceptibility to colds, viruses, and infections. Daily rhythms linked to Earth’s light/dark cycle appeared to be a natural function of cell-formation cycles in the human body, except for cancer cells, which did not exhibit rhythms. Pulse rate, blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, kidney function, metabolism, and hormone secretions, all followed a pattern; drugs and alcohol affected the body differently at various times: Winget and others had developed a new field of biology called chronopharmacolOgy to study the effects of drugs administered at different times of day. (ARC Release 82-32; NASA Release 82-124)
August 19-29: The Soviet Union launched Soyuz T-7at 9:12 p.m. Moscow time August 19 carrying three cosmonauts to orbital station Salyut 7 to join Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, who had been working there since May 14. Commander of Soyuz T-7 was Col. Leonid Pbpov; flight engineer was Aleksandr Serebrov; and researcher was Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly on a space mission. Initial orbit parameters were 280-kilogram apogee, 223-kilometer perigee, 89.5-minute period, and 51.6° inclination.
On August 20, Soyuz T-7 docked with the Salyut 7-Soyuz T-5 complex at
359
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
AUGUST 1982
10:32 p.m. Moscow time. The five-person crew would carry out a week-long scientific program, largely medicobiological research, Tass reported. Soviet manned flights had included many studies of the effects of weightlessness on men; the present crew would check the effects “on the female organism” to understand better how humans adapted to life in those conditions.
An interim report said that Salyut 7 had “more comfortable conditions for life and work” than Salyut 6. On a television broadcast, rookie Savitskaya said, “I think women cosmonauts can work in outer space successfully and. . .in future whole families will work on orbital stations.” On August 26 the visitors began preparing for their return trip, packing research materials, like biological objects with technical documentation, and used equipment such as exposed still and motion-picture film. They returned to Earth at 7:04 p.m. Moscow time August 27 in the Soyuz T-5 that had carried Berezovoy and Lebedev to Salyut 7. On August 29 the remaining crew redocked Soyuz 7-7 with the orbiting Salyut 7 to make room for cargo vehicles expected later. (FBIS, Tass in English, Aug 19, 20, 25, 26, 27, 29; NY Times, Aug 20/82, A-28; Aug 21/82; Aug 27/82, A-ll; Aug 28/82, 5; Aug 29/82,3; WPost, Aug 20/82, A-25)
August 26: NASA launched Canada’s Telesat-G, called Anik D-l in orbit, from ESMC on a Delta at 7:10 p.m. EDT. Transfer-orbit parameters were 36,358-kilometer apogee, 185-kilometer perigee, and 24.5° inclination. Firing of a booster motor at 5:29 p.m. EDT Augusl 29 put Anik D into synchronous orbit, and it was maneuvered to a station 104°W above the equator.
Anik D, weighing 2,370 pounds at liftoff, was the heaviest payload launched into transfer orbit by a Delta from that site. Initial on-station weight was 1,454 pounds. This was a 30th consecutive success for the Delta, a new record. The 24-channel communications satellite would provide Canada with television, data, and voice communications.
Anik D was Canada’s tenth satellite and fifth in a series of domestic commercial communications satellites owned and operated by Telesat Canada. It would be a backup in orbit for three aging Anik A satellites (launched 1972, 1973, and 1975) and Anik B (1978). (NASA MOR M-492-201-82-05 [prelaunch] Aug 24/82, [postlaunch] Jan 17/83; NASA Release 82-126; Spacewam SPX-346, Aug 31/82; NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Sept 1/82; SSR, Sept 2/82; A/D, Aug 31/82, 343; AvWk, Sept 6/82, 53)
During August: Dr. Christopher C. Kraft announced his resignation as director of JSC. He had retired from federal service in March 1980 but had stayed on at the request of the NASA administrator to see the Shuttle program through the flight-test phase that ended July 4. Kraft had begun working for NASA’s predecessor organization, NACA, in 1945 and was appointed director at JSC in 1972. He would be succeeded by Gerald D. Griffin. (NASA Release
82-116)
—Pravda announced the death of Nikolai Pilyugin, 74, a key figure in
360
AUGUST 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
development of the Soviet space program. An obituary signed by President Leonid Brezhnev said that Pilyugin, who had headed a large research institute for 20 years, was an outstanding designer in the field of space-rocket engineering. He was credited with designing the control system for Soviet launch vehicles, space ships, and interplanetary stations. (FBIS, Pravda in Russian, Aug 3/82)
361
September
September 6: India declared its first commercial satellite, INSAT 1, “dead” because its fuel supply had run out and it failed to respond to ground commands 150 days after an April 10 launch. Built by Ford Aerospace to Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) specifications and launched from Cape Canaveral, INSAT was the first operational spacecraft equipped for telecommunications, direct-broadcast television, and weather. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi’s government had planned to use INSAT to broadcast the Asian Games scheduled for New Delhi.
ISRO was reported “caught off guard” by the amount of fuel it had used to correct early malfunctions. Soon after reaching orbit, INSAT’s C-band antenna jammed. Fuel was wasted trying to free it, as well as to deploy the malfunctioning solar sail designed to collect energy from the Sun’s rays. Failure of the sail would have reduced INSAT’s life from 7 to 2 1/2 years. Fuel-supply checks might have been inaccurate.
Because INSAT was built to ISRO specifications, blame would probably fall on Satish Dhawan, head of India’s space program, who had argued for a multifunction satellite to bring radio and television to thousands of remote villages and give India international telecommunications links. He considered mass communications the best hope for progress in a country with a 36% literacy rate. India’s press hinted that the system had tried for too many functions.
A second India communications satellite had been planned for shuttle launch next July as a backup for INSAT, and the government would have to decide how to proceed. Leasing two transponders on INTELSAT’s Indian Ocean satellite as a cost of $16 million per year to partly cover the loss of INSAT would not offer India the prestige of using its own satellite during the games. {W Post, Sept 8/82, A-21; Nature, Sept 23/82, 293)
September 9: Space Services Inc. (SSI) of America launched the first U.S. privately funded rocket from a small concrete launch pad at a cattle ranch on Matagorda Island, 45 miles northeast of Corpus Christi on the south coast of Texas, at 11:15 a.m. Washington time. Conestoga I rose to 196 miles altitude, traveling 326 miles downrange before dropping into the Gulf of Mexico. The solid-fuel rocket, with a motor purchased from NASA for $365,000, was not designed for recovery. The booster successfully. separated from the upper stage of the rocket; a shroud covering a mock payload that weighed 1,097 pounds, including 40 gallons of water, ejected at peak altitude as a visual marker.
After years of planning and one explosive failure in 1981, SSI’s launch
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FIlMm
NTm363	MLMED
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1982
would offer relatively inexpensive space transportation for firms wanting to put up private satellites without government help. SSI chairman David Hannah, a Houston real-estate man, said that the launch of Conestoga I was a “giant step forward” for his two-year-old company; the plan was to send up an orbital test flight within two years and start operating on a commercial basis shortly thereafter.
Former astronaut Deke Slayton, who joined SSI after retirement from NASA and was in charge of the launch team, said that everything worked perfectly. Besides buying the booster from NASA, SSI also had help from subcontractors with considerable government experience and a variety of ex-NASA personnel. It was negotiating for a permanent launch site in Hawaii but was also looking into a lease of the Atlas Centaur launch site in Florida for the sort of launches that could send heavier spacecraft, such as communications satellites, into orbit.
As SSI officials toasted the successful launch with champagne, former director of KSC Lee Scherer, now an SSI consultant, remarked “You can’t do this at a government launch site.” He said that a high-level administration statement that SSI was “in the national interest” would put the firm in competition for space business. (W Post, Sept 10/82, A-l; NY Times, Sept 10/82, A-l)
• FBIS reported that the People’s Republic of China successfully launched “another scientific experiment satellite.” This was the People’s Republic’s 12th satellite (the first was launched in 1970) and was timed for the opening of the national congress of the PRC Communist Party. Later reports said that the satellite had “landed with precision at the predetermined recovery site” on September 14 at 2:00 p.m. Beijing time. (FBIS, Xinhua in English/Dom Svc in Chinese, Sept 9/82, Sept 14/82; Pravda in Russian, Sept 10/82; Tass Inti Svc in Russian, Sept 14/82)
September 9-20: Europe’s first commercial space mission apparently failed when Ariane rocket L5 vanished 14 minutes after its launch from French Guiana September 9 at 11:12 p.m. local time. It was carrying European satellites Marecs-B and Sirio-2, a maritime telecommunications satellite and a weather satellite, both lost with the rocket in the Atlantic north of Ascension Island when the motor stopped 30 seconds early. This was the second failure in five Ariane launch attempts; the two previous attempts succeeded, although they carried no commercial payloads. A success would have put the Arianes into competition for contracts to launch commercial satellites.
ESA began investigating the failure. First reports said that the problem was in third-stage turbopump parts in the casing or the lubrication system. The first and second stages operated correctly, as did the separations and jettison of the fairing. The third stage ignited and ran for 275 seconds when rotation speed dropped, reaching zero at 325 seconds. The drop in thrust and engine
364
SEPTEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
cut-out led to a downward trajectory. (WPost, Sept 10/82, A-l; ESA Info 27, 29, 30)
September 10: NASA rolled out the first lightweight external tank for the Space Shuttle at its Michoud Assembly Facility near New Orleans. The tank, structural backbone of the Shuttle launch assembly, included an oxygen tank, a hydrogen tank, and a connecting intertank housing the instrumentation.
At 66,824 pounds the new tank was more than 10,000 pounds lighter than the one used for the first Shuttle flight in April 1981; the reduced weight would add payload capability almost pound for pound. The new tank, loaded on a NASA barge for shipment to KSC, would be prepared for the sixth shuttle mission scheduled for January 1983. (MSFC Releases 82-81, 82-83)
September 15: NASA announced that MSFC had selected four of the eight aerospace firms making space-station mission analyses for Headquarters to negotiate contracts exploring early uses of a space station. Each MSFC contract would address a specific area: Boeing would describe building large structures in orbit, such as huge communications antennas; both Martin Marietta and TRW would study servicing and maintenance of satellites by a manned facility in space; and General Dynamics would study operations of a Orbital Transfer Vehicle (OTV) serviced in space by a manned facility to move payloads from lower to higher orbits.
William R. Marshall, MSFC director of program development, said that the studies would posit a space station in orbit by 1990 and the kinds of experimental operations to be carried out there that would lead to a fully operational station by the end of the century. (NASA Release 82-134)
September 16: NASA reported a happy ending to a search-and-rescue mission that began in July with the loss of a pilot somewhere in northern British Columbia. The Canadian government conducted an unsuccessful search that cost $2 million before it ended. The father of the missing pilot started to search with a pilot and another passenger and failed to return on September 9. They had crashed in a valley 3,500 feet deep where the Rockies hid their rescue beacon from passing planes. The Canadian rescue center had no data on their location.
Canada had just joined in the SARSAT (search-and-rescue satellite-aided tracking) program using Cospas 1, a Soviet satellite launched June 30, and asked for any data it might gather. Early September 10 the satellite 600 miles up detected an emergency locator-transmitter in the area; a search aircraft found the crash and called for a rescue helicopter. All three persons had been injured but had survived. Canadian authorities praised the timely rescue of the victims at minimal cost. (NASA Dly Actv Apt, Sept 16/82; W Post, Sept 30/82, A-3)
365
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
SEPTEMBER 1982
September 20: NASA announced the selection of a West German physicist, Ulf Merbold, and a U.S. biomedical engineer, Byron K. Lichtenberg, as the first nonastronauts to fly on the Space Shuttle. The two would be part of a crew of six on the ninth Shuttle mission, scheduled for September 1983, and would use the Spacelab workshop installed for the first time in the Shuttle cargo bay to operate 38 scientific packages representing more than 70 investigators from Europe, Japan, and the United States. ESA, which for 10 years had planned and built the $1 billion joint U.S.-European Spacelab unit, had agreed with NASA that one European scientist would be on all Shuttle missions carrying a Spacelab.
Merbold, trained at Stuttgart University, competed for his Shuttle seat with Dutch physicist Wubbo Ockels, trained at the University of Groningen. Lichtenberg, with a Ph.D. from MIT, competed with Michael Lampton, holding a doctorate in physics from CalTech. Winners were chosen in secret ballot by a panel of 36 U.S. and European scientists. (MSFC Release 82-86; ESA Info 31; W Post, Sept 20/82, A-5)
September 28: NASA launched Intelsat 5E F-5 at 7:08 p.m. EDT from Cape Canaveral on an Atlas Centaur into a transfer orbit with 35,962-kilometer apogee, 165.7-kilometer perigee, and 24.4° inclination. This craft would carry for the first time a maritime communications package for ship and shore use by INMARSAT. 'An apogee kick motor fired October 1 would start it to geosynchronous orbit. (NASA Release 82-136; NASA MOR M-491-203-82-05 [prelaunch] Sept 22/82, [postlaunch] Oct 26/82)
During September: NASA Headquarters announced the reorganization of its Office of Space Transportation Systems and Office of Space Transportation Operations into a new Office of Space Flight. L. Michael Weeks was named acting deputy associate administrator, with assistant associate administrators for policy, space transportation, and institutions. The new arrangement would stress integrated Shuttle operations planning and direction; STS orientation to customers; a manageable span of control for the associate administrator; maximum delegation of authority to subordinate officials and field organizations; and minimum disruption to existing lines of communication with centers and outside NASA. (SP anno, Sept 1/82)
—John J. Quann was appointed deputy director of GSFC, effective September 8. He had been director of GSFC’s mission and data operations directorate since October 1980 and had worked at Goddard since 1963. (NASA anno Sept 1/82; NASA Release 82-131)
—NASA named Dr. Frank B. McDonald, chief of GSFC’s laboratory for high-energy physics since 1970, as NASA chief scientist, effective September 20. In this position he would be the principal adviser to the administrator and other senior officials on scientific aspects of NASA activities. Beginning at GSFC in 1959, McDonald had been project scientist on nine NASA satellite programs and principal investigator for many space experiments. He previous-
SEPTEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
ly taught physics at the Iowa State University of Science and Technology. (NASA anno, Sept 9/82; NASA Release 82-133)
—NASA reported that the Shuttle orbiter Enterprise, not slated for flight, was still working for the U.S. space program, helping DFRF engineers to predict and avert structural trouble spots resulting from wear and tear. All preShuttle spacecraft had been one-shot items, so that space fatigue was a new problem. As each Shuttle was meant to fly up to 100 missions, NASA needed a reliable way to foresee difficulties before they developed into problems and to detect potential weakness without damaging the structure. A method called modal analysis measuring structural response to shaker acceleration could track changes from baseline data. Piecemeal testing of parts would not give results valid for the entire structure: Enterprise, built to the same dimensions as the four actual orbiters, was “uniquely qualified for the job,” researchers said. (NASA Release 82-139; DFRF Release 82-13)
—MSFC said that Lockheed’s contractor facility had successfully extended and retracted an experimental solar-array wing as tall as a 10-story building, scheduled for flight on the Space Shuttle in 1984. Unlike rigid metal structures used on current long-life spacecraft, the accordion-like array consisting of lightweight flexible plastic contained contact solar cells welded directly to the array like a printed circuit. The wing, measuring 105 feet by 13.5 feet, could fold into a package less than four inches thick and expand in orbit to its full length on a coilable extension mast. It could provide 66 watts per kilogram compared to 20 watts in present systems. (MSFC Release 82-84)
367
October
October 1: NASA signed an agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF) that transferred management and operation of the National Scientific Balloon Facility (NSBF) at Palestine, Tex., from NSF to NASA as of October 1. The largest and most advanced facility of its type in the world, the NSBF provided launch and services for scientific balloons at its location 200 miles north of Houston. The site had good conditions for launching lighter-than-air craft, and the ground track after launch put balloons over large portions of the continental United States, allowing easy tracking and instrument monitoring.
Balloon vehicles could carry payloads for research in atmospheric physics, astronomy, and astrophysics to altitudes above the stratosphere (70,000 feet or higher). NASA had been the principal user of the facility; other users were NSF and private and foreign research institutions. GSFC’s Wallops Flight Facility would manage NSBF for NASA. (GSFC/WFF Release 82-8; NASA Release 82-142)
October 4: The Washington Post noted the 25th anniversary of the USSR’s launch of an orbiting satellite, saying that “no single event in history assaulted America’s image of itself as did Sputnik.” Subsequent U.S. space ventures “did nothing but tarnish that image,” the Army and Navy arguing over which would launch the first satellite, while the Soviet Union orbited dogs, rats, and mice and took pictures of the dark side of the Moon.
The Navy got the first opportunity December 6, 1957, with Vanguard on the pad at Cape Canaveral and “literally blew it.” The Army was given four days in January 1958 to launch Explorer from the Cape. When the launch finally took place after being delayed two days by unsafe winds, sea air had so corroded Army tracking radios in the Caribbean that, the Cape never received the signal that the satellite was in orbit. In 1961 “the roof fell in” when Yuri Gagarin became the first man to orbit the Earth, and Gherman Titov orbited 17 times. The “best U.S. orbital effort that year was that of Ham the chimpanzee.” Not until 1962 did John Glenn orbit the Earth, and then for only three orbits. By the end of that year the Soviet Union had sent four cosmonauts into, space.	.
President John F. Kennedy had told Congress May 25, 1961, that the U.S. goal would be to put a man on the Moon and return him safely “before the end of the decade.” By the time a three-man crew in Apollo 8 orbited the Moon in 1968 at Christmastime, “the space race was over. What happened to the Soviets?”
Former JSC Director Chris Kraft said in an interview that the Soviet Union
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED
W'TNTIONAUt RUN*
369
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1982
“abandoned their moon program. We took the wind right out of their sails.” Critics said that not all of the effects of the space race were good: it “spurred U.S. determination to improve the quality of schools and students, but whether that succeeded is debatable.” Kennedy “never saw the flight of anything to which he gave the initial impetus”; President Johnson, “who did more for the Apollo manned program than any president, suffered through the fatal Apollo fire”; President Nixon “basked in all of the Apollo triumphs only to answer for Watergate.”
One educator said “Sputnik is one reason Johnny can’t read today. He’s more interested in Pac-Man, which you might call an outgrowth of Sputnik.” If Sputnik led to Pac-Man, the Washington Post said, it also “helped to produce the high technology of the computer revolution. . .Today’s state-of-the-art computer processes 5 million operations a second.” W Post, Oct 4/82, A-l)
October 5: NASA observed the 100th anniversary of the birth in Worcester, Mass., of Dr. Robert Goddard, “father of modern rocketry.” President Reagan issued a proclamation calling October 5 “Dr. Robert H. Goddard Day,” noting that during his lifetime Goddard was “often ignored or ridiculed for his imagination, including the concept of a rocket going to the moon.” “Due to his pioneering vision of space travel and his tireless research efforts in developing the world’s first liquid-fuel rocket, the United States has achieved a preeminent position in space,” the proclamation said. “Dr. Goddard was a trailblazer to the stars.” (Text, procl Oct 5/82; Dtln Gd, Oct 5/82)
October 6: NASA announced the selection of four of five crew members for the first DOD Shuttle mission, STS-10, scheduled for launch from KSC in the last quarter of 1983. The commander would be Thomas K. Mattingly; pilot, Loren J. Shriver; and mission specialists, Ellison S. Onizuka and James F. Buchli. The fifth crew member, an Air Force manned-spaceflight engineer, would be named later. (NASA Release 82-146; MSFC Release 82-90; NY Times, Oct 7/82, A-18) •
• The Washington Post said that STS-5, the first operational Shuttle mission, would include simulation of a space repair job to practice for the salvaging of an orbiting satellite, Solar Max, in April 1984. The 5,000-pound Solar Max cost $70 million at its launch in February 1980 to study the Sun during maximum sunspot activity. Less than six months later, the devices pointing its instrumentation at the Sun broke down, and the satellite wa practically useless.
Congress allowed $18 million to put the Shuttle alongside in a 308-mile-high orbit so that astronauts could ground a dozen cables, cut seals holding them to a panel, and pry the entire group from the panel. The greatest expense was for training the spacesuited crew to use tools and to handle the Solar Max as it orbited at 17,500-miles-per-hour alongside the Shuttle. (W Post, Oct 7/82, A-23)
370
OCTOBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
•	NASA announced that the Federal Republic of Germany was the first nation to buy a dedicated Spacelab mission from NASA, at a cost of about $65 million. Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, NASA associate administrator for space transportation systems, signed the launch services agreement with the chairman and vice chairman of the German aerospace research establishment (DFVLR).
The D-l Spacelab mission, set to fly on the Shuttle in June 1985, would consist of low-gravity experiments primarily from German industry and research groups in the field of materials processing in space and life sciences. The Federal Republic had given about 64% of the funding for the billion-dollar European development of Spacelab. (NASA Release 82-145)
October 8: NASA declared successful the heat-capacity mapping mission (HCMM) launched from the WTR April 26, 1978. Carrying a two-channel radiometer to measure reflected solar radiation and emitter thermal radiation over a 1-year lifetime, HCMM acquired more than 25'000 Earth images during its 2 1/2 years in orbit with a spatial resolution superior to all previous thermal sensors. (NASA MOR E-651-78-01 [postlaunch] Oct 8/82)
•	JPL reported the discovery of the most distant object in the universe: a quasar named PKS 2000-330, more than 12 billion light years away. Light arriving at the Earth from that object started out before the solar system and probably the Milky Way itself were formed. Astronomers from the United States, Great Britain, and Australia began the search 10 years ago, using JPL’s Deep Space Network antennas in Australia to pinpoint radio sources that might be quasars. (NASA Release 82-154; JPL anno Oct 8/82)
October 19: Astronomers from JPL and the University of Hawaii on October 19 reported detection on two solar-system bodies—Pluto and Neptune’s largest satellite Triton—of frozen methane, a substance present on Earth as a product of living organisms ,and petroleum. Although the surfaces, mostly water ice, of Pluto and Triton differed from those of other bodies orbiting the Sun, the methane did not seem to come from biological activity. (NASA Release
82-157; JPL anno Oct 20/82)
October 20: The 200-inch telescope at Mt. Palomar observatoiy and an extremely sensitive electronic camera made the first confirmed sighting of Halley’s comet beyond the orbit of Saturn. Recording the reflected light of an object the night of October 15 and observing it again at a predicted location the night of October 17, G. Edward Danielson and David C. Jewitt of CalTech told an October 20 press conference “it was both where we expected it to be and had the correct brightness.”'.
The sighting was the farthest ever made of Halley’s, named for English astronomer Edmond Halley, first to recognize it as one traveling through the inner solar system every 76 years. He correctly predicted its reappearance in
371
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
OCTOBER 1982
1758 but did not live to see it. Its spectacular appearance in 1910 resulted from a favorable arrangement of Sun, Earth, and comet that would not occur on this visit. (W Post, Oct 21/82, D-l)
October 22: NASA Administrator James M. Beggs announced a revised policy on Shuttle-mission opportunities for payload specialists, heretofore available only to those buying half or more of a Shuttle mission of flying a unique experiment needing the presence of a particular scientist or engineer.
Starting in 1984, NASA would no longer require a minimum payload. Flights for payload specialists would be available on a reimbursable basis to all classes of customer: foreign and domestic commercial firms, international cooperative partners, the scientific and applications community, and DOD. The payload specialists would usually be scientists with special skills who would undergo a brief training for spaceflight. The expanded policy reflected a Shuttle-program goal of sending more people into space on a routine basis. (NASA Release 82-158; MSFC Release 82-97)
October 27: NASA launched RCA-E (RCA-Satcom 5) from ESMC at 9:28 p.m. on a Delta into a synchronous transfer orbit. It would be stationed on the equator at 143 °W over the Pacific to serve the continental United States, Alaska, and Hawaii. First of a series of second-generation domestic communications satellites made by RCA Astro-Electronics, it arrived at ESMC “slightly overweight” and carried no third-stage telemetry. Confirmation of third-stage burn and spacecraft separation was delayed until it passed over the tracking station in New Jersey to confirm that it was working satisfactorily. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Oct 29/82; NASA Release 82-155; NASA MOR M-492-206-82-06 [prelaunch] Oct 26/82)
• NASA said that Cospas/SARSAT, an international search-and-rescue project of the United States, the Soviet Union, Canada, and France, had located four accident sites and saved seven lives in its first month of operation. The Soviet Union’s Cospas satellite, launched June 30, had located two downed planes in Canada during September, another in September in New Mexico, and a capsized catamaran off the coast of New England in October less than 24 hours after receiving the first signal.
As part of the program the United States planned to launch in February 1983 a weather satellite, NOAA-F, carrying a search-and-rescue capability. GSFC managed SARSAT activities for NASA. (NASA Release 82-152)
October 30: The U.S. Air Force launched two military communications satellites from Cape Canaveral on its Space Division’s first Titan 34D and inertial upper stage (IUS). The first Defense Satellite Communications System III (DSCS) satellites went into orbit with parameters of 35,779/35,901-kilometer apogee, 35,641/35,839-kilometer perigee, 1440-minute period, and 2.5° inclination.
372
OCTOBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
The Air Force Systems Command said that the launch was the culmination of five years of development effort on an experience base of 47 previous Titan III launches from the Cape. The DSCS system had handled national security communications since the late 1960s, maturing from simple short-lived satellites to flexible systems with six times the capacity and more than three times the on-orbit life. (AFSC Newsreview, Nov 19/82, 1)
During October: Leroy R. Grumman, 87, founder of the Grumman aerospace firm and designer of carrier-based airplanes with stubby teardrop-shaped fuselages used by the U.S. Navy in World War II, died October 4 in Manhasset, N.Y., after a long illness. He had started his business with a few other persons in 1929 as a repair shop for amphibious aircraft built by the Loening brothers’ company; by the end of the war, Grumman employed 20,000, and it was still Long Island’s largest employer. The company built more planes in a single month than any other U.S. firm (664, in March 1945) and made 98% of the Navy’s bombers.
In 1966, when Grumman resigned as chairman of the board, the firm was building the lunar module that carried Apollo crews to the Moon. His awards included the Guggenheim Medal for Aeronautics and the Presidential Medal of Merit. (W Post, Oct 5/82, C-7; NY Times, Oct 5/82, D-25)
373
November
November 3: A formal ceremony in Washington, D.C., marked the acceptance of the Canadian-built remote-manipulator system as “ready for operational use” on the Space Shuttle. NASA Administrator James M. Beggs and Dr. Larkin Kerwin, head of Canada’s National Research Council (NRC), signed an agreement declaring the device (already successfully used on STS-2, STS-3, and STS-4) operational. Although NRC thus fulfilled its obligations under a 1975 memorandum of understanding, it would continue to monitor the arm system on future missions. Next use of the arm would be on STS-7 in April 1983. (NASA Release 82-168)
• DFRF resumed its DAST (drones for aerodynamic and structural testing) flight-test program with a successful launch and flight of the DAST 1 vehicle from its B-52 carrier. The 15-minute test of the remotely piloted research vehicle by NASA civilian research pilot Thomas C. McMurtry used flight-control, instrumentation, and launch and recovery systems. This was the first flight since DAST lost a wing in June 1980.
The joint program of DFRF and LaRC would lead to flying transport and other aircraft more efficiently with more flexible wings and allowing larger aircraft payloads or greater fuel economy, or both. Rather than use “brute force” stiffening in wings to ensure a safe approach to flutter boundaries (the point at which destructive flapping occurred), DAST computers would indicate ways to suppress flutter. (DFRF Release 82-18)
November 4: MSFC said that it had selected Martin Marietta Aerospace to negotiate a $l-million contract for a tethered-satellite system concept. A tethered-satellite system would go into orbit on the Space Shuttle in the late 1980s, suspended downward from the cargo bay on a 60-mile-long tether to troll the atmosphere for days as a time to. gather magnetospheric, atmospheric, and gravitational data. It could also be deployed upward to study electrodynamic and other phenomena. The area to be studied was too high for airplanes, too low for satellites to, cover for long, and reachable only for brief periods by instrument-laden rockets.
Under a letter of agreement signed in 1981, NASA would join with Italy in developing and launching the system, building the deployment system and managing systems integration and mission operations, while Italy built tire satellite itself. (NASA Release 82-169; MSFC Release 82-102)
November 11: NASA launched the fifth flight (STS-5) of Space Shuttle Columbia on time at 7:19 a.m. EST from KSC with a four-man crew, largest ever
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1982
to take off from Earth at the same time. Feeling none of the motion sickness suffered by three of the first four Shuttle crews, the astronauts were so busy preparing for deployment from orbit of the first of two communications satellites that they had no time for chitchat with mission control. Astronaut Joseph Allen took off his shoes and socks to work barefooted inside the Shuttle cabin: “it’s like having four hands,” he explained. He and William Lenoir maneuvered the first of twin satellites (one U.S., the other Canadian) into space at 3:17 p.m. EST, while Vance Brand and Robert Overmyer flew the 100-ton Shuttle, positioning Columbia to avoid smearing its windows with exhaust from the satellite engine. The astronauts would use the same procedures November 12 to deploy the Canadian satellite on a similar flight path.
The first commercial cargo carried by the Shuttle was a 21-foot-tall cylinder worth almost $50 million, owned by Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a firm begun as a partnership of Aetna Life & Casualty, Comsat General Corporation (a subsidiary of Communications Satellite Corporation—ComSatCorp), and International Business Machines (IBM). Boeing, General Motors, and General Electric were among its more than 300 clients who used SBS satellites to transmit coast-to-coast computer traffic and telephone calls. Transmissions to SPS satellites were at 14GHz, twice as high as frequencies used by other U.S. communications satellites and were relayed at 12GHz to avoid interference.
President Reagan held a telephone conversation with the astronauts at 10:26 a.m. November 11, repeating his request to an earlier crew to “pick me up and drop me off in California.” He added that “if more of us could see [the earth] from that angle we might realize that there must be a way to make it as united in reality here on earth as it looks from outer space.” Brand replied, “We’re in total agreement on that one.” (NASA MOR M-989-82-05 [prelaunch] Nov 5/82, [postlaunch] Dec 7/82; USA Today, Nov 12/82, 1A; W Post, Nov 12/82, A-l, D-8)
•	Charles (Pete) Conrad, who commanded Skylab’s first mission and was now a vice president for marketing at McDonnell Douglas, said that pieces of Skylab that crashed in 1979 over western Australia after five years in orbit would go on sale, with proceeds to NASA, for the support of Viking I, the Mars lander still sending messages from the surface of that planet. The Skylab pieces fitted into colorful posters were expected to raise from $150,000 to $500,000. Conrad had been a member of the Apollo 12 mission that landed on the Moon as well as commander of the Skylab mission in 1973. (W Post, Nov 12/82, A-10)
•	LeRC said that it had developed a device called MIAMI (micro-wave ice-accretion measurement instrument) to warn airplane pilots of dangerous ice buildup. This was the only device able to measure actual ice thickness and rate of accretion, besides giving a warning. Unlike other such instruments, MIAMI was imbedded in, instead of projecting from, the surface under study;
376
NOVEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
projecting probes tended to collect ice and confuse detection of how much was actually forming on the surface. The microprocessor in the device could tell the difference between ice and other substances (oil, dirt, grease, insects) and signal only the formation of ice. (LeRC Release 82-56)
LeRC also reported the completion of a five-year $39-million program of engine improvements to conserve fuel in commercial jet aircraft through identifying areas for cost-effective refurbishment and of performance loss. The specific goal was to reduce fuel use by up to 5 % for current jet engines. Much of the cost would be repaid by contractors Pratt & Whitney and General Electric; under the reimbursement feature of the program, repayments over a 10-year period would be based on sales of improved components. So far, NASA had recovered nearly $1 million from the contractors, with a potential of $19 to $20 million. (LeRC Release 82-57)
November 14-18: Soviet cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev on November 14 broke the 185-day record in space set by two compatriots, Leonid Popov and Valery Ryumin, in October 1980. Berezovoy and Lebedev were in their 186th day on board the orbiting Salyut 7 space station, where they would remain for several more weeks. The longest U.S. spaceflight was the 84 days spend on the Skylab station in 1974 by astronauts Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue.
Salyut 7 had been visited twice by the other crews: on June 24 two veteran cosmonauts arrived with French test pilot Jean-Loup Chretien, the first nonAmerican from the West to travel in space; on August 19, a second set of visitors arrived, including Svetlana Savitskaya, the second woman to fly in space.
Cargo ship Progress 16 had docked with the combined Salyut 7-Soyuz T-7 November 2 bringing fuel, research materials, supplies for the crew, and mail. On November 18 the cosmonauts launched from Salyut 7s airlock Iskra 3, a small communications satellite created by student designers at the Moscow Aviation Institute to make experiments in amateur radio. Student receiving stations in Moscow and Kaluga would control Iskra 3 and receive and process incoming data. (NY Times, Nov 15/82, B-6; FBIS, Tass in English, Nov 2, 9, 16, 18, 22/82)
November■ 15-19: Press reports said that problems November 15 with new million-dollar space suits had canceled the first space walk scheduled in nearly nine years and would bring STS-5 to a conclusion November 16. The walk was canceled when the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit quit and the device maintaining oxygen pressure in William Lenoir’s backpack behaved so erratically that flight directors feared a breakdown during any space walk. Program managers said that the walk could be done on a later flight; Glynn Lun-ney at JSC said that the program was “still right on track.” The next three flights would carry space suits for any unexpected problems, such as cargo-
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1982
bay doors that refused to close. The next flight was scheduled for February 1983.
Inspectors after the November 16 landing said that Columbia came through the fifth flight better than previously: an inboard tire on the left side was shredded and flattened on landing by a brake jamming against it, but only 4 of the 33,000 protective tiles were damaged or came loose during reentry. A seven-man panel investigating the space-suit failure said that they hoped to have answers within a week. One possibility was that the suits were dropped while in their cases or when removed and stowed in the ship. Engineers were baffled by the failure of both suits at the same time for different reasons.
The New York Times said that the suits, “most complex human garments ever made,” differed from those used in Apollo moon landings, or for Skylab in 1973 and 1974, which functioned well but were too stiff for easy handling of tools needed by Shuttle astronauts. Shuttle missions had called for production, by United Technologies’ Hamilton Standard Division, of 43 suits and 13 backpacks at a cost of about $2 million each; the suits had been tested by the company 160 times while unmanned and 70 times while manned, said a company spokesman. (W Post, Nov 16/82, A-l; Nov 18/82, A-7; NY Times, Nov 16/82, C-3)
November 16: Space Shuttle Columbia began a year-long vacation as the second operational Shuttle, Challenger, began final engine tests at KSC in preparation for a three-day mission in January 1983 with a four-man crew.
After its landing at Edwards Air Force Base, Columbia was scheduled to return to KSC for “six dozen minor modifications” after completing its first commercial venture, STS-5. The modifications would prepare it for the December 1983 launch of Spacelab, built for NASA by ESA. NASA spokesman said that the first five flights had proved that the Shuttle could launch satellites into space with “remarkable accuracy”; demonstrated that four men could do high-pressure jobs in a cabin the size of a pickup camper; and showed that the Shuttle, like an airplane, worked better the more it was used. (USA Today, Nov 17/82, 3A)
—MSFC said that it had sent NASA’s first inertial upper stage (IUS-1) to Cape Canaveral to ready it for launch in Challenger’s payload bay in January 1983. The first of six to be built by Boeing for the U.S. Air Force Systems Command, IUS-1 was an unmanned system for pushing payloads to high altitudes unreachable by the Shuttle in its 150-mile orbit. The two-stage vehicle, 17 feet long and about 9 feet in diameter, weighed more than 16 tons, had more than 64,000 pounds of thrust, and could carry up to 5,000 pounds of payload to geostationary orbit 22,300 miles up.
At KSC, the IUS would be mated to a tracking and data-relay satellite (TDRS), first of four planned for launch to replace present ground stations and improve command and telemetry functions for the growing number of operational satellites. NASA hoped to have the four-craft system in operation late in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-103)
378
NOVEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
November 18: The Space and Earth Science Advisory Committee, z. group of more than 80 scientists, met for the first time in Washington to discuss its role in advising NASA on science activities. Associate Administrator Dr. Burt Edelson told the committee of two recent changes in NASA: a reorganization that moved science and applications into the same department and the appointment of Dr. Frank McDonald as chief scientist, a position that had been vacant for a long time. (A/D, Nov 19/82, 107)
November 22: NASA signed an $11.6 million contract with a 22-member Arab group of nations and organizations to launch a communications satellite from the Shuttle in 1984. Administrator James M. Beggs signed the agreement for NASA; Dr. Ali Al-Mashat, director general, signed for the Arab satellite group. Arabsat, a consortium, included both Libya and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO); some uproar ensued on Capitol Hill until senators were persuaded that the deal did not imply U.S. recognition of the PLO. The United States also had no diplomatic relations with Libya and had a policy of selling no military goods to its government.
A State Department spokesman said that Arabsat members would “get no more than they already had through the existing INTELSAT satellite communications system.” The deal envisioned no transfer of technology, as the satellite would never be handled by its Arabsat owners. Saudi Arabia, which would be the center of operations, would control television programming for Arabsat use.
NASA Associate Administrator James A. Abrahamson said that the Shuttle was a commercial service and that its launches “should not be considered a political activity.” (NASA Release 82-173; W Post, Nov 23/82, A-2)
November 23: The Shuttle imaging radar (SIR) flown on STS-2 in November 1981 had revealed previously unknown river channels, geologic structures, and possible Stone Age occupation sites in the eastern Sahara desert.
JPL’s Dr. Charles Flachi, principal investigator for SIR, reported that the radar signal could penetrate the virtually featureless desert surface to show subsurface features nearly as broad as the Nile Valley and up to 50-million years old. Drainage networks detected by radar and confirmed by ground studies would explain the location of present oases in the desert. This new tool could serve in the search for ground water in such arid regions.
Dr. Alexander Goetz of JPL said that the multispectral infrared radiometer flown on the same Shuttle mission had made the first detection from orbit of clay and carbonite-bearing minerals, an important step in the use of remote sensing for geological mapping. The device used an area in Egypt of known mineral content as a baseline for analysis; its narrow spectral resolution made it able to map mineral content in the area, using specific substances as a guide for exploration and development, previously possible only through laboratory sampling techniques.
Dr. Henry C. Reiche, Jr., of LaRC was the principal investigator for the
379
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
NOVEMBER 1982
MAPS (measurement of atmospheric pollution from satellites) experiment flown on STS-2, which proved accurate when compared to ground studies. A gas-filter radiometer, part of the first scientific Shuttle payload, measured carbon monoxide ratios in the lower, upper, and middle troposphere, data to be used in 1984 for seasonal variation studies.
Besides the desert features revealed by the Shuttle radar, Flachi reported readings over densely forested areas such as the U.S. Appalachians, the mountains covered by rain forests in western Guyana and Venezuela, and other remote locations not covered by ground survey. Geologic features shown in the radar images would help identify causes of change: erosion, fault lines, or previously unknown fractures of the Earth’s crust. The devices recorded their findings because the Shuttle lacked communications capacity. (NASA Releases 82-174, 82-175, 82-176, 82-177; W Post, Nov 26/82, A-l)
November 24: NASA said that the three main engines that powered Space Shuttle Columbia on its five missions would be modified and retested to certify them for operation on the orbiter Atlantis. Rocketdyne would disassemble, inspect, and reassemble the engines before forwarding them to MSFC’s NSTL for acceptance tests and certification. They would be installed in Atlantis for its first mission in 1985. Columbia would get three new engines for its Spacelab mission in 1983. (MSFC Release 82-104)
November 28: Press reports said that weather satellite Goes West, monitoring the Pacific Ocean and the western United States, had stopped functioning November 25, leaving more than 60° of Earth’s surface (an area responsible for most of the winter storms on the Pacific coast) with a “blind eye.” Efforts to revive it were unsuccessful; officials said that the problem was in the Goes radiometer. Launched in 1980, the satellite was designed for three-year operation; a replacement was to be launched in 1983. If further efforts failed, the National Weather Service planned to reactivate one of several older satellites that had been retired but were still in place. W Post, Nov 28/82, A-8)
November 29: NASA went before the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to ask for a market test of a “land mobile se.tellite service” to complement cellular systems and other mobile arrangements now being planned or in use. NASA asked the FCC to reserve frequencies, for commercial companies offering to establish communications by satellite to rural America via portable radiotelephones that could switch calls between vehicles and local telephone networks. Present “cellular radio” systems were land-based, difficult to install in remote areas amid mountains and other barriers.
The FCC had denied a similar NASA request last year but would not comment on the new request. NASA said that other nations were developing mobile satellite communications services on frequencies provided by the 1979 World Administrative Radio Conference; if the FCC failed to provide the United States with frequencies, it could jeopardize its leadership “in satellite
380
NOVEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
communications and in mobile communications equipment.” The application said that mobile systems in the United States had been “available only through terrestrial facilities... limited in range” and restricted mostly to urban areas. A satellite system could include up to 288,000 rural subscribers by 1990, NASA said. W Post, Nov 30/82, C-7)
November 30: Former Apollo 13 astronaut Jack Swigert, elected November 2 as congressman from Colorado’s 6th congressional district, was hospitalized in Denver after undergoing chemotherapy for bone-marrow cancer. He would remain there “another few days,” an aide said. (NY Times, Nov 30/82, A-17)
381
December
December 2: NASA investigators of the failure of $2-million space suits on STS-5 issued an interim report blaming two missing parts and a faulty sensor.
During the mission on Shuttle Columbia, an oxygen device in astronaut William Lenoir’s suit failed to provide required pressure, and the fan in astronaut Joseph Allen’s suit and portable life-support system would not operate. JSC program Operations Manager Richard A. Colonna, who headed the team, said that two vital plastic parts the size of a matchstick, worth less than a nickel apiece, that several to hold a pair of screws against a metal piece in Lenoir’s suit, had been removed for a test last August and were never put back. Documentation indicated that the parts were in place, and during repeated tests, technicians failed to spot their absence.
The team said that the fan failed because a tiny magnetic sensor no bigger than a pinhead apparently gave way just after Allen put on his space suit. The motor running the fan and pumping water through the suit used the sensors, instead of the magnetic brushes used in most motors, because of the danger of a spark igniting the pure oxygen circulating inside the spacesuit.
Colonna said that the team would continue its investigation. He expected it to recommend further and more frequent testing and quality-control inspections by the manufacturer, Hamilton Standard, during space suit production and at JSC and KSC. (NASA Release 82-181; W Post, Dec 2/82, A-l)
• Speaking to an audience of U.S. and Brazilian businessmen in the governor’s palaee at Sao Paulo, Brazil, President .Reagan proposed that “a Brazilian astronaut train with ours so that Brazil and the United States can one day participate in a shuttle launch together as partners in space.” George P. Shultz, U.S. secretary of state, told newsmen on Air Force One that Brazil’s president Joao Figueiredo, hearing of Reagan’s proposal, said “That’s wonderful, and I know just who the first astronaut is going to be, Me.”
Brazilian officials said that Reagan had initiated a welcome new climate in U.S. relations with Brazil but said that the closer ties were more a matter of potential than reality. (Text, Dec 2/82; W Post, Dec 3/82, A-l)
December 3: NASA named Dr. Peter J. Denning head of a new Research Institute for Advanced Computer Science (RIACS) to begin at ARC in June 1983. Denning, chairman of computer sciences at Purdue, would direct research in computer science and engineering with potential for use in NASA programs. Funded by NASA through the Universities Space Research Association (USRA), RIACS would be an academic center for applications of
PRECEDING PAGE BLANK NOT FILMED ^tS^^WTjEN.nbNAui mm™
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1982
the computer to solve scientific and engineering problems. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 3/82)
December 9-15: Tass reported preparations for the end of the record-setting flight in Salyut 7 of cosmonauts Anatoly Berezovoy and Valentin Lebedev, the crew of Soyuz T-7 launched May 13. The crew was stowing in a reentry module a number of containers with flight documentation, biological samples, motion picture and still films, and monocrystals of semiconductor materials. They were also mothballing research equipment and support units on the station.
On December 10 the crew returned to Earth at 10:03 p.m. Moscow time in the preset area 190 kilometers east of Dzhezkazgan “not far from” the space center at Baykonur. Beijing’s Xinhua press service said that a special lighthouse equipped with a strong beam was installed at the site to guide helicopters with ground crews to assist the cosmonauts. Difficulties with the landing meant that journalists for the first time were not at the site.
Berezovoy later reported that “Judging from previous crews, who hardly felt the shock of landing, this landing was quite severe: and was followed by a few more rolls, apparently because we were on a small incline, and we ended up on our side with one on top of the other—Valentin [Lebedev] was on the (?up-per) couch and I was on the lower. . . .We spent about 20 minutes in the descent module while an offroad vehicle was made ready but then spent 5 hours in this vehicle because of poor conditions. It was not bad, it was warm. We changed our clothes for clean and dry ones, replacing spacesuits with flight suits.” (Interview recorded for Moscow DomSvc in Russian, December 13)
Later press reports said that the cosmonauts had “a harrowing reentry” in a craft rolling across a steppe swept by a blizzard and fog. Although initial USSR reports implied all had gone well, the New York Times said that the crew had “anxious moments” when unexpected bad weather landed them in darkness, near-zero temperatures, and blowing snow. One helicopter “force-landed” without injury, and another had to turn back. (NY Times, Dec 14/82, C-2; WPost, Dec 12/82, A-31)]
Tass carried reports December 12 of the first meeting with the cosmonauts. Their doctors said that “the cosmonauts feel fine which is somewhat at variance with the real state of their organisms.” Good appetites indicated “energetic adaptation to terrestrial conditions. In 24 hours the cosmonauts gained about a kilogram in weight each. They particularly liked a bath with the air temperature of up to 70 Berezovoy said afterward “If we could have such a pleasure at the Salyut station I would have worked for more time in orbit.”
On December 16 Ivan Skiba, chief physician of the space training center, said that the cosmonauts had been “put on a regime approximating their usual lifestyle.” He said that the doctors were “naturally worried over the decree to which the additional 26 days spent by [Berezovoy and Lebedev] in outer space over the 185-day space mission of [Popov and Ryumin] will affect the human organism. These 26 days constituted the “unknown path” both for the
384
DECEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
cosmonauts and for us physicians. Now we can say with certainty that the [additional] time in space.. .has not affected the cosmonauts’ organisms. Their cardiovascular activity, blood composition, and other characteristics are returning to preflight figures.” Skiba recalled that Boris Yegorov, “a representative of the medical profession,” was among the first cosmonauts and hoped he would not be the last medical man to fly in space.
Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov told a magazine December 17 Berezovoy and Lebedev had “made an important step in increasing the endurance of weightlessness.. .essential for activity in large orbital stations, space plants and factories, and interplanetary missions.” When the two returned from the 211-day mission, they “were sunken physically and had become thinner and paler... [wanted] regular human communication with friends. They eat with a good appetite.. .swim every day.. .to have some weightlessness in water and make their life easier. They still find it a bit difficult to be seated as the muscles that make the position comfortable are out of their elementary function.”
U.S. space officials were watching the cosmonauts’ adaptation to gravity after 30 weeks of weightlessness. A television broadcast three days after their return showed them moving unaided to the edge of a whirlpool where they were assisted down a ladder. A commentator noted they were “like infants” and would have to relearn how to walk. The Soviet Union had announced plans for a station orbiting for a year and permanently manned, its crews remaining in space indefinitely to reduce ferrying costs. Soviet experts, like former cosmonaut Konstantin Feoktistov, had talked of manned missions to destinations such as Titan, a satellite of Saturn. (Longest U.S. flight so far was the 84-day mission flown by Gerald Carr, Edward Gibson, and William Pogue on Skylab in 1973 and 1974.)
The Washington Times said that Soviet planners were “seriously divided about what to do next.” Valery Ryumin, who spent 175 and then 185 days on Salyut 6 and was now a senior program chief at the space center, talked of grave risks to crew health on long-term missions and said that “four months is about the optimal period.” Ignoring reports that Berezovoy and Lebedev were in fine health, Ryumin said that it would take “through medical tests on earth” to show how they had fared. (FBIS, Tass in English, Dec 9-17/82; Beijing Xinhua in English, Dec 11/82; NY Times, Dec 11/82, 12; Dec 14/82, C-2; W Post, Dec 11/82, A-23; Dec 12/82, A-31; W Times, Dec 15/82, 8A)
December 18: NASA successfully completed a 30 second flight-readiness firing of the new higher power space shuttle main engines at KSC. The test was to verify flight readiness of the three new engines and demonstrate in a launch-day environment the proper integration of all elements before the STS-6 mission. The successful test was a major step in preparation for STS-6, scheduled for launch in January 1983. Pre- and post-test activities included personnel from KSC, JSC, and MSFC.
385
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
DECEMBER 1982
This was the second time in history for static-firing the primary propulsion system of a manned spacecraft on the launch pad. A similar test of Columbia’s three main engines occurred Febraury 20, 1981, before the first Shuttle launch. Challenger’s more powerful engines, each generating 390,000 pound of thrust at sea level, had been fired individually at NSTL but were fired for the first time today in a flight configuration.
The most significant problem was a high level of gaseous hydrogen in the aft compartment. NASA said that so much work remained in the crew compartment that Rockwell employees at KSC were scheduled to work in that area over the holidays. (NASA Dly Actv Rpt, Dec 21/82; NASA Release 82-187; MSFC Release 82-111)
December 21: NASA said that it had added two physicians, Dr. Norman Thagard and Dr. William Thornton, to the crews of STS-7 and STS-8, respectively, to study space motion sickness, because other measures had failed to indicate the causes of the sickness. Neither physician had flown in space before.
Thagard would join STS-7 commander Robert L. Crippen, pilot Frederick H. Hauck, and mission specialists John M. Fabian and Dr. Sally K. Ride. Thornton, the oldest astronaut at 53, would join STS-8 commander Richard Truly, pilot Daniel Brandenstein, and mission specialists Dale Gardner and Guion Bluford, Jr. A five-person crew would not require spacecraft changes. (NASA Release 82-190; MSFC Release 82-115; WPost, Dec 22/82, A-3; NY Times, Dec 22/82, B-12)
December 27: ARC said that it had developed, with the aid of General Electric, a portable remote-communications system: a terminal and a folding antenna sized to fit inside two suitcases and be carried aboard an airplane and powered by either an ordinary AC outlet or the cigarette lighter in an automobile. Working with experimental communications satellite ATS 3, operated by NASA since 1967, an operator anywhere in North or South America or most of the nearby Atlantic and Pacific Oceans could contact any of several ground stations at any time.
The system would fit into two ordinary suitcases that could be carried as luggage in an automobile or on public transportation; one suitcases contained the collapsible antenna, the other an alphanumeric terminal to send or receive messages. The alphanumeric system would not disturb voice communications over the satellite, so that a NASA-authorized user could use it at any time without prior scheduling. ATS 3 had already served in many emergencies. When Mt. St. Helens erupted in May 1980, an Air Force jeep at the disaster site maintained voice communications through ATS 3 and a GE station near Schenectady, showing the need for rapidly deployable long-distance systems not dependant on land lines, often destroyed in emergencies. Organizations, including the state of California and the National Association for Search and
386
DECEMBER 1982
ASTRONAUTICS AND AERONAUTICS
Rescue, were working with NASA on further uses of the technology. (NASA Release 82-195; ARC Release 82-48)
During December: George B. Kistiakowsky, 82, a developer of the first atomic bomb who later became a leading opponent of nuclear weapons, died of cancer at his home in Cambridge, Mass. In 1944 he headed the explosives division at Los Alamos Laboratory of the Manhattan project, where he designed the arrangement of conventional explosives needed to detonate the atom bomb, receiving the Presidential Medal of Merit for his work. After he saw the first nuclear bomb explode at Alamogordo July 16, 1945, he said “I am sure that at the end of the world—in the last millisecond of the earth’s existence—the last human will see what we saw” ( W Post, Dec 9/82, C-17) —Jack Swigert, the former astronaut elected to Congress by Colorado’s 6th district voters, who knew he was fighting cancer, died December 27 at the age of 51 a week before he was to be sworn into office. He had flown on the aborted Apollo 13 Moon mission in April 1970, substituting at the last minute for Thomas K. Mattingly who had been exposed to German measles and was not immune. Swigert left NASA in 1973 to become executive director of the House committee on science and technology and had worked for two energy firms in Denver before resigning to run for Congress. (MiHrld, Dec 29/82, 1A)
387