Gerard K. O'Neill, a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the idea of colonizing space, died in Redwood City, California. O'Neill, 65, was the author of The High Frontier, a 1977 book that proposed the construction of giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could live in space. (P Inq, Apr 29/92)
Congress planned to give the fledgling U. S. commercial space business a boost next year by pumping $10 million into launch site improvements. Most of that money was expected to be spent on upgrades to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station facilities. (Fla Today, Oct 8/92)
In a letter to the British journal Nature, two American scientists at the University of Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, David Kring and Willima Boynton, said that they had found what they believe to be the location where a gigantic object from outer space crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago, possibly ending the age of the dinosaurs. The site is a buried crater 110 miles across on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. (The Sun, Jul 9/92; WSJ, Jul 9/92)
A team of American and British astronomers detected the flare of a supernova almost halfway to the edge of the known universe--five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed. Light from the supernova was expected to help astronomers grapple with the questions of whether the universe is infinite and will expand forever or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse. (NY Times, Nov 15/92)
A Japanese amateur astronomer detected Comet Swift-Tuttle on its return to the inner solar system. Swift-Tuttle, last seen during the American Civil War, is currently the longest predictable periodic comet, returning approximately every 130 years. (W Post, Sept 29/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
Ceremonies at Edwards Air Force Base marked the 50th anniversary of the birth of the jet age. On October 2, 1942, Bob Stanley first flew the XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed at Muroc Air Base (now Edwards Air Force Base). (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 2/92)
General Dynamics Corporation said its space systems unit had won a $112.6 million Air Force contract to modify space-launch facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. (WSJ, Nov 6/92)
In a carefully hedged report, the General Accounting Office said that crucial American high-technology industries including consumer electronics and robotics may have lost ground in the 1980s to foreign competitors, particularly Japan. The sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equipment, supercomputers, pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, fiber optics, robotics, consumer electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and flexible manufacturing systems. (NY Times, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 18/92)
To help bolster the competitiveness of American industry, NASA and the Department of Energy announced that they had formed a partnership to enhance the transfer of technologies developed in their laboratories to American enterprise. Areas of cooperation included outreach to business and non-profit research organizations, access to federal technology resources, training and education, dissemination of scientific and technical information, and technology transfer policy and program analysis.
The Air Force reported that a YF-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, prototype of the planned F-22, had slammed onto the main runway of Edwards Air Force Base with its wheels retracted during a practice approach. The radar-eluding plane, designed to be the hottest air combat fighter going into the 21st century, slid several thousand feet and burned for 90 seconds. A Lockheed pilot escaped with only minor injuries. (B Sun, Apr 29/92)
NASA and a contractor team headed by Rockwell International said they were conducting supersonic laminar flow experiments using two General Dynamics F-16XL demonstrators on loan from the U. S. Air Force. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
