Aera Corporation, which had competed as American Astronautics in the X Prize private spaceflight competition, signed a five-year launch support agreement with the U.S. Air Force, securing access to Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. Although Aera had yet to launch a single test vehicle, the company planned to launch paying customers by the end of 2006. Aera’s President and Chief Operating Officer Lewis Reynolds explained that the company had used computer-based modeling for most of its testing and had done very little testing of actual physical components for the spacecraft. The company intended to apply for a FAA launch license within 30 days and to secure a manufacturing facility for its seven-seat spaceship, the Altairis, by the end of April.(Alan Boyle, “Dark Horse Makes Bold Claims in Space Race,” MSNBC.com, 8 March 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7121988// (accessed 2 September 2009).)
NASA’s implementation of its Integrated Financial Management Program (IFMP)NASA had begun implementing the IFMP in 2000 as a single accounting system to replace 11 separate accounting systems. At the request of the U.S. Congress, in 2003 GAO had examined NASA’s progress on IFMP implementation and had recommended that NASA make 45 changes to the program. In its assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement those recommended changes, GAO stated that NASA had made slow progress and still needed to implement most of the recommendations. The report also stated that NASA’s financial management problems were in danger of threatening its capacity to manage its programs and to allocate its budget to projects and programs. NASA responded that it had made significant improvements under the IFMP and had made progress on more of GAO’s recommendations than GAO had indicated in its report.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Business Modernization: Some Progress Made Toward Implementing GAO Recommendations Related to NASA’s Integrated Financial Management Program” (report no. GAO-05-799R, Washington, DC, 9 September 2005); Tamara Lytle, “NASA Still Can’t Balance Its Books, Auditors Say,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 October 2005.)
The National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) in Hampton, Virginia, released a report commissioned by the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science, which had concluded that, to keep pace with Europe, the U.S. government would need to spend more on aeronautics, not less. The report, “Responding to the Call: Aviation Plan for American Leadership,” recommended that, over the next five years, the U.S. government should restore NASA’s aeronautics funding to 1998 levels, a goal that implied a spending level approximately twice that of President George W. Bush’s proposal for FY 2006. The study team comprised more than 250 of the nation’s top aviation experts representing industry and academia. NIA President and Executive Director Robert Lindberg remarked that the United State’s aviation capabilities had eroded, despite the position of aviation as a critical component in the U.S. balance of trade. The report of more than 1,000 pages provided detailed investment plans, budgets, and needs assessments for seven aeronautics sectors: airspace systems, aviation safety and security, subsonic aircraft, supersonic aircraft, hypersonic technologies, rotorcraft, and workforce and education.(National Institute of Aerospace, “NIA Releases Congressionally-Requested Aviation Plan,” 3 May 2005, http://www.nianet.org/pressreleases/AviationPlan_050305.php (accessed 16 September 2009); Allison Connolly, “Survey: NASA Can’t Afford To Fall Behind in Aeronautics,” Virginian Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 4 May 2005. 788 BBC News, “First Marsis Radar Boom Deployed,” 6 May 2005; Maggie McKee, “Mars Express To Deploy ‘Divining Rod’ at Last,” New Scientist, 4 May 2005.)
NASA announced the establishment of the Exploration Systems Advisory Committee (ESAC), composed of leading experts from government, academia, and industry. NASA named Lester L. Lyles, a former commander of the U.S. Air Force Materiel Command to chair ESAC. Lyles had extensive experience managing large, high-technology organizations involving aeronautical and astronautical research, development, acquisition, and logistics. The committee would provide advice and recommendations to NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, including input regarding plans, policies, programs, and other matters pertinent to the directorate’s responsibilities.
