DISCOVERER XI launched from Vandenberg AFB and stayed in orbit, reentry capsule was not recovered. (See Appendix A.)
DISCOVERER DC failed to orbit from Vandenberg AFB.
American Bar Association's “Report to NASA on the Law of Outer Spnce’’ was released, which contained collation of legal opinion on the broad spectrum of space activities.
NASA selected Recketdyne Division of North American Aviation to develop a 200,000-pound-thrust engine utilizing hydrogen and oxygen propellants. This engine is second only to the F-l in single-thrust chamber level.
Radar beam transmitted along electron lines of the earth’s magnetic field extending into the exosphere, first confirmation of theory and work of Roger M. Qallct of the National Bureau of Standards and Henry G. Booker of Cornell University. Echo reflected from the earth successfully received 0.2 of a second later after traveling 37,000 miles, perhaps offering a new tool to study the effect of solar eruptions on the earth’s magnetic field and a new long-range sur-velUance method using radar.
Completion of technical review of Dyna-Soar program announced by the Air Force.
Atlas-D with Mark 3 nose cone fired 4,381 nautical miles into Enlwetok Atoll in first SAC launching from Vandenberg AFB.
Stanford University scientists reported on successful reflection of radar signals off the sun’s corona on April 7,10, und 12,1959.
USAF SAMOS 1 launched from Vandenberg AFB, but failed to orbit.
Civil Service Commission approved new examination for career professional positions in aerospace technology, part A covering work in the physical sciences, engineering, and mathematics, and part B covering work in the life sciences and related systems. December 7:	DISCOVERER XVIII launched into polar orbit by new Thor-Agena B from Vandenberg AFB, carrying survctllance-system equipment and human tissue In recovery capsule.
NASA selected Hughes, North American, Space Technology Laboratory, and McDonnell to study designs for the first lunar soft-landing spacecraft.
USAF DISCOVERER XIV launched into polar orbit from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (See Appendix A.)
