Italian Air Force crew fired Jupiter IRBM from Atlantic Missile Range, the third such launching.
Representatives of 30 American aerospace firms in Europe formed an informal organization known as U.S. Aerospace Industries in Europe.
Two U.S. Air Force officers were sealed in space simulator for 17-day test of man’s reaction to almost pure oxygen at 35,000 feet altitude, at School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Tex. Emerging on August 25, Lts. B. Appel and J. Slider had eaten dehydrated food, drunk water processed from the atmosphere and their own body wastes, and were pronounced in good physical condition.
First Northrop T-38 supersonic jet trainer was delivered to USAF Air Training Command at Randolph Air Force Base, Tex.
National Aeronautic Association appointed committee headed by Maj. Gen. Albert Boyd, U.S. Air Force (retired), to program U.S. efforts to break world aircraft records now held by other nations.
X-15 flown more than 40 miles into space—217,000 feet— and reached a speed of 3,647 miles per hour, Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. This was above 99.9 percent of Earth’s atmosphere; pilot’s heartbeat and respiration rose to twice above normal; and outside skin temperature of the X-15 rose to 900° F. on reentry.
Twelfth Congress of the International Astronautical Federation held in Washington, D.C.
Lt. Hunt Hardisty, U.S. Navy, pilot, and Lt. Earl H. DeEsch flew an F4H Phantom II over the 3-kilometer course of Holloman Air Force Base, N. Mex., and averaged 902.769 miles per hour for a new world’s record for speed at low altitude.
USAF B-58 Hustler flown from Carswell Air Force Base, Tex., to Le Bourget, Paris, in record 6 hours 15 minutes, covering distance from New York to Paris in 3 hours 20 minutes. This flight commemorated the 34th anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s transatlantic crossing on May 20-21, 1927, and the opening of the 24th Paris International Air Show.
Ten scientific organizations recommended that the American Association for the Advancement of Science create a new section to deal with scientific information and communication. The problem was seen to be one of an overabundance of information not accessible for the scientist, particularly in interdisciplinary science. Only three other new sections have been created in the American Association for the Advancement of Science in this century.
NASA awarded contracts to Convair, Lockheed, and North American for studies of space vehicles beyond the Saturn class, having first-stage thrust of 6 to 12 million pounds.
USAF Discoverer XXVI orbited from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying instrument capsule to be recovered after 32 polar orbits and 4 days. Of the 25 previous Discoverers, 17 had gone into orbit and 15 carried recovery capsules, of which 5 had been recovered.
USIA reported that U.S. space achievements were a leading item in their overseas information program and covered all media. USIA concluded: “The policy of ‘openness’ observed in both U.S. manned space flights during the year dramatized the basic difference between the American open society and the Soviet closed society, and drew widespread approval from commentators throughout the free world. The availability of full information about the events through all news media, together with the presence of foreign correspondents—who gave firsthand, on-tlie-spot coverage—enabled oversea audiences to achieve a high degree of self-identification with one. of the greatest adventures of our times.”
Maj. Robert Rushworth, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 to 2,820 miles per hour, with bottom tailfin missing in programed malfunctions for test of stability and control.
NASA selected North American Aviation to develop an upper stage (S-II) for an Advanced Saturn launch vehicle to be used on both manned and unmanned missions.
Dr. Carl Sagen, of University of California (Berkeley), disputed the “space seed” life theory in American Association for the Advancement of Science paper. “Panspermic” theory did not seem plausible in the light of the fierce environment of space and the vastness of the universe, he said.
Air Force Office of Aerospace Research (OAR) announced that its Office of Scientific Research had awarded 139 basic research grants and contracts worth almost $8 million so far this fiscal year.
USAF awarded an additional $52 mlliion contract to North American Aviation for development of a prototype B-70 bomber, bringing to $267 million the amount allocated for the B-70.
USAF Discoverer XXV placed into polar orbit by Thor-Agena B, at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.
USAF announced plans to institute special course for the instruction of space pilots at Edwards Air Force Base, and it was activated in June.
X-15 flown to unofficial record 2,275 miles per hour by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force.
Italian Air Force personnel fired Jupiter IRBM in training launch at Cape Canaveral.
USAF Bomarc B launched from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., on command from SAGE Center at Montgomery, Ala., destroyed supersonic Regulus launched from Venice, Fla.
General Curtis E. LeMay, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, said in interview with U.S. News & World Report: “I think we’re at the period of space technology that we were in aeronautical technology along about 1914. At that time no one could predict the type of weapon systems that the airplane was going to produce, or the transportation system that it would eventually produce. As a matter of fact, it was pretty much a laughing stock—a very expensive toy. “We, of course, initially did a very poor job in our development program to advance the science of aeronautics in this country. I hope we do a better job in space. At the present time we can’t predict what will eventually come out of research in space in the way of weapon systems or commercial vehicles or any other use that we might put space to. I am sure that men are going out into space. I’m sure that they’ll find useful things to do out there, and I’m sure that, unless something is done to preclude it, they’ll find things to fight over out there, too.”
Thomas F. Dixon of North American Aviation was appointed Director of NASA’s Office of Launch Vehicle Programs (OLVP), effective September 18, 1961. He replaced Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, U.S. Air Force, who returned to military duty as Vice Commander of AFBSD (AFSC), having served as first Director of OLVP since December 16, 1959.
Northrop T-38 (Talon) jet flown 842.6 miles per hour to claimed world speed record for women, by Jacqueline Cochran at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
Marine helicopter crews conducted extensive tests to perfect water recovery of Mercury capsule at Langley Air Force Base.
Full Tass text of Marshal R. V. Malinovsky’s speech on October 23 as it appeared in Soviet dailies, showed no statement to the effect that the Soviets had perfected an antimissile missile, as had been reported by Moscow correspondents of the American press.
In a ceremony at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., the USAF graduated its first class of five pilot-engineers from its school for space pilots. Graduates were awarded advanced technical degrees.
An F4H Phantom II piloted by Lt. Col. Robert B. Robinson (USMC), claimed a new world speed record at Edwards Air Force Base, averaging 1,606.324 miles per hour.
Capsule of Discoverer XXVI snatched at 15,000 feet during final descent after 32 polar orbits. Midair recovery by C-119, Capt. Jack Wilson, U.S. Air Force, as pilot, was fourth so performed. Capsule carried undisclosed payload.
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, speaking before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said that although science had become a determining factor in national and international events, its effectiveness was hampered because educated men did not understand science. Yet, he said, science was truly a part of the humanities; “Who in our times can make an adequate criticism of life without knowledge of the ideals, the methods, the dynamics of science?”
The space surveillance system (Spasur) was formally commissioned at the Nava] Weapons Laboratory, Dahlgren, Va., under the operational control of the North American Defense Command.
Prof. Martin Schwarzschild, of Princeton University, named by the National Academy of Sciences to receive the Henry Draper Medal for his work as director of ONR’s Project Stratoscope (produced clear photos of the structure of the surface of the Sun).
Tiros II completed 4 months in orbit and continued to provide useful cloud picture and radiation data. Signal from Tiros II was used on 1,763d orbit to trigger dynamite to break ground for new RCA Space Environment Center at Princeton, N.J.
USAF Discoverer XXVII destroyed by range safety officer 60 seconds after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Air Force reorganized its headquarters staff to reflect creation of Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), which made the Deputy Chief of Staff for Development, Lt. Gen. Roscoe C. Wilson, Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Technology.
Studies of “unconventional” rockets using liquid fuels in the thrust range from 2 to 24 million pounds announced by NASA; 2 contracts being carried out by Aerojet-General and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation.
Tass announced that the “Air Force Herald” would be retitled “Aviation and Cosmonautics” (Aviatsiga I Kosmo-navtika), beginning in January 1962.
NASA announced that Dr. Hiden T. Cox, executive director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences, would become Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, and “charged with developing NASA policies to insure that the character, the intent, and the results of America’s space effort are correctly and adequately interpreted to the people of this country and the world.”
Second Atlas ICBM launched by SAC crew, from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Workshop: Telemetry in Europe” at National Telemetering Conference in Chicago brought seven European representatives together with American scientists in working out unofficial preliminary standardization planning on bands, means, and frequencies.
USAF Discoverer XX placed in polar orbit with 300-pound recovery capsule from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
X-15 (No. 1) on its first flight with new XLR-99 engine was flown to 2,735 miles per hour by Comdr. Forrest S. Petersen, U.S. Navy, at Edwards Air Force Base.
Convair B-58 Hustler, jet bomber powered by four GE J-79 engines, broke six world speed records, Maj. H. J. Deutsch-endorf, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. On first closed-course run, the Hustler averaged 1,200.194 miles per horn, and it averaged 1,061.808 miles per hour on both runs carrying a payload of 4,408 pounds and a crew of three.
Dr. von Karman and some of his associates organized the Astronautics Foundation, Inc., in Washington, D.C., to enable U.S. individuals and corporations to support through this nonprofit foundation various cooperative international activities.
First silo launching of an ICBM, a USAF Titan at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Lt. Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, said that plans to orbit a monkey in Discoverer XXII (March 30) were canceled at the last minute, and that such plans had not been rescheduled.
Gold-plated capsule of Discoverer XXXV recovered after 18 orbits in midair over Fern Island by C-130 aircraft, Capt. James F. McCullough, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. It was the 10th recovery from orbit in the Discoverer series and the 1st recovery observed from the ground.
Air Force Systems Command formed a Bioastronautics Division, effective October 1, to consolidate all USAF applied research in this area into a single organization. School of Aerospace Medicine, now under Air Training Command, becomes a part of Air Force Systems Command.
Massive Soviet air show over Tushino Airport in Moscow, on Soviet Air Force Day, which demonstrated that U.S.S.R. had continued development of all classes of military aircraft.
USAF established a Council of Scientists to be comprised of senior civilian scientists of major Air Force organizations, Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold as Chairman.
Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 a record speed of 2,905 miles per hour, topping his mark of 2,275 miles per hour set on February 7 with interim engine.
Operational Atlas raised from emplacement and fired in an operational test exercise at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Speaking at the Air Force Association convention in Philadelphia, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, said that “the United States has been notably slow to recognize the military application of new inventions. Two of the most significant inventions of this century— the airplane and the liquid-fuel rocket—are American inventions. Yet in each case their first application was made by other nations.” Gen. Schriever also stated: “We should recognize that there is no inherent difference between basic military and nonmilitary space technology. What really matters is not the technology but the intent * * * space power must become a vital part of our national strength and security.”
