Pertinent facts of human evolution should be included in preparation for interstellar communication, according to Prof. Robert Ascher of Cornell Univ. dept of anthropology and his wife, Marcia, assistant professor in Ithaca College dept, of mathematics and physics. Models of primitive man’s efforts in surmounting barriers can be used as theoretical background for thinking about !>ossible civilizations on other planets. Problem of watching and istening for signals across space and developing means to reach source of those signals is essentially same as problem of prehistoric man making contact with other races or civilizations. Ascher also declared whenever two civilizations have made contact, conquest by dominant group has followed. Models of those communications should be constructed and studied, Ascher said, and applied to future interstellar communications.
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) began negotiating a new type of three-year contracts for basic research with Westinghouse Electric, ibm, and rca in the solid-state field. This was the first time that basic research had been contracted on any other basis than one year at a time, is designed to provide more continuity and certainty of completion of research projects. As under the previous system, osr and industry each bear roughly half of the costs of the research.
Awards for 1961 announced by the American Helicopter Society: first Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy to Mikhail L. Mil of the Soviet Union; Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Brig. Gen. Robert R. Williams, U.S. Army Aviation Center Commander; Capt. Wm. J. Kossler Award to'Air Rescue Service, mats; Frederick L. Feinberg Award to Lt. Col. Francis M. Carney (usaf) ; and the Grover E. Bell Award to the engineering organization of Sikorsky Aircraft.
Six candidates were selected by the usaf for Dyna-Soar, including four Air Force and two nasa test pilots. Dyna-Soar is designed to be boosted into orbit by a Titan III.
Radio Moscow quoted Mikhail Yarov-Yarovoy, senior scientist at U.S.S.R. Astronomical Institute, as saying: _ “We learn today that America’s space vehicle, the Mariner II, has passed quite close to Venus. The successful launching and the reception of radio signals from such a great distance indicate that American scientists and engineers have achieved more and more in conquering space. “We congratulate our American colleagues.”
Aviatrix Jerrie Cobb told Women’s Advertising Club of Washington, D.C.: “We’re bypassing the one scientific space feat we could accomplish now—putting the first woman in orbit. . . .”
usaf launched two Atlas D missiles in quick succession from Vandenberg afb toward impact area 5,000 miles away. Officials said the tests, the first demonstration of a multiple countdown capability, were successful.
usaf combat missile crew launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., during President Kennedy’s visit to the missile base, the first time an American President had witnessed a live launching of an icbm.
Development of new type of laser by General Electric and International Business Machine researchers was reported in American Physical Society’s Physical Review Letters and American Institute of Physics’ Applied Physics Letters. Called “injection laser,” new crystal laser was powered by electrical current; previous solid lasers used strong flash lamps as energy source. At least 10 times more efficient than existing lasers, injection laser was expected to enable engineers to broadcast audio messages on the beams of light and to modulate the brightness of the light according to voice, television, or other pattern. Researchers anticipated that single laser beam could transmit a million telephone messages or a thousand television channels.
In testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee Air Force Chief of Staff LeMay requested additional funds to speed the development of the RS-70. Asking for nearly three times the Administration’s budget request, or $491 million, LeMay said that limiting funds “wollid lose more than a year” beyond the 1967 target date for the first three prototypes. “This program has been slowed down at least four years. We have delayed and delayed until there is practically no risk in it now.”
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $1 mlliion contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for a paraglider development program.
usaf released unclassified “U.S. Air Force Space Policy” Report to the House Armed Services Committee in executive session. It was reported as saying that the U.S. must “recognize the peril” of Soviet space supremacy, take the lead in military space technology, and called for continued close cooperation with nasa.
usaf discoverer xxxvu launched from Vandenberg afb but did not attain orbit.
American Meteorological Society issued statement on the implications of the control of weather and climate, which endorsed the resolution adopted in the United Nations on December 20, 1961. U.N. resolution called for a cooperative international effort to improve weather prediction and to explore the possiblli-ties of weather control and climate modification.
usaf Atlas F missile flown 5,000 miles from Vandenberg afb carrying a special package of cameras to help locate and correct propulsion problems encountered in previous tests, the missile meeting all test objectives.
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch by sac crew at Vandenberg afb on training mission, usaf spokesman said no one was injured and no facilities were damaged.
First known antimissile missile interception of icbm nose cone announced by dod, the interception of an Atlas nose cone launched from Vandenberg afb high over the Pacific by a 3-stage Nike-Zeus fired from Kwajalein. Interception of 16,000-mph nose cone by experimental Nike-Zeus was regarded as comparable to a bullet hitting a bullet, although dod did not state whether physical contact had been made.
In response to statement by Col. Gen. Pyetr Braiko, Soviet Air Force chief of staff, regarding U.S.S.R. lead over U.S. in aircraft records, National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced that Soviet claim was based on January 1, 1961, figures. At that time, U.S.S.R. held 176 world records— 113 aircraft, and 63 parachute; U.S. held 106 world records—all aircraft. By July 20, 1962, U.S.S.R. still led U.S. in total world records (including parachute), but U.S. held more aircraft records than U.S.S.R. Parachute records: 83 U.S.S.R. to 8 U.S.; aircraft records: 112 U.S.S.R. to 161 U.S.
Through the official Soviet newspaper Pravda, the U.S.S.R. asserted that the U.S. was endangering an international program for cooperation in the use and exploration of outer space by failing to accept the Soviet drafts of codes to regulate activities in space, and by planning to undertake a program for the military use of space. Pravda reported: The “United States thus had left the door open for carrying the armament race into outer space. It seems that American representatives have come to Geneva not so much to negotiate on the peaceful exploration of space as to justify by legal pettifogging the Pentagon’s militaristic plans in space and these plans already are too well known.”
Office of Aerospace Research announced scientists at Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl) would conduct the “most thorough study of atmospheric ozone ever made,” a concentrated one-year series of observations with more than 700 balloons carrying sensitive ozone meters into the upper atmosphere. New 11-station network, from Canal Zone to Greenland, would participate in project. To begin in January 1963, project was expected to yield data on nature of ozone.
dod opened Defense Research Office in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to coordinate basic scientific research throughout Latin America. Col. Leonard M. Orman (usa) headed the office and the Army Element, and Lt. Col. Charles J. Lyness (usaf) headed the Air Force Element. Also established, near the Defense Research Office, were nsf and nih offices. U.S. Department of State would coordinate all the offices’ activities.
The Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched a 150-foot balloon made of .001-inch-thick plastic. The test, intended to provide data for better research balloons, would send the balloon to an altitude of 117,000 feet for a fifty-hour period.
Dr. Ross A. McFarland of Harvard University was awarded the Walter Boothby Award by the Aerospace Medical Assn, for outstanding research directed at the promotion of health and prevention of disease in professional airline pilots.
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus successfully intercepted icbm target in first test involving decoys, dod announced. Atlas icbm with its decoys was launched from Vandenberg afb toward Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, from which two Nike-Zeus were launched; one of the antimissile missiles had to be destroyed after launching, but the other successfully completed the mission.
Preliminary results of solar-wind experiments by mariner ii were reported by Dr. Conway W. Snyder of jpl at American Geophysical Union meeting. Experiment measured velocity, density, and temperature of solar plasma using electrostatic analyzer onboard the probe. Results showed energies of gas atoms in solar wind are very low as compared to cosmic-ray particles, but number of solar-wind particles is about a billion times greater than number of cosmic rays, making total energy content of solar wind much greater than of cosmic rays. Solar flares eject plasma clouds which may have higher velocity, density, and temperature than undisturbed solar wind—which mariner ii found to be little less than 250 mi. per sec. velocity, 10-20 particles per cu. in. density, and few hundred thousand deg. temperature, mariner ii also found solar wind appears to be “supersonic”—and supersonic effects such as plasma shockwave ahead of the earth and other planets would be objects of study of future nasa space vehicles.
National Council of the Federation of American Scientists adopted a policy statement that space activities should be classified only when there are compelling military reasons.
Jacqueline Auriol set a new women’s international air speed record for 100 kilometers (62.10 miles) at Istres, France, flying a French-built Mirage III jet at 1,149.23 mph. Previous record, held by American aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, was 783.02 mph.
dod announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted Atlas icbm over the Pacific Ocean. Target Atlas was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., and two Nike-Zeus missiles were fired from Kwajalein Island, the first Nike-Zeus making the successful intercept. This was second successful intercept-test by Army’s Nike-Zeus.
Addressing American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. Loren K. Eiseley, anthropology prof, at Univ. of Pennsylvania, said that space defense efforts are “consuming an enormous amount of our wealth and energy. . . . Let a few generations go by, and so much of society’s wealth and employment will be wrapped up in this sort of thing that you will get-—as we are beginning to get now—a vested interest in war. . . . [The space/defense effort is] a kind of gigantic tumor. When these emerge, you not alone run the danger of weakening society, but also encounter the fact that these tumors grow and become monstrous; to reduce them to normal size becomes difficult if not impossible. . . .” Dr. Eiseley predicted the massive emphasis on space and armaments might lead to downfall of modern civilization; he compared the preoccupation with space and armaments to Imperial Rome’s colonialism, Ancient Egypt’s tomb and pyramid building, and India’s elaborate caste system which contributed to downfall of those ancient civilizations.
usaf Minuteman icbm fired in combat-ready test from Vandenberg afb, Calif., range safety officer destroying missile shortly after launch.
usaf Atlas F icbm was destroyed by tne range safety officer a few seconds after launch from Vandenberg afb.
usaf 564th Strategic Missile Squadron of sac successfully launched an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb.
Preliminary results of particle-flux-detectors onboard mariner ii were reported by Dr. L. A. Frank and Dr. H. R. Anderson at American Geophysical Union meeting, Stanford Univ. The instruments showed absence of particles near Venus, indicating the planet’s magnetic field does not extend out as far as trajectory of mariner ii; this observation was confirmed by onboard magnetometer. Cosmic-ray measurements during the probe’s interplanetary flight indicated cosmic-ray flux was a constant measurement throughout the flight (approximately 3.0 particles per sq. centimeter per sec.). High-energy solar particles were generally absent except for a single solar-flare event beginning Oct. 23; low-energy solar-particle counter detected this event and at least eight others. Total radiation dose recorded in Oct. 23 event was only about 0.24 roentgens inside ionization chamber’s 0.01-in.-thick steel wall, and radiation was very non-penetrating.
E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. announced it had awarded grants totaling $1,693,300 to 161 American universities and colleges to strengthen the teaching of science and related subjects, to promote fundamental research, and to aid facilities for education or research in science and engineering.
Radiation research results reported by George M. Woodwell of Brookhaven National Laboratory to American Association for the Advancement of Science showed that plants, like animals, vary in sensitivity to radiation. Large plants that reproduce slowly, such as trees, appear more susceptible to radiation than less complex plants, such as algae and fungi. “. . . The hypothesis seems tenable that small organisms with wide ecological ampll-tudes and high rates of reproduction—in short, weeds and other organisms frequently considered pestiferous because of their persistence under persecution—have survival advantage under conditions of long-term exposure to ionizing radiation over large organisms with longer life cycles.”
sac combat missile crew launched successful Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California.
Reported that hundreds of Soviet mathematics textbooks are being published in English, and that many of them are being used in American universities.
usaf Atlas F icbm was launched from a silo at Vandenberg afb in successful 5,000-mi. flight to vicinity of the Marshall Islands in the Pacific, the first Atlas F launch from an underground silo.
faa released memorandum dated December 29, 1961, stating that Stanford Research Institute’s radiotelescope was a hazard to air navigation. The first of three such telescopes to be built in the U.S. by sri extends 90 feet too high for Moffett Field air traffic and 128 feet too high for Palo Alto Airport traffic.
explorer x detected a “shadow” on the side of the earth facing away from the sun; in this shadow there is an absence of the solar “wind”, a belt of plasma moving out from the sun at about 200 miles per second but deflected around the earth by the earth’s magnetic field and creating a cone-shaped “shadow” some 100,000 miles across at its larger end. The explorer x findings were reported to the annual meeting of the American Physical Society in New York by Dr. Bruno Rossi of mit.
usaf awarded contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for development of RS-70 prototypes, including fabrication of three aircraft.
Aerospace Research Pilot School began a seven-month course to train seven Air Force and one Navy officers for future space missions and projects. This was the second space-training course given at Edwards afb, Calif., but the first for potential “operational” personnel.
“American Roulette 500 Miles Up” was the title of the article by Sir Bernard Lovell in the Sunday Observer (London"), which repeated his arguments against the planned nuclear explosions by the U.S. over Johnston Island in June and July.
Announced that 1962 Daniel Guggenheim Medal for achievement in aviation would be awarded posthumously to James H. Kindle-berger, late board chairman of North American Aviation, Inc.
usaf sac crew launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in routine training exercise.
In an address before the American Management Association Forum in New York, Maj. Gen. Robert J. Friedman, afsc Comptroller, spoke on “Management of the Decision-Making Process.” He pointed out that the Air Force Systems Command was an organization of 60,000 employees with an annual budget of seven billion dollars to administer, afsc has, he said, over 33,000 active contracts involving companies of all sizes and in all states. Gen. Friedman discussed the “boundaries” within which afsc must manage its decision-making processes: (1) actions of the military competitors of the U.S.; (2) the constraints of limited funds; (3) the number of alternative courses available in the solution of technical, strategic, and tactical military problems; (4) limitations of time; and (5) the availability of information and competence at various organizational levels within one jurisdiction.
nasa announced signing of detailed contract with Space and Information Division of North American Aviation, Inc., for development and production of Saturn S-II stage. The $319,922,328 contract, largest single contract ever awarded by nasa, covered production of nine live flight stages, one inert flight stage, and several ground-test units for the Advanced Saturn vehicle.
Studies conducted by American Airlines revealed that 78% of Americans have never traveled on commercial airliner, while 8 million use the airlines regularly (15% of these accounting for 64% of commercial air passengers).
norad announced Soviet manned spacecraft vostok iii and iv crossed the North American continent 70 times during their double orbital trips August 11-14. norad space detection and tracking system tracked the flights for 112 earth orbits.
Soviet News Agency Tass announced that the U.S.S.R. was again resuming nuclear tests in the atmosphere, quoting an official Soviet Government statement, in part: “The explosions of the American nuclear bombs above Christmas and Johnston Islands have produced their echo—they have made Soviet nuclear tests in reply inevitable.”
afsc formed the Research and Technology Division, Provisional, to “plan and manage afsc’s basic research, applied research, and advanced technology and . . . create a broad base of research and technology for rapid use in the development of Air Force aerospace systems.”
Cosmonaut Gherman Titov arrived in New York City for 8-day visit to the U.S. in conjunction with cospar sessions in Washington.	_ _
United Aerospace Workers and the International Association of Machinists served a notice of intention to strike on July 23 “unless an honorable settlement is reached by that time” against five major space companies—Lockheed, North American, Douglas, General Dynamics, and Aerojet. Fifty-one plants, test sites, and missile bases would be affected by walkout of 125,000	union members.
usaf Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., launching conducted by 12-man combat crew of sac’s 565th Strategic Missile Squadron from Warren afb, Wyo.
United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., voted to defeat union shop proposal, iam workers at General Dynamics/Convair and uaw workers at Ryan Aeronautical Co. would also vote on the proposal.
usaf Atlas-E icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, the first such launch from this base.
President Kennedy made a statement to the press on the lawn of the White House, expressing the “great happiness and thanksgiving of all of us that Col. Glenn has completed his trip .... “I also want to say a word for all those who participated with Col. Glenn in Canaveral. They have faced many disappointments and delays—the burdens upon them were great—but they kept their heads and made a judgment and I think their judgment has been vindicated. “We have a long way to go in this space race. We started late. But this is the new ocean, and I believe the United States must sail on it and be in a position second to none. “Some months ago I said that I hoped every American would serve his country. Today Col. Glenn served his, and we all express our thanks to him.”
Unidentified usaf payload launched with Thor-Agena vehicle from Vandenberg afb.
usaf Minuteman icbm exploded within seconds after launch attempt from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Titan I icbm was successfully fired 4,000 mi. down the pmr in test of recently modified ground support equipment. This was sixth Titan I launch from Vandenberg afb.
usaf Titan I icbm launched by military crew at Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, said in a speech at Mississippi State College: “The Materials Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base developed the basic material and structures used in ‘sandwich construction’ of aircraft; titanium alloy as a structural material; plastic, ceramics, and metallic alloys to withstand the high temperatures encountered during re-entry into the earth’s atmosphere.”
Two new sources of radiation in the Milky Way had been discovered by usaf Aerobee probe on June 18, physicist Riccardo Giacconi announced at Third International Symposium on X-Ray Optics and X-Ray Microanalysis, Stanford University. Giacconi said that knowledge of x-ray emissions was valuable because this kind of radiation was “intimately connected with the creation and behavior of cosmic rays and the properties of a galaxy. . . .” Discovery and investigation of such x-rays would “further understanding of the origin and dynamics of the universe . . . and may have a bearing on the study of communication of matter between galaxies.” A second probe was planned for launch on October 2, to investigate the discoveries.
Stars may devote % of their lifetime energy to production of neutrinos, according to Dr. Hongyee Chiu of Yale and nasa’s Institute for Space Studies, speaking before the American Physical Society in New York. Neutrinos are among the most elusive of atomic particles, having no weight and no electrical charge, passing through matter with little chance of being stopped and with minimum interaction. Dr. Chiu theorized that the universe may have once been made up entirely of neutrinos which interacted to produce other particles and elements and that eventually the universe may return to neutrinos.
Final usaf Atlas icbm squadron declared operational at Plattsburgh afb, N.Y., bringing total operational Atlas force to 123. Additional composite squadron of Atlases was being maintained at Vandenberg afb, partly for r&d and partly for training use. December 19-21: President Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, meeting in Nassau, reached defense agreement designating Polaris missile to replace the Skybolt air-launched missiles as Britain’s primary nuclear deterrent weapon. Under terms also to be offered to France, Britain and France would receive Polaris missiles from U.S. and eventually these would form the backbone of a nato nuclear force.
usaf announced “routine training launch” of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb by the 576th Strategic Missile Squadron.
Nine Soviet cosmonauts were lost in space between February 1959 and October 1961, it was reported by Oton Ambroz of North American Newspaper Alliance (nana). Article, relying heavily on European sources, claimed five cosmonauts were sent on orbital space flights from which they did not return; two cosmonauts, a man and woman, orbited in a single spacecraft May 17, 1961, but did not return; and two cosmonauts, man and woman, were sent on lunar flight Oct. 14, 1961. Conversations of the dual flights were reportedly monitored by Western receivers; signal from a single cosmonaut ("World—S.O.S.—S.O.S.”) was received Nov. 28, 1960. Other flights were based on reception of physiological, tracking, and other signals. None of the flights was reported) by U.S.S.R. andjjNASA had no comment on the report.
Soviet Foreign Ministry told U.S. Embassy in Moscow that the “Soviet Union will not undertake any action that might hinder the flight of the American spaceman Walter Schirra.” The Soviets were replying to U.S. note requesting the U.S.S.R. to refrain from nuclear tests during the MA-8 flight.
usaf Atlas E successfully test-fired from pmr to impact near Wake Island, the second successflli firing of an Atlas E from Vandenberg AFB.
International Association of Machinists rejected contract offer of Aerojet-General Corp. and began a strike. In Washington, a Presidential committee opened talks on labor dispute between IAM and the Boeing Co. United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., had accepted a three-year contract, thus averting strike.
Dr. James B. Weddell of North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div. announced development of new technique to predict solar flares up to 35 days in advance with 70 per cent accuracy. Dr. Weddell announced his new forecasting technique at symposium on radiation hazards, Gatlinburg, Tenn., cosponsored by nasa, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and American Nuclear Society.
Proposals to ban orbiting of nuclear weapons, and to seek international agreement on space activities irrespective of other disarmament measures were included in the final report of the second American Assembly—British Institute for Strategic Studies at Brighton, England.
United Auto Workers (uaw) of North American and Ryan Aviation voted to delay walkout for 60 days as requested by the President, thus joining International Association of Machinists (iam) which had previously accepted the 60-day delay in planned strike against General Dynamics (Convair) and Lockheed.
Tenth anniversary of Livermore Branch of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of California. Established to “help cope with problems involved in maintaining American superiority in nuclear deterrence,” the laboratory devoted about half of its effort to weapons research and the remainder to peaceful uses of atomic energy.
Boeing-Vertol was selected by the Air Force to build long-range helicopter capable of carrying a payload of at least 5,000 lbs. for 200 nautical miles or 2,400 lbs. for 700 miles. Modification of Vertol 107 helicopter, now in production for civil use, would satisfy usaf’s Specific Operational Requirement 190.
