sao crew launched a Titan I icbm froin Vandenberg afb, Calif., in a routine training launch. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)
nasa Launch Operations Center awarded two contracts for construction at the Merritt Island site adjacent to Cape Canaveral: Ingalls Iron Works, $11,500,000 contract for three launching towers; and American Bridge Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., $23,534,000 contract for work on Saturn V vertical assembly building. {NYT, 7/10/63,5)	_
Louis B. C. Fong, Director, Office of Technology Utilization, addressing the American Management Association, Inc., said: “nasa’s activities in space operate across all of the interfaces in the total transition process which starts with basic research and advances through applied research, development, engineering design, test and fabrication to ultimate production. Industry must be ready to determine in which phase it should act and direct space technology to an industrially oriented goal. “Resistance to new ideas and new technologies is part psychological ; a good deal of it is practical when new expenditures have to be justified to stockholders in terms of an upward sales curve. Often it is economic, since to implement a new technology may result in a tremendous impact upon a way of life of a major industry—e.g., oil vs. coal, transistors vs. tubes, solid state physics vs. conventional circuit design, diesel vs. steam engines, etc. . . . “Companies must organize to accept this data; must be geared to use what is helpful; must work to break down the barriers between one division and another. For economic survival, the time lag can no longer be accepted as standard operating procedure in the laboratory-to-consumer cycle .... “The accepted business patterns of the past must change if you singularly as a company and we collectively as a national business enterprise are to stay in the race.” (Text)
American Geophysical Union, at annual meeting in Washington, adopted resolution urging that fcc protect Channel 37 for radioastronomy uses, fcc had received applications for operation of commercial TV on that channel in Paterson, N.J., and scientists feared that broadcasts from such station would interfere with research being performed with radiotelescope at Danville, HI. fcc had proposed in March to exclude for five years commercial stations on Channel 37 within 600 mi. of Danville and to limit nighttime hours that stations could broadcast on Channel 37. agu resolution asserted that the “needs of radio astronomy are not met by the limited protection” provided by fcc proposal and that the proposal “leaves unprotected nearly all of the active radio astronomy observatories in the United States.” {NYT, 4/22/63, 24)
usaf launched an Atlas D iobm from Vandenberg afb, Calif. {M&R, 11/18/63, 11)
An American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft believed to be returning from a mission over Cuba had crashed into the Gulf of Mexico 40 mi. north of Key West. An air-sea rescue search failed to recover the pilot, (uri, Wash. Post, 11/21/63)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired and controlled from Kwajalein Island in mid-Pacific, recently made successful interception of target vehicle launched by Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1170-63)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced that Soviet scientists had successfully bounced first radar signals off planet Mercury. Performed last summer when Mercury was 52-54 million mi. from earth, experiment was credited with confirming value of the Astronomical Unit calculated in 1961 by U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. using Venus as radar target. Eberhardt Rechtin of jpl called Soviet Mercurv achievement “another significant step in radar exploration of the solar system.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, A3; San Francisco Chronicle, 1/5/63)
Ernest J. Sternglass, physicist at Westinghouse Research Laboratories, proposed theory at American Physical Society in New York that would offer a unified concept of nuclear and electrical forces, heretofore considered separate phenomena, and would reduce all matter to two particles—electron and positron. Sternglass hypothesized that all other particles found in atom (30 or more in recent years) are merely combinations and variations of negatively-charged electron and positively-charged positron. Simplest such grouping is single electron-positron pair, whirling near speed of light, which exhibits same properties as elementary particle known as neutral pi meson. Two such electron pairs, Sternglass said, exhibit properties of elementary particles K meson and Rho meson; other systems similarly account for all heavy mesons “within a few per cent of their observed values.” Combinations of electron-positron pairs with proton can explain other elementary particles classed as hyperons. Sternglass had assumed that Einstein’s special theory of relativity, which states that an object’s mass increases with its velocity, governs particles’ behavior; thus, if charged particles move fast enough and close enough in their orbits, they will generate sufficient force to hold atomic nucleus together. (Wash. Post, 1/25/63, A6)	_	,
usaf launched Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight some 5,000 mi. down Pacific Missile Range, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/31/63; M&R, 9/9/63,13)
A City of Los Angeles Commendation award was presented to Air Force Space Systems Division by Los Angeles mayor, The Honorable Samuel Yorty. The citation, in recognition of ssd’s contribution to the national space effort, was accepted by General Ben I. Funk, Commander. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan., 1964)
Use of helium-neon gas laser for transmitting television pictures was demonstrated by scientists of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. Terming the development a “breakthrough,” scientists said new system using one-inch-cube, four-pound modulator could send TV pictures from deep in space and its pictures could not be tapped by outsiders, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
dod announced Dr. Theodore von Karman had been selected to receive the second annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award, established in 1962 by Air Force Association to be conferred on U.S. citizen for outstanding contribution to national defense, (dod Release 420-63)
Youth Science Congress, sponsored by nasa and the National Science Teachers Association, was held at gsfc. Feature event was presentation of 25 award-winning research papers by high school students from Washington, D.C., Md., Del., Pa., and N.J. (gsfc Release G-20-63)
A statement from the American Meteorological Society expressed the hope that the U.S. would continue to provide leadership in the challenging new field of meteorological rockets and urged support on an expanded and more enduring basis. The ams recommended that the national program should pursue three objectives: (1)	A U.S. Meteorological Rocket Network based on the existing network should be established and cooperative programs with other countries should be arranged. (2)	A first-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and at least 60 km. to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height should be produced. (3)	A second-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and 100 km. or higher, to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height, and electron density above 60 km. should be established. (Bulletin of the AMS, May 1963)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Walter L. Lingle, Jr., reviewed nasa procurement policies before National Capitol Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) : “It is our objective in nasa to have one overriding objective in all of our procurement policies; and that is so to make our contracts that we will achieve the highest standards in reliability and systems performance . . . .” (Text)
aec announced Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer would be recipient of Enrico Fermi Award, aec’s highest honor, in recognition of his leadership in development of the atomic bomb and of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Dr. Oppenheimer has headed Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, since 1947. {NTT, 4/6/63,1,5)	_
Dr. J. N. Bahcall of Cal Tech’s Kellog Radiation Laboratory outlined at American Physical Society meeting in Pasadena a proposed experiment to determine temperature of sun’s interior. A tank the size of an Olympic-size swimming pool, sunk at bottom of 5,000-ft. shaft drilled into the earth to screen cosmic rays, would be filled with 100,000 gals, of chlorine-37 isotopes. Neutrinos from sun bombarding the pool would change chlorine37 into argon-37. Measuring rate of change would help physicists determine solar temperature as well as sun’s structure and composition. (Becker, NTT, 12/20/63,31)
usaf accepted the first two F^C tactical fighter aircraft into the Air Force inventory in ceremonies at MacDill afb, Fla. The F—4C is the Air Force version of the Navy’s F^B, combines into one aircraft the capability for close air support, interdiction, and air superiority, (dod Release 1496-63)
Titan I missile successfully launched from Vandenberg afb by sac crew in routine training exercise, usaf announced. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/30/63, Al)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted re-entry target vehicle launched by Atlas icbm in recent test. Nike-Zeus was fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, Atlas from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 858-63)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “. . . if we were to draft every scientist and engineer in the country into weapons development work, we could still develop only a fraction of the systems that are proposed .... This process of choice must begin with a requirement for solid indications that a proposed system would really add something to our national security . . . . “Development costs alone on typical major weapons systems today average upward of $1 billion. Over a billion dollars was spent on the atomic airplane, which was little closer to being a useful weapon when we canceled it, shortly after taking office, than it had been half a dozen years earlier. Eighty million was spent on the Goose decoy missile, essentially a pilotless aircraft that the enemy would confuse with our B-52’s .... “The RS-70 is an example of a weapon which, it seems to me, fails to meet the basic requirement for a major systems development: a solid indication that the weapon, if developed, would add significantly to our national security. It happens to be a particularly expensive weapon: to develop, procure, and operate a modest force of these planes would cost us at least $10 billion. Yet considering the weapons we already have, or will have by the time the RS-70 could be operational, it is very hard to see how this weapon would add to our national security .... “As weapons systems grow more complex, more expensive, and more difficult to maintain in a high state of military readiness, it is essential that we limit as far as possible the number of new systems that we bring into operation; for we want to be as sure as possible that wTe can depend on every system to operate when it is really needed. A basic fact of life is that under the chaotic conditions of combat you do not get anything like the efficiency of weapons systems that you get on a test range. Relative simplicity is a most desirable characteristic of a weapons system, or of a combination of systems . . . .” (Text, in CR. 4/24/63, 6580-83)
usaf launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the 20th of the solid-fueled missiles launched from the West Coast base. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star. 11/3/63)
Atlas icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb in routine training launch for sac missile crews, (dod Release 105-63)
An aircraft somewhat similar to the U-2 reconnaissance plane was seen by reporters on the flight line at Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards apb, Calif. Air Force officials identified the aircraft as an RB-57F, a drastically modified version of the British Canberra jet light bomber. Chief modifications visible were two extremely long tapered wings similar to those of the U-2, with two very large engines mounted on them. Two smaller J-60 engines were mounted on the fuselage. The aircraft is used in Project Peewee, an environmental study of navigation and weather equipment at high altitude. (AP, NYT, 10/6/63) 63-22*1)"'" ^
General Curtis LeMay (c/s usaf) said in address to Air Force Association, Washington, that usaf was “making a concerted effort to maintain a mixed force of manned aircraft and missiles and, for the longer term, vehicles that could operate in space. The Secretary of Defense . . . has directed that we continue our studies of follow-on manned, strategic vehicles that can counter threats and survive in the varied plateaus of aerospace operations . . . .” (Text)	. General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said that during the next “ten to fifteen years aircraft technology promises to make major advances which will provide significant improvements in range, speed, and versatility.” As examples, he cited use of laminar flow control which “promises to make possible a significant increase in the subsonic range and endurance of large aircraft”; technical progress in such areas as “aircraft configuration, high temperature structural materials, and propulsion systems” which will “make feasible the development of a great variety of advanced types of aircraft, ranging from conventional design to V/Stol, variable geometry, and paraglider configurations.” (Text, A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,18) Lt. Gen. T. P. Gerrity (usaf) told afa Industrial Associates’ Luncheon that “there is a recognition of our future mixed force needs and new manned strategic systems are currently under consideration” and spoke of threat of a “manned aircraft gap.” (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,19)
X-15 No. 2, being remodeled under usaf contract by North American Aviation, Inc., would have as one of its most important research objectives the testing of a ramjet engine modified to bum liquid hydrogen. Using the basic configuration of the Navy’s Typhon missile engine, the ramjet would slow the supersonic airstream of the X-15 to subsonic speed for burning in the engine. Theoretically the ramjet flying at 4,600 mph should be twice as efficient as a jet engine. (Clark, NTT, 11/10/63, 88)
dod announced that the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile had scored another successful interception against an icbm. This 10th successful Nike-Zeus interception was from Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific, the target a Titan I icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, dod refused to state the date on which the interception took place, (dod Release 1519-63; Wash. Post, 11/30/63)
Ernie Smith, who made first civilian airplane flight to Hawaii from Oakland, Calif., on July 15, 1927, died in San Francisco. 2,393-mile flight took 25-hrs. 26-min. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/27/63)
In formal statement of policy, Air Force Association declared Senate ratification of nuclear test ban treaty would entail “unacceptable” risks to security of U.S. and Free World. Statement also said: “One area of military technological potential in which this nation obviously is making less than a maximum effort is military space .... We must exploit military space to extend and preserve our deterrent strength, to control and inhibit those who would use their power aggressively to dominate life on earth. All of our national space efforts, including purely scientific exploratory programs, must be measured first against this yardstick. The national interest must be the prime purpose of every national program . . . .” (afa Statement)
In interview during annual meeting of American Geophysical Union, Dr. Lewis B. Kaplan of jpl, said mariner ii’s discovery of 800° temperatures of Venutian surface indicated possibility that atmosphere of Venus and clouds surrounding that planet contained organic compounds—including formaldehyde, oily hydrocarbons, and certain methyl compounds. Although large quantities of carbon dioxide were present in Venutian atmosphere, carbon dioxide alone would not account for the “greenhouse effect.” Other substances—probably organic compounds—existed in Venutian atmosphere to absorb heat and radiation from planet and reflect it back to surface. (Carey, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/63)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in letter to Air Force Association President J. B. Montgomery regarding afa’s Statement of Policy on nuclear test ban treaty: “. . . I recognize the right of the Association to express itself but the resolution is so immoderate and based on such misinformation as to disregard completely the best interests of the United States, as well as of the Air Force . . . .” He also canceled his appearance at afa reception in his honor. (Letter/DOD Release)
usaf launched Atlas E icbm on successful 4,000-mi. test-flight from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 810-63)
usaf launched Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb in “routine training launch.” (dod Release 220-63)
Charles Michels, lrc scientist, described Lewis work with a “coaxial plasma-gun,” being studied as a method to propel future interplanetary spacecraft. Michels spoke before the American Physical Society in Cleveland, (lro Release 63-44, Lewis Chronology, 5)
Speaking at American Institute of Chemical Engineers meeting in Buffalo, N.Y., engineers of Linde Co. described new process for making liquid hydrogen that would reduce its cost from $2 per pound to 35 or 40 cents per pound. (AP, NYT, 5/7/63, 11)
Report on laser research presented at meeting of American Physical Society by Robert W. Terhune, Ford Motor Co. physicist. Ford scientists had succeeded in altering laser’s ultraviolet-ray frequency to other frequencies, an achievement hailed as breakthrough toward using lasers for communications. {NYT, 4/24/63,18)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director, Procurement and Supply, at the NASA-Industry Programs Plans Conference, Washington, D.C., explained the role of small business in nasa contracting. “During fiscal year 1962 small business companies received 66 percent of the total number of contractual actions, large and small, placed by nasa. This small business share of nasa procurement amounted to approximately $125 million, or 12 percent of the total nasa procurement placed with all business firms . . . They are able to compete successfully for many of nasa’s contracts, particularly in furnishing components and supplies. During fiscal year 1962, of the hundred contractors who received the largest dollar value of nasa prime contracts, 24 were small business concerns. In those procurements where small business concerns submitted bids, they were successful in receiving 57 percent of the dollar value of the awards.” (Proceedings, nasa SP-29; Text)
usaf launched Titan icbm in routine training test from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 1018-63)
usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1188-63)
Maj. Harold W. Dietz (usaf) of Vandenberg afb told aerospace medicine conference at sam that it was “practically impossible” for a single commanding officer of an icbm site, even if he lost self-control in a nervous breakdown, to start a nuclear war. Major Dietz reviewed the safeguards built into the complex procedure for preparing and firing icbm’s. (Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A6)
Senate unanimously passed a joint resolution authorizing a special medal to be struck in honor of Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (Ret.), one of the first military pilots in the U.S., chief of the Air Service of the American Expeditionary Force in World War I, and Chief of the Air Corps from 1931 to 1935. (CR, 6/27/63, 11203) June 28: nasa concurred in Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. selection of Radio Corp. of America as subcontractor for Lunar Excursion Module (lem) electronic subsystems and engineering support. ( nasa Release 63-143)
usaf conducted routine training launching of Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 844-63)
Sixth Annual Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, sponsored by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. In address, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson paid tribute to the “father of modern rocketry,” and said that those today who “understand the stakes of space” must help “the public to understand these stakes.” He urged that communications barriers among scientists, engineers, and politicians be abolished so that public support for public policy can be obtained. “Unless and until this is done,” said the Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, “the technological community cannot justifiably be impatient with those who are chosen to represent and express the public’s own will.” In addition to honoring Mrs. Goddard, the National Rocket Club presented its annual awards: the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, its premiere award, to John H. Glenn, Jr., in recognition of the first U.S. manned orbital space flight; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for development and operation of telstar i; the National Rocket Club Award to the Radio-Television Industry (abc, cbs, mbs, and nbc) for “pioneering private enterprise efforts” under the U.S. open information coverage of the space program; the Astronautics Engineer Award to Jack Norval James of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Technical Director of mariner ii. The First Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was given to R. Cargill Hall of San Jose, Calif., for his prize essay on “World-Circling Spaceships—Satellite Studies in the U.S. During the 1940’s”; Honorable Mentions going to Wilfrid J. Mayo-Wells of Washington, D.C. (“Origins of Space Telemetry”) and Robert D. Roach of Buffalo, N.Y. (“The First Man-Rocket Belt”). The Robert H. Goddard Scholarship was awarded to Miss Marcia S. Miner, physics major at the American University. (Program)
Rainer Berger, senior research scienti^. at Lockheed-Califomia, Co., predicted man would probably encounter some form of extraterrestrial life within 10 years. Speaking at ninth annual meeting of American Astronautical Society, Los Angeles, Berger also suggested “greenhouse effect” of planet Jupiter might make possible the existence of warm oceans hospitable to life on that planet. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,6)
Plans for orbiting 18 unhatched chicken eggs in Biosatellite were described at aaas meeting by Dr. G. N. Hoover, Chief of Life Sciences, North American Aviation, Inc. One of several Biosatellite experiments planned for life specimens, the experiment was expected to yield data on effects of weightlessness on incubating eggs. (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/30/63)
usaf announced Titan II missile had been test-fired while locked in its 155-ft.-deep silo at Vandenberg afb. Firing of “brief” duration was to test the missile’s resistance to noise and vibration. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/63)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was successfully launched from Vandenberg afb in routine launch, (dod Release 997-63)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, addressing American Meteorological Society in New York, said: “A global system of weather services and atmospheric research requires much more than the sum of separate national programs, much more than traditional cooperation or coordination. Its success depends upon a world-wide joint effort benefiting a world-wide task . . . .” (ams Release)
A. Scott Crossfield, first pilot of the X-15 and now an executive with North American Aviation, Inc., said in an interview that he thought the X-15 “can fly twice as high as its present record and probably can go several hundred miles faster than it has been flown . . . .” The increased altitude “. . . would be more difficult than the extra speed and it would create re-entry problems too.” (Tulsa Daily World, 10/11/63)
Atlas missile was launched from Cape Canaveral in test of new slimsilhouette warhead intended to present less image on enemy radar screens. Atlas went out of control 2% min. after launch and fell into the Atlantic far short of its intended goal. This was the sixth successive failure of Atlas missiles, the previous five at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/63)
afsc announced awarding two six-month study contracts for operations analyses and preliminary design of long-range, low-level supersonic air-to-surface missile designated the Chemical Low Altitude Missile (clam). Recipients of the two $300,000 contracts were North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Division and Lockheed California Co. (afsc Release 39-107-104)
usaf launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in successful routine training launch, (dod Release 987-63)
usaf successfully fired Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, a routine training launch by sac crew, (dod Release 1142-63)
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo in successful flight, (dod Release 767-63)
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb down the Pacific Missile Range in routine training launch, (non Release 987-63)
Communist China’s press agency Hsinhua announced that more than 1,000 Chinese and. foreign scientists met in Peking to celebrate establishment of center for the World Federation of Scientific Workers devoted to the “advancement of science in Asian, African and Latin American countries.” (NYT, 9/26/63, 5)
Hanson W. Baldwin reported in New York Times that during latest Soviet nuclear tests “one high-altitude explosion destroyed two incoming missiles. In one American high-altitude test in the Pacific, a fairly small nuclear detonation high above the earth caused fission—an atomic chain reaction—in a nose cone 150 miles above the earth and 800 miles from the explosion. “This phenomenon, called neutron flux, travels great distances in a virtual vacuum. Thus it may be able to neutralize fissionable material in incoming warheads. This is a technique about which the Russians are believed to know more than American scientists . . . .” (Baldwin, NYT, 7/26/63)
Minuteman icbm successfully launched from underground silo, Vandenberg afb, by sac crew, seventh of series of Minuteman launchings down Pacific Missile Range. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/63)
Washington (D.C.) Academy of Sciences presented its 1962 scientific achievement awards to: the Rev. Francis J. Hey den, Professor of Astronomy and Director of the S. J. Observatory, Georgetown Univ., winner for science teaching because “by combining teaching and research, he leads others to join his adventures in science”; Dr. Marshall Nirenberg, National Institutes of Health, winner in biological sciences; Lindell E. Steele, Naval Research Laboratory, winner in engineering sciences; Dr. Bruce L. Reinhart, Univ. of Maryland and Research Institute for Advanced Study, Baltimore, winner in mathematics; and Dr. Edward A. Mason, Univ. of Maryland, winner in physical sciences. (Wash. Sum,. Star, 2/17/63)
Titan II missile launched for first time from underground silo, in usaf test from Vandenberg afb. Re-entry vehicle landed in preselected target area and flight was described as a complete success. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/63, Al)
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/8/63, Al) center could acquire' management responsibility for all or part of these planetary projects, study having been initiated at request of nasa Hq. Unnamed Hq. spokesman pointed out that jpl is now responsible for all nasa unmanned lunar and planetaiy programs and has heavy workload with Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner R projects; Goddard may be asked to perform major subsystem work in Mariner B and Voyager, perhaps leading to eventual overall direction of the projects. (MdkR, 1/7/63,14)
WTright Brothers Day. Events commemorating the 60th anniversary of powered flight were highlighted by dedication of First Flight Airport at Kitty Hawk, N.C., the 3,000-ft. l iinwriy parallel ing flight path of Wright Flyer. Airport was built by State of North Carolina, fa a, and National Park Service. Dedication speeches were made by Governor Terry Sanford and Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges. Other participants in ceremony included Sen. A. S. Monroney (D.-Okla.), cab Chairman Alan Boyd, tac Commander Gen. Walter C. Sweeney, Jr. (usaf), and Park Service Director Conrad L. Wirth. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine, and Coast Guard joined for first time in display of air power, with more than 70 airplanes flying over the site. (NYT, 12/16/63; NYT, 12/18/63, 30)
Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo on 5,000-mi. flight down Pacific Missile Range. Launching wTas conducted by sac crew. (M&R, 9/9/63.13)
nasa and the Air Force began a test of a 5-psi 100% oxygen environment in a 42-day experiment with four airmen at Brooks afb, Tex. It would include 7 days in the chamber in a normal atmosphere to f ather base-line data, 30 days in the test atmosphere, one half day or detailed lung and eye examinations outside the chamber, and then 5 more days in the test atmosphere for ‘‘follow-up” observations. Conducted jointly with nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, the experiment should lay to rest fears about the debilitating effects of pure oxygen on lungs, blood, and other organs. A&AE, December 1963, 91)
President Johnson delivered a personal Thanksgiving Day message to the American people via TV and radio, less than one week after he assumed the duties of the Presidency upon the assassination of President Kennedy. “All of us have lived through seven days that none of us will ever forget .... “A great leader is dead; a great nation must move on. Yesterday is not ours to recover, but tomorrow is ours to win or lose .... “And to honor his memory and the future of the works he started, I have today determined that Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range and a nasa launch operations center in Florida shall hereafter be known as the John F. Kennedy Space Center. “I have also acted today with the understanding and the support of my friend, the Governor of Florida, Farris Bryant, to change the name of Cape Canaveral. It shall be known hereafter as Cape Kennedy.” (AP, Was A. Post, 11/29/63)
Revolutionary new helicopter, called XH-51A, was described in paper by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineers W. H. Statler, R. R. Heppe, and E. S. Cruz delivered at meeting of American Helicopter Society, Washington. Built for Army and Navy, experimental craft was said to be first helicopter to fly with ease and stability of an airplane because it employed rigid mounting of rotor blades to shaft and three-armed gyroscopes linking pilot control sticks with rotor. {NTT, 5/4/63, 38)
Large fireball streaked across San Francisco Bay area sky, landing in the Pacific Ocean several miles off-shore, and witnessed by thousands of residents. Fireball was presumed to be a meteor. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/8/63, A3)
25th Minuteman icbm fired by usaf from Vandenberg afb made routine training flight downPMR. (M&R, 12/6/63,10)
Howard M. Weiss, nasa Director of Quality Assurance and Reliability, said total cost of the two Mariner shots, the second of which brought U.S. several firsts in knowledge of planet Venus, was $47 million. Weiss was addressing American Society of Quality Control, Southern Connecticut Section, in Bridgeport. (Bridgeport Post, 3/18/63)
George Low, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking at an aiaa-nasa symposium on interplanetary exploration in Palo Alto, Calif., spoke of two areas of possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar flight: (1) a series of jointly programed space probes to survey the lunar surface prior to a manned flight; and (2) exchange of information on problems of re-entering the earth’s atmosphere at 25,000 mph. (San Francisco Chronicle, 10/2/63)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Production and Procurement, said in address to American Ordnance Association meeting in Washington: “The fact that we will buy [for usaf] more than eight billion dollars worth of weapon systems, supplies, and services this fiscal year and will administer approximately 70,000 contracts for government purchases, which are administered by 57 field organizations, provides some idea of the sheer magnitude of afsc’s procurement management task. “A large majority of our funds is involved in weapon system acquisition contracts .... For the past two years the Air Force has undertaken a program of surveying certain selected contractors and related weapon systems. Two types of surveys are conducted. One type—called the Industrial Management Assistance Survey—looks at a particular contractor’s internal organization, management and operating practices as they affect all the Air Force contracts bemg performed. Nine of these surveys have now been completed. The second type is called the Systems Program Management Survey and looks at all aspects of a particular aerospace system at a given point in time, including an examination, as appropriate, of the prime, associate prime and major subcontractors involved. We have now completed 20 of .u;™ ----j UI19 DOAIllU vy pb VA 9U1 V xyy .	#	•	• “Altogether, we have identified some 37 prominent deficiencies in major areas of contractor management . . . .” (Text)
First issue of Astronautics a/nd Aerospace Engineering, publication of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa), featured series of articles on manned orbital operations by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center personnel. (A&AE, 2/63)
President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress, his first major speech since assuming the Presidency on Nov. 22 following the assassination of President Kennedy: “The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our time .... “The dream of conquering the vastness of space—the dream of partnership across the Atlantic and across the Pacific as well— the dream of a Peace Corps in less developed nations—the dream of education for all of our children—the dream of jobs for all who seek them and need them—the dream of care for our elderly—the dream of an all-out attack on mental illness—and above all, the dream of equal rights for all Americans, whatever their race or color—these and other American dreams have been vitalized by his drive and by his dedication . . . .” (OR, 11/27/63, 21734)
usaf successfully launched a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the eighth successful Minuteman launch from the West Coast base. (NYT, 6/29/63, 8)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Science Advisor to the President, said in speech before Federation of American Scientists in Washington that the field of education was “probably the most backward field in our modem society” and that scientists were largely to blame. Pointing to “widespread lack of understanding” about science and technology, he said: “It is surprising that we scientists and technologists in universities who, in a sense, have made major contributions to the great revolution through which we are living, have failed to apply our methods to our own profession. “Modem teaching aids have been rarely employed, either in Seneral education or in the universities. The process of invention as been almost ignored. The most highly developed devices in common use are still the old-fashioned textbooks, the blackboard, the written examination . . . .” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)	_	_	'
Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, scored its ninth “intercept” of Atlas icbm target fired from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (MocR, 9/9/63,13)
afsc announced installation of 100-in. centrifuge at Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility, Air Force Missile Development Center (afmdc), Holloman afb. Intended primarily for calibration, testing, and evaluation of high-precision inertial accelerometer, centrifuge was capable of providing acceleration forces up to 25 g’s, giving usaf “a laboratory capability for simulating accelerations common to actual missile flight.” (afsc Release 31-53-18)
afsc announced it launched more than 60 space experiments in FY 1963, encompassing following areas of study: aurora borealis; infrared spectrum of Agena engine plume; variations in earth’s magnetic field; effect of space environment on materials; impedance of near space; air density at satellite altitudes; earth’s albedo (whiteness) ; altitude of ozone layer; radio waves from outside solar system; emissions from upper atmosphere; thermal electricity; and space radiation. Spacecraft were launched with Atlas-Agena and Thor-Agena launch vehicles from Vandenberg afb and usaf facilities at Pt. Arguello. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/17/63, 400) _	.....
French President Charles de Gaulle, speaking in press conference in Paris, referred to President Kennedy’s offer of Polaris missiles as joint defensive weapons for nato: “Nobody in the world, especially nobody in America, can say, if, where, when, how, and to what degree American atomic armaments will be employed to defend Europe. Therefore we will construct and if need be will employ our atomic force ourselves. “Of course, this does not exclude the combined action of our force with an analogous allied force of the same kind, but for us integration is unthinkable in this case. ... “We have neither the submarines to launch them [Polaris missiles] nor the nuclear warheads to arm them. By the time we have them, what good will the Polaris be? Without doubt, by then we will have our own missiles. For us, this matter has no present application. . . .”	(Wash. Post, 1/15/63, Al, A7)
usaf Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine for having “formulated new scientific concepts and performed original research of great national and international significance.” Award was made during ceremonies in which President Kennedy dedicated the school’s new facilities at Brooks afb, Tex. (Air Force Magazine, 1/63, 84)
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) , addressing Waco Chamber of Commerce, referred generally to aerospace activities in Texas and specifically referred to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston: “Although the buildings are not yet completed, the Center has been operating for some time. Many nasa personnel are temporarily working in facilities at Ellington Air Force Base, and an air base group has been established to provide support for personnel at the Center. This is just one illustration of the fact that Air Force and nasa efforts in space are cooperative, not conflicting. They are complementary not competitive . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 32-R-19)
usaf Atlas E icbm was launched by sac crew from Operational Systems Test Facility at Vandenberg afb in successful flight test, (dod Release 585-63)
usaf announced Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb exploded shortly after liftoff. Cause of explosion was not determined. (dod Release 414—63)
In Interstellar Communication, anthology of articles on man’s search for intelligent extraterrestrial life published by W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Dr. Freeman J. Dyson proposed that highly advanced civilization elsewhere in Milky Way galaxy may be using gravity machines instead of sunlight as principal power source. If a civilization on planet which orbits twin stars fired vehicle from planet toward twin stars so as to circle approaching star, vehicle would return with far more energy than initially; vehicle could then be recovered in manner exploiting the energy. Dr. Dyson is theoretical physicist at. Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/9/63)
usaf announced Atlas F icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, its re-entry vehicle impacting on predetermined area more than 4,000 miles down the Pacific Missile Range, (dod Release 399-63)
Selection of Lockheed California Co. and Boeing Co./North American Aviation, Inc., as contractors to conduct airframe research in supersonic transport program was announced by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby. Lockheed would perform research in three study areas under $950,000 contract; Boeing/North American, operating as a joint venture, would perform research in six areas under $850,000 contract. Under the cost-sharing agreement, government was providing $1.8 million and industries $1.6 million toward total program costs, (faa Release 63-35)
Titan I icbm exploded during attempted launching at Vandenberg afb. usaf spokesman said no one was injured and damage to silo launch facility appeared slight. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/2/63; dod Release 624-63)
usaf announced routine launching of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb. ( upi, Wash. Post, 9/12/63)
Trevor Gardner, former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d (1955-56) and advocate of increased funding for icbm development, died at his home in Washington. (AP, NTT, 9/30/63, 29)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif., in successful flight down Pacific Missile Range. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10) ...
In Air Force Academy commencement address, President Kennedy said: “It is my judgment that this Government should immediately commence a new program in partnership with private industry to develop at the earliest practical date the prototype of a commercially successful supersonic transport superior to that being built in any other country of the world .... Neither the economics nor the politics of international competition permits us to stand still in this area.” ( Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
President Kennedy, speaking at a breakfast in Ft. Worth a few hours before his assassination, mentioned as part of the growing strength of the U.S. the development of the tfx aircraft: “There’s been a good deal of discussion about the long and hard-fought competition to win the tfx contract; but very little discussion about what this plane will do. “It will be the first operational aircraft ever produced that can literally spread its wings through the air. It will thus give us a single plane capable of carrying out missions of speed as well as distance; able to fly very far in one form, or very fast in another. “It can take off from rugged, short airstrips, enormously increasing the Air Force’s ability to participate in limited wars. The same basic plane will serve the Navy’s carriers, saving the taxpayers at least one billion dollars in costs if they built separate planes for the Navy and the Air Force.” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
In coordinating the military and civilian scientific and industrial efforts of the United States toward the development of aerospace weapon systems, afsc had managerial responsibility for some 40 per cent of the Air Force budget, or approximately 10 cents of each Federal dollar. (CR, 2/18/64, 2910) Through 1963: Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s ( apgc) Eglin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the “Project Firefly” program. The project involved intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and near space, (afsc Release, 312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 1)
Luncheon in Wright brothers’ hometown, Dayton, 0., commemorated 60th anniversary of powered flight and 50tb anniversary of Air Force Silver Wings. General Mark Bradley, Commander of afcl, Wright-Patterson afb, made presentation to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) one of first military officers to fly an airplane. National Aviation Hall of Fame president, James Jacobs, announced four selections to Aviation Hall of Fame: Octave Chanute, General Foulois, Frank Purdy Lahm, and Samuel Pierpont Langley. Luncheon was sponsored by Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce and National Aviation Hall of Fame, Inc. (Cfi, 12/17/63, 23666-67)
1963 Nobel Prize in Physics was announced in Stockholm to have been won jointly by American Prof. Maria Goeppert Mayer, of the Univ. of Calif. at La Jolla, and American Prof. Eugene Paul Wigner, of Princeton Univ., the former sharing her half of the Srize with German Prof. J. Hans D. Jensen, of the Univ. of [eidelberg. Mrs. Mayer and Prof. Jensen, working independently, devised nuclear models portraying the particles as arranged in levels or shelves which increase abruptly in number of particles at each level further out from the nucleus. Prof. Wigner was cited for devising symmetry principles explaining the interaction of the proton and neutron in accordance with the direction of their spinning motion. The prize in Chemistry was also announced, being awarded jointly to Italian Prof. Guilo Natta, of the Institute of Technology at Milan, and German Prof. Carl Ziegler, of the Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research in Mul-heim. They were cited for devising a system of controlling the polymerizing of simple hydrocarbons into large molecule substances. Their discovery had important commercial results, making possible the development of many kinds of plastics, synthetic detergents, antiknock mixtures for high-octane fuels, etc. {NYT, 11/6/63,1)
The Air Force accepted the first Titan III engines from AerojetGeneral Corporation in Sacramento. The engines were the first-and second-stage liquid-fuel engines for the Titan IIIA (core) of the Titan IIIC. Together they produce a combined thrust of 530,000 lbs. (A-N-AFJournal and Register, Jan., 1964)
Pan American World Airways President Juan T. Trippe announced Pan Am had ordered six Concorde supersonic airliners being developed jointly by British Aviation Corp. and Sud-Aviation of France, boac also reported ordering six of the 1,500-mph jetliners; Air France was believed to have ordered six, but report was unconfirmed. (Carter, NYT, 6/5/63,34)
usaf launched a Titan II icbm from an underground silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Test, sixth Titan II launch from Vandenberg, was to check operation of the total weapon system. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/63) During early November: usaf selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth, Boeing, and North American Aviation, Inc., to study feasibility of an Advanced Manned Penetrator (amp), revision of previous Low Altitude Manned Penetrator (lamp) . All three had proposed use of kerosene-type fuels in the engine. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63, 25)
usaf announced routine training launch of Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A6)
Air Force Systems Command and Air Force Logistics Command announced a joint program of data management applicable to all Air Force contracts from the two commands. Program calls for tight data control by project officer, selection of minimum essential data, line-iteming each data point in the contract, (afsc Release 310-R-87)
usaf launched Scout vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/28/63)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before Subcommittee on Investigations of Senate Committee on Government Operations that his own personal study of General Dynamics and Boeing Co. contract proposals for tfx convinced him that General Dynamics provided the most practical design and the most realistic cost, estimate. (Testimony)
In the speech which President Kennedy was on his way through Dallas to deliver when he was assassinated, the President had prepared a statement on U.S. preparedness. After reviewing the improvements in military readiness, the President would have said: “I have spoken of strength largely in terms of the deterrence and resistance of aggression and attack. But, in today’s world, freedom can be lost without a shot being fired, by ballots as well as bullets. The success of our leadership is dependent upon respect for our mission in the world as well as our missiles—on a clear recognition of the virtues of freedom as well as the evils of tyranny .... “And that is also why we have regained the initiative in the exploration of outer space—making an annual effort greater than the combined total of all space activities undertaken during the fifties—launching more than 130 vehicles into earth orbit—puttihg into actual operation valuable weather and communications satellites—and making it clear to all that the United States of America has no intention of finishing second in space. “This effort is expensive—but it pays its own way, for freedom and for America. For there is no longer any fear in the free world that a Communist lead in space will become a permanent assertion of supremacy and the basis of military superiority. There is no longer any doubt about the strength and skill of American science, American industry, American education and the American free enterprise system. In short, our national space effort represents a great gain in, and a great resource of, our national strength . . . .” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara sent telegram of congratulations to Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) : “Your Air Force leaders, Secretary Zuckert and General LeMay, and the entire Defense Department, join me in congratulating you on your record breaking achievement in behalf of our national space effort. “The scientific data that you have obtained will add tremendously to our store of knowledge about space. “You have earned the highest esteem of all Americans for your historic exploit.” (dod Release 710-63)
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch from Vandenberg afb. Cause of explosion was not announced, (dod Release 341-63; urn, Wash. Post, 3/10/63)
In American Univ. commencement address stressing action for world peace, President Kennedy said: “. . . Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts. It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of each generation. For peace is a process—a way of solving problems . . . .” He announced his agreement with Prime Minister Macmillan and Chairman Khrushchev that “high-level discussions will shortly begin in Moscow looking toward early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty,” and declared that U.S. “does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other States do not do so. We will not be the first to resume . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/10/63,9870)
usaf successfully launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight down the Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 12/23/63, 10.) . ...
usaf launched Titan I icbm with dummy nuclear warhead from Vandenberg afb. {M&R, 9/23/63,10)
Edmond E. Bisson, Lewis scientist, installed as president of American Socity of Lubrication Engineers, (lrc Release 63-45, Lewis Chronology, 5)
