Paraglider landing system definitely would not be used for the scheduled Project Gemini space flights, msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney announced. Development of paraglider system was too far behind for the 12 scheduled flights. After many rumors and much speculation, this statement was first official announcement of decision not to use the paraglider. It followed by three days the first manned free-flight test of the system, which was unsuccessful. Development and testing of paraglider by North American Aviation would continue, Haney said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/11/64)
usaf launched final Minuteman I test icbm from Cape Kennedy. First-stage flight was satisfactory, but second stage veered out of control and had to be destroyed by range safety officer 165 sec. after launch. In launches from Cape Kennedy, the missile scored 38 successes, 8 partial successes, and 8 failures. From Vandenberg afb, it scored 60 successes, 4 partial successes, and 2 failures. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/30/64; M&R, 10/5/64, 11)
Nasa conducted two successful test-flights of paraglider vehicles at Edwards AFB, Calif. In the first test, a simulated Gemini spacecraft manned by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot E. P. Hetzel was towed aloft beneath a pre-inflated paraglider landing system. The tow test vehicle (ttv) was towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by CH—46C helicopter. While airborne, Hetzel manually controlled the ttv through preplanned maneuvers to its landing. In the second test, a similar but unmanned system was dropped from a C—130 aircraft at 32,000-ft. altitude. The paraglider was automatically deployed and remotely controlled in flight from 22,000-ft. to 12,500-ft. altitude, where it was separated from the Gemini test vehicle. The tests were part of NASA’s continuing evaluation of the paraglider system as a means of landing and recovering manned spacecraft (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
Air Force Office of Scientific Research and Massachusetts Institute of Technology announced jointly that scientists at the National Magnet Laboratory, using a giant water-cooled magnet, had produced the strongest continuous magnetic fields generated by man to date—up to 255,000 gauss. Maximum fields were maintained for periods of a minute. (afosr Release, 11/64,2S)
Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (I&L), advised Army, Navy, Air Force, and DSA that it was dod policy “to provide quality and reliability assurance services to NASA in a manner fully responsive to NASA’s technical requirements,” Memo clarified use of nasa Quality Status Stamps by dod personnel and npc 200-1A as the document establishing NASA’s quality assurance requirements, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Full-scale paraglider was successfully deployed at Edwards afb in test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for NASA to demonstrate the method of maneuverable recovery of manned spacecraft. After an air drop from usaf C-130 transport at 33,000 ft., the 31-ft.-long inflatable wing deployed and assumed the programed trimmed glide, (naa s&id Skywriter, 5/1/64, 1 ;Av.Wk„ 5/4/64,27)
USAF Air Defense Command 10th Aerospace Missile Sq., a fully operational unit of adc at Vandenberg afb which would man an antisatellite weapon, was on 5-min. alert status. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 13)
A National Geographic report, based on findings by nasa and Air Force researchers, estimated that the earth’s gravitational field picked up several million tons of dust and small particles every year and that the total accumulation of this material on the earth’s surface since its formation two billion years ago was well over ten feet. {NYT, 12/27/64)
XB—70 supersonic aircraft was unveiled at North American Aviation plant, Palmdale, Calif. The 2,000-mph intercontinental-range plane would be used to investigate feasibility of long-range high-speed flight. Speaking of achievements in the program thus far, Brig. Gen. Fred J. Ascani (afsc Aeronautical Systems Div.) said: “. . . Not all of these and other accomplishments can be termed radical breakthroughs (although the XB-70 program has produced about a thousand patent disclosures), but taken together they have helped to advance a technology which constitutes a base for a new generation of civil and military aircraft which will operate at sustained supersonic speeds.” (dod Release 374r-64; Witkin, NYT, 5/12/64,1; AF Pol. Info. Ltr., 6/1/64)
Life science researchers in North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. were studying effects of weightlessness and increased gravity on boa constrictors, NAA reported. The eyes of the boas were of special interest, for they offered easily observable reactions to the conditions. Normally a slit that remains vertical, the pupil of the boa’s eye tilted some 15 degrees after the snakes were subjected to centrifuge. The snakes were “grossly disoriented” and, in striking at objects, they missed widely, (naa s&id Skywriter, 2/7/64, 2)
Soviet Chief Air Marshal Konstantin A. Vershinin said in Red Star that Soviet air force can destroy any enemy land, sea, or air target. Soviet air power now is based on supersonic, rocket-carrying planes capable of operating in all weather conditions, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A16)
Minuteman icbm exploded shortly after launch from silo at Vandenberg Afb, and usaf was investigating cause of the explosion. This came five days after usaf conducted 50th launch in its Minuteman development program, a successful AMR flight. (M&R, 3/30/64,16)
ComSatCorp announced six companies had made summary proposals to provide research data and consultant services for ground terminal stations: American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; ARCS Industries, Inc.; Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall; Hughes Aircraft Co.; Page Communications Engineers, Inc.; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Of these, one or more contractors would be selected. (ComSatCorp Release)
Evidence that the electron is smallest indivisible unit and that the proton lacks a core, as had been postulated, was reported at annual meeting of American Physical Societv in New York. Experiments were made with electron accelerator built by Harvard Univ. and mit and were described by Dr. Roy Weinstein of Northeastern Univ. (Boston), Dr. Richard Wilson of Harvard, and Dr; Louis S. Osborne of MIT. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/23/64, 20)
usaf launched Titan II ICBM from Vandenberg AFB with pickaback instrumented capsule equipped to study heat and shock of reentry. The package containing 25 experiments was provided by General Electric Co. Re-entry Systems Dept, for DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa). The Titan II was launched by a SAC crew on routine training mission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/3/64; M&R, 10/12/ 64, 10)
faa disclosed it was requesting Coordinating Research Council of New York City to study comparative safety features of the two most commonly used aircraft fuels—kerosene and JP—4. (Hudson, NYT, 2/26/64,21)
usaf successfully launched Atlas F icbm from Vandenberg AFB in routine training mission. (M&R, 2/17/64,13)
Air Force Systems Command announced plans to orbit an experimental fuel cell able to produce both electricity for space power and pure drinking water for space crews. The fuel cell would be orbited from Vanden-berg afb early in 1965. (afsc Release 43-11—145; NYT, 11/10/64,34; Houston Post, 11/10/64)
Reported that new 125-ft. radiotelescope opened at England’s Jodrell Bank Radio Astronomy Station early in June could give insight into creation of universe. Radiotelescope was to detect and analyze high-frequency radio pulses emitted by stars 6 billion light-years distant. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 7/6/64) During week of July 5—11: Unmanned paraglider wing designed to make air-to-ground cargo deliveries to forward battle areas successfully completed series of three flight tests at U.S. Army Yuma Proving Ground, Ariz. The paraglider, also designed to be a spacecraft recovery system, slipped three 1,000-lb. cargo packages to earth without mishap from 3,100 ft. Demonstration was performed by Space and Information Div. of North American Aviation under program called Precision Aerial Delivery System (pads) . (naa S&id Skywriter, 7/17/64, 1)
I remain convinced that it will be possible to develop an American supersonic transport which will be economic to operate, will find a substantial market among the airlines of the world and will help to maintain American leadership in the air.
Lt. Gen. William J. Ely (usa), Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Administration and Management), said in testimony before House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Research and Development Subcommittee: “For the past six years, over 80% of the net value of rdt&e contracts of the Department of Defense has been to companies concerned with aerospace and electronics. Actually, 11 states received 88.3% of the awards in FY 1962; 18 states received 95.3% of the total. Five major Defense rdt&e complexes, centered around Los Angeles, the San Francisco Bay area, the New York City-northern New Jersey area, Boston, and the Washington, D.C., area accounted for about 58% of the total net value of rdt&e awards. . . we recognize that Defense R&D is concentrated geographically and that this concentration will continue for the foreseeable future. The Department of Defense, of all the agencies of government, is the one that must feel itself most constrained to the purpose of getting the best results in rdt&e at the least cost. We cannot speak for the remain* der of the government; such agencies as the National Science Founda* tion and the National Institutes of Health were created in part to support research, and therefore have legitimate additional criteria for their operations. We tend to follow competence where we find it and therefore consider that greater uniformity in the geographical distribution of our R&D contracts and grants can only be achieved to the extent that more uniform competence is developed.” (Testimony)
At American Physical Society Meeting, the planet Jupiter was reported to be rotating slower. Prof. Alex G. Smith said in 1961 radio sources showed an abrupt change in rotational rate; observations made by radio observatories in Florida and Chile showed that the rotation had slowed by 1.3 sec. Dr. Smith said this was “almost as surprising as if the city of Washington had begun to drift across the surface of the earth at a rate of 10 degrees longitude a year.” Studies were continuing to determine whether Jupiter itself had changed its rotation or whether the change was limited to radio sources. (Finney, NYT, 4/28/64, 19)
usaf Titan III transtage was successfully static-test-fired for more than six minutes to verify compatability of various subsystems, in operation to simulate injection of mol into 100-mi. orbit. Officials said firing went as expected, including length of bum time, although no mention was made as to whether it reached 312-second specific impulse demanded by Air Force. (SBD, 7/14/64, 66; M&R, 7/20/64, 8)
Dr. Bruno Bettelheim, professor of educational psychology at Univ. of Chicago, said in address before symposium on American Women in Science, at MIT, that women’s “specific genius for nurturing, humanizing, and preserving” should be made use of in all spheres of living, in science, engineering, architecture, medicine, and all other professions. (Leland, Poston Globe, 10/23/64)
Air Force Systems Command announced first successful demonstration of internal thrust from a “scramjet” (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine. The test was one in a series to demonstrate that scramjet engines could be developed for very-high-speed vehicles and was conducted under the direction of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Test conditions in the 30-in.-long scramjet engine simulated a speed of approximately mach six over a brief burning period. Frontal area of the engine was approximately three-by-four inches. Scram jets differed from conventional engines in that they had moving parts only in the fuel feeding system and produced thrust by burning fuel in a supersonic air stream. ( afsc Release 49—40-141)
Dr. Herman J. Sander, Behavioral Scientist in USAF OSR Life Sciences Directorate, was presented Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal by Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, OAR Commander, (oar Release 2-64-1)
North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. was studying the planaria to help understand human healing process under conditions of weightlessness. Planaria was capable of regeneration even under extremes of temperature, vibration, and shock. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
Explosion-fire of fuel for usaf XB-70 aircraft at Edwards afb, Calif., caused four injuries and one death (Ivan W. Mayo of North American Aviation, Inc.), (upi, Wash. Post, 10/21/64)
White House announced new development plan for U.S. supersonic transport, authorizing technical design competition between two airframe manufacturers (Boeing and Lockheed) and two engine contractors (General Electric and Pratt & Whitney). Thus North American Aviation and Curtiss-Wright were eliminated from airframe and engine competition respectively. New “program of action” recommended by FAA and President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport and endorsed by President Johnson called for: Commerce Dept, studies and forecasts of overall economy of the 1970’s; National Academy of Sciences advice on sonic boom studies; and Boeing and Lockheed examination of purchase cost, operating cost, and sonic booms as related to various designs, sizes, and ranges of the plane. This phase would be completed in November. (Clark, NYT, 5/21/64, 1; Av. Wk., 5/25/64, 22)
A 60-ft. pad was rapidly fabricated at Moffet Field, Calif., for full-scale evaluation using the Bell X-14 vertical take-off aircraft. In this test neither the. 1,500° F temperature nor the wheel-loading adversely affected the rapidly prepared pad, AFSC Research and Technology Div. reported. The instant-landing pad, a ground-hardener of polyester resin, was being developed by Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory for rapid preparation of landing sites for future jet vertical take-off and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Operational Vtol aircraft would drop or spray the semi-liquid preparation in forward combat areas, land on it 15 min. later. (AFSC RTD Biennial Rpt., 7/62-7/64, 23)
Plans for adding a transmitter to the Pan American Boeing 707 for twoway communication tests using syncom ill as a relay point were discussed at an Air Transport Association meeting attended by representatives of FAA, nasa, Bendix, Pan Am, and Hughes Aircraft. Teletypewriter messages had been successfully transmitted in November from a ground station at Camp Roberts, Calif., to a Pan Am 707 enroute to Honolulu. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64, 34)	_
At American Meteorological Society meeting, ucla campus, Lewis D. Kaplan presented paper on current ideas about atmosphere of Mars-— surface pressure is considerably lower than previously estimated and C02 concentration is considerably higher—and discussed significance of these findings for Martian-atmosphere entry spacecraft, (ams Program, 717)
17-nation Disarmament Conference resumed in Geneva. In his letter of Jan. 19 to the Conference, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “There is only one item on the agenda of this conference—it is the leading item on the agenda of mankind—and that one item is peace. “Already this conference has led to more concrete and effective results than any disarmament conference in modern history. Your efforts and deliberation laid the ground work for the nuclear test ban treaty—for the communications link between Washington and Moscow—and for the U.N. General Assembly action against nuclear weapons in space. . . .” President Johnson then proposed five major types of potential agreement : to stop spread of nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing them; to accept observation posts on both sides; to stop all production of fissionable material; to ban threat or use of force in changing boundaries or controlling territories; and to freeze numbers and kinds of strategic nuclear-carrying vehicles (aircraft and missiles). (Text, CR, 1/22/64, 812; “Statement to American People,” CR, 122/64, 813)
The policy committee of the Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center of New York urged the Government to begin immediately to develop procedures for the selection and training of crews for the supersonic transports now in the design stage. The group urged the initiation of intensive studies of the “operating environment” of supersonic aircraft now in use by the military, and the development of joint management-union programs for selection of crews based upon physical and technical competence rather than upon the seniority principle. (AP, NYT, 6/2/64, 63)
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb after sundown left spectacular trail across the sky seen from San Francisco to San Bernardino and caused Redding and Chico areas to call civil defense alerts. Cross winds distorted the exhaust trail and it was lighted by rays from the sun below the horizon. (AP, NYT, 2/27/64,17)
First manned free-flight test of Gemini paraglider landing system was unsuccessful at Edwards afb, Calif. The paraglider, with pilot E. P. Hetzel of North American Aviation in mockup spacecraft slung beneath it, was towed to 13,000 ft. by helicopter, then was cut loose. Pilot Hetzel lost control and at 3,000 ft. was forced to bail out. The paraglider crashed. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/64)
U.S. Navy was reported to be defining its manned orbiting laboratory (mol) ocean surveillance experiment despite the proposed merger of the Air Force mol and NASA’s Apollo-X programs. Navy felt its space mission potential should be explored as thoroughly under either military or civilian programs. The Navy space mission was first envisioned to involve five major areas concerning shipping: detection; location; identification; classification; tracking of surface and subsurface craft. (Fink, Av. Wk., 12/28/64,13)
President Johnson appointed a national commission to study the impact of technological changes on American life. Howard Bowen, an economist and president of the Univ. of Iowa, was nominated chairman of the 14-member panel which would submit a report to Congress and the President on four areas: the role and pace of technological change, both past and future; the impact of technological change during the next ten years on the Nation’s economy and social structure; unmet community and human needs to which modern technology might be effectively applied; the most effective means for channeling technology into promising directions. (Wash. Post, 11/15/64, A6)
Air Force Systems Command’s Research and Technology Div. reported the High Power Facility at the Rome Air Development Center (radc) was operational. It was designed to evaluate high-power transmitting tubes and radio frequency components, and would support research in plasma physics and engineering where brute force was needed in direct current and pulse radio frequency, (afsc Release 44-128-139)
USAf’s “Summary of Lessons Learned from Air Force Management Surveys” found that cause of management deficiencies was absence of three essential elements: program-oriented management structure; comprehensive written procedures spelling out guidelines in all foreseeable situations; and effective discipline. (Armed Forces Mgmt., 5/64, 37)
usaf version of F-lll tactical fighter plane, designed for use by both usaf and usn, rolled out of General Dynamics’ Fort Worth, Tex., plant, in ceremony attended by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze, and other officials. Secretary McNamara said: “For the first time in aviation history, we have an airplane with the range of a transport, the carrying capacity and endurance of a bomber and the agility of a fighter-pursuit plane. . . .” The technology of the variable-geometry wing configuration was developed at NASA Langley Research Center, (dod Release 719-64; Witkin, NYT, 10/16/64,1, 11; Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/64; Av. Wk., 10/26/64, 32)
usaf launched Blue Scout, Jr., probe from Vandenberg AFB on a nonorbital space mission. Press sources reported this as the second successful launch of a contact cesium ion engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. (hhn—48; M&R, 1/4/65,11)
usaf successfully launched 30th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, a routine training launch by sac crew. (M&R, 2/17/64, 13)
Dr. Robert L. Barre, former nasa Scientist for Social, Economic, and Political Studies, said in address before American Orthopsychiatric Association in Chicago: “Space activities may be viewed either as a cause or as a consequence of social and cultural change. From either point of view, freedom to engage in scientific activity entails significant social responsibility. . . . “It is ironic that a consequence of the extension of definite verifiable knowledge, the primary product of science, should be to extend confusion. To increase knowledge, not only adds knowledge where it did not previously exist, but corrects previously held mistaken knowledge and belief. In so doing, it alters the conditions of existence; hence man’s relationship, not only to his physical environment, but to other men. “Scientists produce the conditions from which these alterations develop. The inescapable responsibility of scientists is to continuously inform society of the knowledge they have, or are trying to create, and to explain its scientific significance. “The institutional locus and the social role of the scientist has traditionally fulfilled this responsibility. The scientist in the past was, not only a creator of knowledge, but an integrator, a teacher—a transmitter of knowledge. New knowledge could be incorporated in its appropriate context and transmitted more rapidly than it could be produced. Today we have altered these arrangements. . . . “While slowing down the system for the transmittal of new knowledge and reducing the proportion of the educated populace who have access to the existing system, we are simultaneously speeding up the production of new knowledge. While ignoring the processes of evaluation, integration, interpretation, and assimilation of new knowledge, we have fixedly accelerated the processes of specialized acquisition of new knowledge. “We have upset the equilibrium between invention and innovation. I submit that the social responsibility of the scientist is obvious: to assist society restore the balance.” (Text)
usaf’s big Project Forecast, according to Richard Witkin in New York Times, anticipated eventual need for four new manned aircraft: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), intercontinental-range attack aircraft; transport capable of 10,000-12,000 mi. range; Vtol attack-reconnaissance craft; and limited-range Vtol transport. Begun almost a year ago at request of Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuc.kert and Chief of Staff General Curtis E. LeMay, Project Forecast was said to be virtually completed. (Witkin, NYT, 2/16/64,1)
Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of Washington had reserved a delivery position for U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, faa announced. TransAmerican was expected to make the aircraft available to a Latin American flag carrier through leasing arrangement, (faa Release 64-14)
In the Journal of the American Physical Society, Irwin I. Shapiro of mit’s Lincoln Laboratory proposed use of radar as a test for Einstein’s general theory of relativity: radar pulses would be sent to one of the solar system’s inner planets, either Venus or Mercury, and the time-lapse before the radar echoes’ return measured on the earth. According to Einstein’s theory, when the radar beam passed close enough to the sun to encounter a very strong gravitational field, the radar waves should slow down. The slowdown should be sufficient to delay return of the radar echoes by as much as 0.0002 seconds, a time interval accurately measurable by electronic techniques. {Wash. Post, 12/28/64)
AFsc announced new graphite refractory coatings for use in aerospace vehicles had been developed by Research and Technology Division’s Air Force Materials Laboratory. Materials research engineer Khodabakhsh S. Mazdiyasni applied for patent on the process of coating graphite with zirconium oxide, (afsc Release 43—13—64)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb in successful flight 5,000-mi. down Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 2/3/64, 10)	.......................
The usaf successfully fired a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
USAF launched Adas-Agena D combination from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload. (M&R, 3/2/64,12)
FAA released summary statements on the supersonic transport by the six companies that submitted initial design proposals—three airframe companies (Boeing, Lockheed, and North American) and three engine manufacturing companies (Curtiss-Wright, General Electric, and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft). Boeing’s proposed SST.was based on basic arrow-wing shape, designed to carry 150 passengers, and cruise at mach 2.7. Lockheed’s proposed SST was based on advanced “double delta” wing shape, designed to carry 218 passengers, and cruise at mach 3. North American’s proposed sst was based on modified delta shape wing, was designed to carry up to 187 passengers, cruise at mach 2.65. Curtiss-Wright’s summary said its proposed turbojet engine would produce thrust about twice that of current transport jet engines. GE’s proposal offered choice between advanced turbojet or turbofan engine types suitable for cruising speeds at mach 2.5 to mach 3. Pratt & Whitney offered two configurations of turbofan engine for aircraft flying up to mach 3. (faa Release 64-8)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., said in speech before Tennessee Valley Post of American Ordnance Association, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.: “Space can be nothing less than a total national undertaking. “Space has to do with our future, with our country’s future, and with the progress of civilization. It also has to do with our personal and our national security. . . . “I personally believe that the working partnership between NASA and the Department of Defense will grow increasingly close in the months and years just ahead, and that joint efforts in ventures such as Gemini, and the lunar expedition, will serve to identify this country’s slate of space activities as national programs. . . .” Discussing role of the military in space, he said: “As a national policy, we have declared that space will be reserved for peaceful purposes. This, I submit, serves to put the military into space—not restrict space to purely non-military activities. . . . “In describing the military mission, I like to say that the Defense Department’s job is to insure that space is used for us—not against us.” {Marshall Star, 1/15/64,1—2)
usaf fired Atlas E icbm on successful 5,000-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, testing advanced nose cone design. Same day, USAF also fired Minuteman icbm from Cape Kennedy and two Minuteman Icbm’s from Vandenberg afb, Calif., within 45 min. of each other, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,17; M&R, 3/2/64, 12)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that President Johnson had ordered development of the world’s largest airplane— a giant military subsonic jet transport able to carry 600 troops or 250 tons of cargo nonstop for 7,000 mi. at 550 mph. The CX (Cargo Experimental) military jet transport was predicted to be ready for the Air Force by later 1968. Development costs would total $750 million. According to McNamara the CX would “maximize the effectiveness” of eight combat-ready divisions stationed in the U.S. and reduce “reaction time in meeting global crisis.” It would also “have potential commercial use for both passenger and cargo purposes.” In addition the CX would be able to carry any piece of divisional equipment used by an Army division, which present aircraft cannot do. (Mohr, NYT, 12/23/64, 1; Glass, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/23/64)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced: “The United States has successfully developed an advance experimental jet aircraft, now the A—11, which has been tested in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles an hour and at altitudes in excess of “The performance of the A-ll far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today. The development of this aircraft has been made possible by major advances in aircraft technology of great significance to both military and commercial application. Several A-l 1 aircraft are now being flight-tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. . . . “The development of supersonic commercial transport aircraft will also be greatly assisted by the lessons learned from this A-ll program. For example, one of the most important technological achievements in this project has been the mastery of the metallurgy and fabrication of titanium metal which is required for the high temperatures experienced by aircraft traveling at more than three times the speed of sound. “Arrangements are being made to make this and other important technical developments available under appropriate safeguards to those directly engaged in the supersonic transport program. “This program was first started in 1959. Appropriate members of the Senate and the House have been kept fully informed on the program since the day of its inception. The Lockheed Aircraft Corporation at Burbank, Calif., is the manufacturer of the aircraft. The aircraft engine, the J—58, was designed and built by the Pratt & Whitney Division, United Aircraft Corporation. The experimental fire control and air-to-air missile system for the A—11 was developed by the Hughes Aircraft Company. “In view of the continuing importance of these developments to our national security, the detailed performance of the A-ll will remain strictly classified and all individuals have been directed to refrain from making any further disclosure concerning this program. . . .” The President also announced he would release on March 2 Eugene Black’s supersonic transport study. (Transcript, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A20)
USAF successfully fired an Atlas-F icbm down the WTR from Vandenberg afb—the third major launching from the base in two days, (upi, NYT, 12/23/64, 28)	'
Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex was officially redesignated Cape Kennedy Air Force Station. (Special Order GA-7, issued by usaf CofS Curtis E. LeMay, in khn-i )
AFSC established Hq. National Range Division (NRD), Provisional, at Patrick AFB, Fla., with Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (USAF), as commander. Replacing General Davis as AFMTC commander was Brig. Gen. Harry J. Sands, Jr., vice commander of afmtc. At the same time, afsc established Air Force Space Test Center, Provisional (AFSTC), at Vandenberg afb, with Brig. Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of 659th Aerospace Test Wing (SSD) as commander. To become fully operational on July 1, Hq. nrd would coordinate activities of AMR (managed by afmtc commander) and of that portion of PMR transferred from usn to usaf (managed by AFSTC commander). (afsc Release 41-5-1; SBD, 1/7/64, 26; M&R, 1/13/64, 10)
usaf successfully fired an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California. (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
usaf fired a Minuteman missile from Vandenberg afb. It was the 70th Minuteman to be launched from that base. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/5/64)
Ray Romatowski, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs, was among the 12 Federal employees selected by Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs to study at Princeton Univ. during 1964r-65 academic year. (Wash. Post, 4/27/64)
Pan American Airways’ Guided Missile Range Div. was awarded one-year, $112 million contract from usaf for continued operation of Air Force Eastern Test Range. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 25) During May and June: Project Taper (Turbulent Air Pilot Environment Research) was conducted by FAA and NASA to study turbulent air hazards for jet aircraft and ways for pilots to deal with them. Project involved flights into light-to-moderate turbulence at high altitudes by faa Convair 880 flown by faa and NASA pilots. Data on motion effects experienced in the cockpit, gathered in the 800 flights, were used in NASA laboratory tests on motion simulator. In second series of flight tests, using FAA Boeing 720 airliner, instruments recorded pilot control actions and aircraft response in turbulent air, also tested autopilot and yaw damper for their ability to maintain control. (Hudson, NYT, 5/1/64, 58)
Institute for Strategic Studies, an international organization for research on defense, security, and disarmament, reported U.S. had increased its strategic superiority over U.S.S.R. The report warned, however, that “this may he the last year in which the western superiority in long-range striking power is so marked.” By early next year the U.S. would have 925 intercontinental ballistic missiles, compared to U.S.S.R.’s 200. American superiority in fleet ballistic missiles had increased to four to one over U.S.S.R.’s less advanced counterpart of the Polaris. Soviet Union had maintained her superiority in submarine strength. (Cerutti, Chic. Trib., 11/13/64)
usaf launched a new Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System experimental nosecone (Abres) from Vandenberg afb 5,000 mi. down the WTR on an Atlas-D icbm. The nosecone tests were being conducted to develop more effective re-entry systems for America’s intercontinental ballistic missiles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/64; Houston Chron., 12/1/64)
usn announced KC-130F (Hercules) transport, a four-engine turboprop aircraft, had made series of landings and take-offs from aircraft carrier Forrestal without aid of arresting gear or catapults. The tests were made last November, but USN spokesman said reason for delaying announcement was that “the project was being analyzed.” {NYT, 11/1/64,20S) During October: NASA Assistant Administrator for International Programs Arnold W. FrUtkin said in id erospace: “The prime purpose of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s international space program is to serve broad foreign policy objectives through useful scientific and technical projects. “But a practical consequence for the American aerospace industry is that the program has stimulated a level of space activity abroad which might not otherwise have been achieved. Purely as a by-product, then, cooperative space projects have created limited markets for American know-how and hardware overseas. .. .” (Aerospace, Fall 1964, 10-15)
usaf launched Titan IIICBM from Vandenberg AFB on 5,000-mi. flight down pmr. (upi, Houston Chron., 2/18/64)
usaf announced that Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems, would receive a $4,000,000 order to an existing contract for procurement of Thor space boosters from Space Systems Div. of Air Force Systems Command, (dod Release 888-64)
Office of Naval Research was studying submarine-based antisatellite missile system, according to Aviation Week & Space Technology. System would use Polaris fleet ballistic missile to supplement existing Army and Air Force weapons. (Av. Wk., 9/28/64, 18)
Venus was found to be rotating backward with a period of between 248 and 258 earth days, Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill of Cornell Univ. reported at iau assembly in Hamburg. The new value was a refinement of one made in late 1962 by JPL studies, which indicated a rotation of between 239 and 293 (266 mean period) and was obtained by radarastronomers using new l,000-ft.-diameter antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. (Hines, Wash Eve. Star, 8/27/64; Sullivan, NYT, 8/28/64)
usaf fired Atlas-D 5,000 miles downrange from Vandenberg afb as part of an advanced re-entry systems program, and indicated shot was successful. (upi, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/64)
Richard L. Schleicher of North American Aviation, Inc., received Royal Aeronautical Society of Great Britain’s George Taylor Gold Medal for 1963 for paper on X-15 structural design which he presented to the Society. (Av. Wk., 6/1/64, 13)
The Air Force version of the controversial F-lll fighter-bomber, formerly called the tfx, made a successful but somewhat abbreviated maiden flight from Carswell afb, Tex. (the site of the General Dynamics Corp. plant that built the plane). Piloted by Richard L. Johnson and Val E. Prahl, the 1,650-mph aircraft performed all the items on the test program that were possible with the malfunctioning wing flaps. The variable-geometry wings, capable of a 70° sweep, were kept in 26° position during the first flight. In 21 min. of flight, the F—111 achieved an altitude of 17,000 ft. and a speed of 230 mph. On takeoff it required less than half the runway used by conventional jet planes. The Navy version of the F-lll was scheduled to fly by mid-1965. (Witkin, NYT, 12/22/64, 12; UPl, Chic. Trib. 12/22/64; Aviation Daily, 12/23/64)
Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander, Research and Technology Div., AFSC, speaking at the Seventh Hypervelocity Impact Symposium, said: “Another example of advanced development hypervelocity in nature if you will, is the asset Program. ASSET stands for Aerothermodynamic/ Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests, and involves the flight verification and demonstration of aerodynamic and structural design concepts for the lifting re-entry class of aerospace vehicles. Three ASSET vehicles have been launched to date of which two were quite successful. The ASSET Program was originally conceived and conducted by the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory and has now been turned over to the Systems Command’s Space Systems Div. program for even more advanced vehicles.” (Text, AFSC Release)
Dr. S. Burman Long, Worcester, Mass., minister, delivered address on religion in the space age at the 73rd convention of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs in Atlantic City, N.J.: . . My religion in the space age confirms my faith in a spiritual heaven as real as my humble earthly home. The sooner that mankind accepts an orderly and unlimited universe, the earlier we will have faith in truth. Our cosmology has changed because our knowledge has changed. It has changed before. Once a new continent was discovered. We no longer limit the universe to hell below, heaven above, and some of both between. The God of creation is in control now as He always has been. ...” (Text, CR 7/24/64, A3801-02) Early June: Air Force Space Systems Div. announced 10-ft. delta wing glider able to travel almost around the world as goal of improved Asset program. Glider would be ready for launch in two years. This improved Asset program was said to be more “realistic” prospect for manned reentry vehicle than canceled Dyna-Soar project. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
Comparison of science in U.S. and U.S.S.R. was subject of article by Prof. Robert E. Marshak, Univ. of Rochester. Distinguishing between “pure science or basic research and applied science or technological development,” he said U.S. was “doing exceedingly well in basic science. . . . The striking American performance in pure science in recent years results from a combination of fortunate circumstances. A primary factor is that the openness, freedom and emphasis ou individual initiative that characterizes the American way of life provide a favorable climate for the practice of pure science. . . . “On the other hand, in applied science the U.S.S.R. has demonstrated its capability of organizing large team undertakings whose favorable outcome depends as much on careful mobilization of material and human resources as on scientific brainpower. . . .”	(NYT Mag., 10/11/64,
North American Aviation, Inc., announced FY 1964 sales of $2,189,594,000, the largest annual total ever recorded by a company predominantly in the aerospace business. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 29)
Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Tests (Start) established in Advanced Planning Directorate of the Deputy for Technology, Air Force Space Systems Div. Start included two activities: Asset re-entry vehicle program and unnamed glide re-entry vehicle, still under study. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
Rep. Roland V. Libonati (D.—111.) presented to the House a group report on AFSC, SAC, TAC, and Air Force Academy, after Congressional delegation visited various usaf installations. Listing highlights of afsc during 1963, report said: “Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s Elgin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the Project Firefly program. The project actually is the intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and an assault on the secrets of ‘near space’. . . . “amrl [Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson afb] initiated the first lunar gravity research in 1963. Using a zero-gravity parabola, aircraft tests were conducted under actual lunar—one-sixth earth gravity—conditions. . . .” (CR, 2/18/64, 2906-35)
Effective this date, usaf Western Test Range’s facility at Point Arguello became part of Vandenberg afb, and its facility at Kwajalein Island was turned over to the Army. Organization plans for National Range Division with its Eastern Test Range and Western Test Range had been announced Mfiy 4.	(L.A. Times, 7/2/61)
General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, was interviewed in General Electric Forum and discussed aerospace power’s contribution to national security. “In recent months, the area of direct technical concern to the Air Force has 'become much broader. For example, we must now press for technical superiority not only in aircraft but also in missiles, space systems, and command and control systems that are responsive to the compressed time scale of military operations. We cannot afford to fall behind in any of these fields, because the potential enemy can be expected to exploit Jill of the important technical gaps that might appear.” LeMay said that “chiefly because of the cost factor, we are not exploiting anything like the total amount of technology that we think might be useful. Certainly we would like to do more, but our r&d outlay already comprises 18 percent of the Air Force’s total budget and must be balanced against other needs.” (GE Forum, 10-12/64,14-17)
afsc/bsd commander Maj. Gen. W. A. Davis, asked at Cape Kennedy press conference to comment on the recently reported Atlas ICBM failures at Vandenberg AFB, said: “There are several possible reasons for the failures. The Adas is a complex piece of machinery that has a habit of using up some of its reliability with age. SAC has been taking Adases off of operational sites, where they have been for a year or more, placing them on the stand at Vandenberg and firing them. “I feel that this type of test is not operational realism as SAC calls it You take the missile out of its environment, load it on a plane, fly it 1,000 or more miles, load it on another stand and fire it. This requires disconnecting and reconnecting wires and fuel lines and installing destruct packages and some instrumentation for the training launches.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/64)
The largest contract awarded to date for work on the NASA Mississippi Test Operations facility was awarded to Koppers Co., Inc., Malan Construction Department, New York City, for the construction of the first test position on the S—IC dual test stand. The contract was for $17,280,157, and was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Mobile District. Work on the stand would include construction of three concrete tiers each about 158 ft. high, a tower approximately 105 ft. high, a steel flame deflector, and other equipment. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1) . .
New evidence of possible explosions in Milky Way galactic core, reported by Soviet astronomer Dr. Iosif S. Shklovsky, was discussed by British astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Dr. Shklovsky discovered that spurlike structures above and below the galaxy are connected in a single figure-8 configuration, its center at the galactic core. It is possible that the loops, which are strong sources of radio emissions, are magnetically trapped particles which may have been forced from the core by a past eruption. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/24/64, 48)
Dr. Norman W. Rosenberg, of the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, was presented the DOD Distinguished Civilian Service Award, highest decoration for civilian employees. Since joining AFCRL in 1959, Rosenberg designed and executed a number of important experimental studies in upper atmosphere physics, most of which were part of Project Firefly. ( oar Release 7-64-3)
President Johnson announced he was sending a set of lunar photographs taken by RANGER VII to leaders of 110 nations. “The success of the Ranger 7 exploration has been greeted with enthusiasm and interest around the world. Men of all nations recognize this is one of the greatest extensions of human knowledge about the lunar surface to occur in many centuries. “The American people can be justly proud. We started behind in the space age. But we placed our trust in our open society and free system. Our achievements in peaceful exploration of space give us all cause to be proud, grateful and confident. . . . “More than 60 countries now work together voluntarily in this pursuit. We continue to hope that the extent of such international cooperation will be enlarged and that all nations will join through the United Nations to place the peaceful realms of space off limits to the designs of aggressors on earth. “I am sure the American people will continue to support what is necessary to assure leadership. In return, they will rightfully expect that our program hold to the orderly and responsible course which has brought such outstanding success in such a short period.” (Spivak, UPI, Wash. Post, 8/17/64)
In a New Year’s greeting addressed to President Anastas I. Mikoyan and Premier Alexei N. Kosygin of the Soviet Union, President Johnson urged agreement on a series of United States disarmament proposals and arms control: “Arms control remains especially urgent; nothing can contribute more to the hopes of mankind for the future. During the months ahead I hope we can work for practical agreements to this end. We can and should move to limit the spread of nuclear weapons; to achieve a verified worldwide comprehensive test ban; to make a cut-off of fissionable material production for weapons coupled with measures to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear power; and to agree on a verified freeze in existing offensive and defensive strategic nuclear delivery systems. “By progress in this critical area, our Governments can help to make this a happier and safer world for all people. You may be certain that the American people and their Government will never be second in this effort.” (Mohr, NYT, 12/31/64,1—2)
Dr. Hari K. Sen, research scientist in Space Physics at usaf oar’s Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, had shown that evaporation of solar corona was largely responsible for origin of the solar wind, OAR announced. Dr. Sen evolved simple physical theory explaining how electrons and protons of solar winds escape solar corona, then compared his results with observed interplanetary electron densities and with experimental data obtained from spacecraft on solar winds near the earth. His theory agreed, in order of magnitude, with experimental data and gave estimate of interplanetary electron density beyond observed range out from the sun. He set critical altitude for escape at about four solar radii, about 1,300,000 mi. above the visible solar disc. (oar Release 3-64-5)
General Bernard A. Schriever, afsc, said in speech to the Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami, regarding the USAf/usn F—111: “The outstanding characteristic of the F—111 is its versatility. The F—111A—the Air Force version—can penetrate supersonically on the deck for interdiction or low altitude tactical reconnaissance. For purposes of close support, it must be able to maneuver well at low altitudes and be able to carry a variety of conventional weapons. It must also be able to loiter for extended periods while awaiting target assignments from the local ground commander. Combined with this low altitude capability, the F-lll requires a very high altitude capability for reconnaissance flexibility and air superiority missions. It must be capable of high altitude deployment between theaters without tanker support. “The F-111A will significantly increase the Air Force’s capability in support of the Army. Its great ferry range will increase Tactical Air Command’s capability to react even more rapidly than now to meet contingencies anywhere in the world. But even more importantly, the F—111A, with its variable geometry wing design will operate effectively over a wide range of speeds and altitudes in any conservative combat environment. “Basically the F-lll will be the first truly multi-purpose all-weather tactical fighter in tac’s inventory with a capacity to operate from short austere fields. This means greater dispersal and flexibility and, of course, quicker responsiveness to support Army requirements for immediate and effective close air support, air superiority and interdiction. In short, the F—111 represents a quantum step forward in the development of a tactical air weapon system providing optimum combat effectiveness at the lowest cost and with the greatest possible flexibility. “The F—111B—the Navy version—has a primary role of air superiority. It will be armed with the Phoenix missile system and will be able to loiter at the outer defensive perimeter of the fleet for much longer periods of time than present day Navy fighters. It will also be able to accelerate out of a subsonic loiter condition and maneuver for supersonic attack. “It is easy to see that both the Air Force and Navy versions of the F-lll call for a number of conflicting inflight performance characteristics. The requirements for high subsonic cruise efficiency and for short takeoff capability call for maximum lift from the wing area. In other words, you need wings swept fully forward. On the other hand, supersonic low altitude flight calls for swept back wings, since the body design itself provides sufficient lift to support flight; and additional wing area only induces instability. At altitude more wing area is required, but the higher speeds obtainable dictate either very thin straight wings or else a higher degree of sweep. “How do you answer these conflicting demands? The answer is obvious—develop a variable sweep wing aircraft. Contrary to some impressions, the variable sweep design is not new. A variable sweep design was used in the Bell X-5, which was developed under Air Force sponsorship and flown at Edwards in 1951. A similar principle was utilized in the Grumman F—10F prototype which flew in 1952. But there is a major difference between those designs and the one to be used in the F—111. The early designs required a bulky internal mechanism to move the wings. That mechanism is not required for the newer designs, and consequently the use of a variable sweep wing has become practical.” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-64)
USAF fired Titan II icbm from Vandenberg AFB more than 5,000 mi. down the Pacific Missile Range in 10th and last of series of R&D tests at pmr. (AP, Wash. Past, 3/14/64)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, spoke on “New Technology—Its Selection and Development” before the Atomic Industrial Forum conference in San Francisco. His address made the following points: (1) preeminence in space demands that a program of development of new technology be continuously supported; (2) the formulation of a responsible requirement requires the existence of an underlying body of technology; (3) the development of a new branch or extension of a branch of technology should be directed at a related class of requirements rather than a single requirement; (4) development of a new technology requires the existence of a focal point in the form of advanced hardware; (5) short and long-term goals must be related to the Nation’s policies and plans; (6) our goals must be continuously assessed; (7) our work must be relevant to the goals which have been set; and (8) better processes of program management must be devised. He said in conclusion: “A balance of technologies in our favor will, however, require wisdom in the selection of new technologies in which to invest our resources and resolution in their development.” (Text)
Atlas F icbm exploded on launch pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R,
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation and Douglas Aircraft Co. received three contract increments totaling more than $8 million for work on S-IVB stage of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles from NASA msfc. Additional funding of $3.6 million went to Rocketdyne to equip their plant for production of J—2 engines and for providing static test site and propellant storage area. Douglas received two incremental contracts. One, for $2.3 million, was for purchase of long-term items on recently ordered additional eight S-IVB stages. Other, for $2.2 million, was for purchase of additional set of automatic checkout equipment. (SBD, 7/14/64, 63; Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 9)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.—Minn.), Vice-Presidential candidate, told rally in Washington, D.C., that the Administration would form a study group to seek “the appropriate mechanisms of development and research” by U.S. industry. (Pomfret, NYT, 10/12/64,15)
Indonesian air force launched Soviet-built surface-to-air missile in connection with military alert exercises, according to official Antara news agency. (M&R, 2/24/64, 11)
Scientists from the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, the Swedish Space Committee, and NASA announced they would investigate the nature of noctilucent clouds during a period starting the last week in July and extending through Aug. 24. This would be the second in series of rocket-borne experiments to be conducted from' Kronogard Range in Northern Sweden. Principal purpose of experiments was to confirm results of experimental flights completed in August 1962, when it was tentatively determined that noctilucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or the residue of burned out meteors. Program calls for the firing of four Nike-Apache rockets for collection purposes and four Nike-Cajun rockets to measure temperatures and winds associated with the presence or absence of the clouds, (oar Release 7-64-2)
dod announced it had undertaken comprehensive review of procurement policies and practices affecting labor-management relations at missile and space sites.. NASA was cooperating in the study, which in 1964 was expected to involve the following sites: Vandenberg AFB, Warren AFB, Minot AFB, Whiteman AFB, and NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility. The first on-site review was made at Cape Kennedy late last month, (dod Release 110-64)
Minuteman ICBM was successfully fired from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., by a Strategic Air Command crew from Malmstrom AFB, Mont. The missile traveled 5,000 mi. down the Western Test Range. (MdeR, 11/9/64, 10)
