Report of experiments by the European Organization for Nuclear Research indicated there was no fifth force in nature as had been proposed, independently, by two groups of American physicists to explain some unexpected experimental results. The four forces in nature were gravity, electromagnetism, and weak and strong nuclear forces. (Reuters, NYT, 2/28/65, 69)
Snap 8, NASA—aec experimental reactor, had run continuously at power for 209 days, thereby completing the longest known power operation of a nuclear reactor. Built by Atomics International Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., Snap 8 began power operation in November 1963, ran 91% of the total time available, and produced more than five million kw. hours of heat. It was operated in a shielded AEC test facility near Los Angeles. (Atomics International Release Ai-18)
Commenting on American contributions to space science, N.	M. Sissakian, Soviet biochemist, wrote in Pravda: “Soviet scientists note with satisfaction the considerable contribution of American science to the study and opening up of cosmic space, which specifically manifested itself in a series of flights of cosmonauts in one-seater and two-seater ships. Most essential results were obtained by the American scientists from the flights of the ships Gemini 4 and Gemini 5. . . . . . The flight of G. Cooper and C. Conrad was additional proof that the state of weightlessness during the minimum time required for a flight to the moon and back does not cause essential physiological changes in the human organisms and has no noticeable influence on his ability to work. “Of great interest in the cosmic flight of man from the biological viewpoint is the study of such problems as the functional state of the cardiovascular system, the water-salt exchange, and the vestibular apparatus. “Aboard the ship Gemini 5 a number of physiological experiments . . . were performed. The method tested on the Cosmonaut C. Conrad of inflated cuffs around the extremities, which were intended to maintain the necessary functional vigor of the cardiovascular system, merits attention. . . . “The flight of Gemini 5 is a great success for U.S. scientists. The Soviet scientists sincerely congratulate Cosmonauts G. Cooper and C. Conrad on the successful conclusion of their flight, giving due credit to their courage and endurance. They transmit to the scientists and the entire personnel which prepared and carried out the flight their congratulations and wishes for further successes in the peaceful opening up of the cosmos.”	(Pravda, 9/2/65)
usaf “ripple-launched” two Minutemen icbm’s from Vandenberg afb. Roth were launched from silos, the second within minutes of the first. (M&R, 2/15/65, 12)
USAF named Robert G. boewy chairman of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, (Hussie, Phil. Inq,, 9/26/65) *	ComSatCorp asked fcc for permission to make available service via early bird i outside of normal hours to permit transatlantic televising of Pope Paul vis visit to the U.S. October 4. The Corporation normally could offer its services between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. daily; it was seeking to extend them from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. during the papal visit. (ComSatCorp Release) *	Potential of a manned orbiting vehicle to obtain advanced photographic and electromagnetic intelligence on Soviet ICbm defenses, on Russian deployment of new smaller solid propellant icbms, and on Chinese progress toward a strategic missile force was suggested by Aviation Week and Space Technology as being significant factor behind Defense Secretary Robert S, McNamara’s decision to proceed with manned military space missions. It was photographic evidence provided fay Samos, shortly after McNamara had come to the Pentagon, that had enabled the U.S. to determine that the Russians were not building and deploying icbms as fast as had been believed and which had allowed McNamara to establish more modest missile production goals. (Av. m„ 9/27/65, 261
usaf launched a Titan I ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., as one of a series of tests to determine compatibility of the missile with various payloads, (ap, NYT, 3/6/65, 9; M&R, 3/15/65,11)
U.S. Army modified Redstone missile was successfully test-fired from wtr as part of Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Project Defender. Some 24 Army-stockpiled Redstones had been ordered by arpa for use in reentry measurements. This seven-year-old Redstone, among the first Redstones reactivated last June for Project Defender, was the first Redstone to be launched since November 1963. (SBD, 1/13/66. 72: M&R, 12/13/65, 17)	'	'	' During November: Wendover Air Force Auxiliary Field, Utah, an empty facility in “caretaker” status, was reported to be leading candidate for site of the first American inland landing station for spacecraft. A study made by a dod committee had described Wendover as “the only site known to satisfy the recovery requirements of polar orbiting vehicles.” (NYT, 11/28/65, 50)
afsc’s 6595th Aerospace Test Wing assumed responsibility for Atlas launches into the Air Force Western Test Range in support of the Army Nike antimissile program and the usaf Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems ( Abres) program. ( afsc Release 46.65)
Statistics on intercontinental ballistic missiles were given by Robert R. Brunn in an article in the Christian Science Monitor: “In the Soviet Union 270 to 300 intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms) are in place. Underground and overseas the United States has more than 1,300. “Within five years the Soviets may have emplaced 500 to 600 of these great birds with nuclear warheads. But by then the American missile arsenal may have the destructive power of 3,000 1965-type A multiple warhead for the Minuteman had been developed, Brunn said, which could triple the effectiveness of this missile: “Approaching enemy territory, it could separate into three warheads, each with its own guidance system. It would be steered to the target and report if it was going to miss or hit.” (Brunn, CSM, 7/2/65, 9)
Spokesmen for some 43,000 United Aerospace Workers Union members employed by North American Aviation, Inc., announced plans for possible strike action Oct. 10 unless negotiators reached agreement on a new wages and hours contract. UAW members involved worked in plants in Los Angeles, Calif.; Tulsa, Okla.; Columbus, Ohio; and Neosho, Mo. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/16/65)
Arthur E. Jenks, retired FAA official, received the Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award for 1965 at a luncheon in Washington, D.C., given by the Society of Automotive Engineers in conjunction with its annual meeting. The award, sponsored by the Flight Safety Foundation, was presented to Jenks because of his “contributions to improving the techniques for flight checking the accuracy of air navigational aids and improvement of landing aids on and around airports.” (faa Release 65-30)
Resignation of Eugene M. Zuckert as Secretary of the Air Force, effective Sept. 30, was announced by President Johnson. To succeed Zuckert, who had served since Jan. 23, 1961—longer than any previous Air Force secretary—the President named Dr. Harold Brown, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering since May 3, 1961. No replacement was named for Dr. Brown. President Johnson also accepted the resignation of Dr. Brockway McMillan as Undersecretary of the Air Force, also effective Sept. 30. (White House Release; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/65, 12)
Survey issued by the North American Air Defense Command revealed 879 objects orbiting in space: American, 672 (164 payloads, 508 pieces of debris); Soviet, 198 (53 payloads, 145 pieces of debris); Canadian, 4(2 payloads, 2 debris); British, 3 (2 payloads, 1 debris); French, 2 (1 payload, 1 debris). Except for the payload and debris from France’s recent launching, all the objects in space were launched on American or Soviet rockets. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/65, All)
Pan American Airways announced it would purchase four additional Boeing 727 jet aircraft, bringing its Boeing purchase program total to 19. {WSJ, 5/7/65,3)
Ives, Whitehead & Co., Inc., a Washington, D.C., management and trade consultant company, proposed that the Nation’s program to develop a supersonic airliner be financed by a special Government corporation similar to ComSatCorp. The plan would eliminate the necessity of asking Congress to appropriate the minimum $1 billion needed for development of the aircraft. The proposed company would be known as the sst Development Corp. and would be authorized to raise capital funds through private investment channels, by issuing and selling bonds or notes or both. The corporation would then enter into contracts with airframe and engine manufacturers whose designs had been selected by faa. The corporation’s obligations would be repaid by a predetermined percentage of the profits earned by industry by selling the planes to private airlines and by royalty payments added to the sale price of the plane by the airlines, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 42)
afsc announced award of five letter contracts totaling $3.8 million for conceptual phase of Mark II Avionics Svstem being considered for use on f-111a aircraft. General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft Co., Sperry Gyroscope Co., Westinghouse Electric Corp., and Autonetics Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., would perform analyses leading to system design recommendations integrating many subsystems. (afsc Release 30—65)
Jerome Lederer, director of the Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at the Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. He was cited for “35 years of distinguished service and unceasing devotion to increasing the safety of flight throughout the world . . .” (naa News; ap, L.A. Times, 11/27/65)
usaf launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb in test of the Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, (upi, NYT, 7/2/65)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told members of the Overseas Writers Club in Washington, D.C., that Communist China could produce hydrogen bombs by a comparatively simple process and could possibly develop a nuclear delivery system in five years. Dr. Urey said Communist China had surprised world scientists, including himself, when it produced a nuclear bomb last fall with uranium 235— one of the technically most difficult ways to produce the nuclear bomb. (ap, NYT, 4/30/65, 3)
Describing the size, capacity, and productivity of the c-5a aircraft, recently approved and funded by DOD and ordered by the Air Force from Lockheed Aircraft Co., Ira C. Eaker said in the San Diego Express: “A fleet of 130 c—54 aircraft, the best then available, were required for the Berlin airlift. Five c—5as could have done that job more efficiently and with a saving of 5,000 crew and support personnel.” (Eaker, San Diego Express, 10/26/65, 29)
Tribute to Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D—Nev.) was read on the floor of the Senate: “It is no surprise that Eugene Zuckert served in the office of the Secretary for longer than any other man. His leadership spans nearly 20 years, dating almost from the time that the Air Force became an independent service while Mr. Zuckert served as special assistant to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air. He served for a time on the Atomic Energy Commission and brought a high degree of competence and ability to this important operation. “After more than 4V2 years as Secretary, Eugene Zuckert has established an enviable record, and I suggest that his devotion to the service and his unique skills will make his absence from Government of very short duration. No man who has done what he has for the Air Force in the critical years when that service entered the space age can be forgotten or easily replaced.” {CR, 9/29/65, 24571)
Washington Post editorial comment on President Johnson’s assignment of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project to the Air Force: “. . . Anxiety arises out of the Air Force commitment to total secrecy in its space operations. . . . [nasa] has pursued a brilliantly successful open public information policy. It has made every American a participant in its exciting conquest of space, aroused the national interest in the whole world of science, stirred the youth of the country to enthusiasm and stimulated national pride. The Vandenberg Air Force Base which will become a major site for MOL launching has operated under a veil of secrecy. . . . “The Pentagon has not yet devised a policy for informing the public on the man-in-space MOL project. If it continues the Vandenberg policies of the past, the country is going to know very little about MOL. Such secrecy is bound to arouse international suspicions and alarms, particularly since the flights will be over Soviet territory. Either this is primarily a project in the peaceful penetration of space that requires little secrecy; or it is a secret military project that cannot be reconciled with our previous professions.” (Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A23)
Rains forced Princeton Univ. scientists to postpone launching from Palestine, Tex., of a Stratoscope II balloon and its telescope designed to photograph Saturn and its rings. No new launch date had been set. (Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert named Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) as Director of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program. This assignment was in addition to his duties as Commander, Air Force Systems Command. B/Gen. Harry L. Evans was named Vice Director of the Mol Program and B/Gen. Russell A. Berg was named Deputy Director, (dod Release 560-65)
North American Air Defense Command said reported Ufo sightings from six states were probably the planet Jupiter or one of the stars Rigel, Capella, Betelgeuse, or Aldebaran. A usaf weather observer in Norman, Okla., taking issue with the Air Force’s stand, said: ‘‘What we saw was not an aircraft . . . nor was it a planet or star ... It was about 22,000 feet high and pitched at about a 45 degree angle.” He said he and a friend had observed the object, which was “moving quite rapidly,” for a little less than five minutes through a 40-power telescope. (Wash. Post, 8/3/65)
A shipment of American Hawk missiles was unloaded recently at the Israeli port of Haifa. Israel announced, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/19/65)
Immediate planning for a fourth jetport for the New York City area was advocated by Harold E. Gray, President of Pan American World Airways, at the ' Annual Aviation Luncheon of the Queens Chamber of Commerce: “Maybe the need is eight years from now. Maybe it is twelve years from now. But it would take ten years, as I understand it—starting today—to develop a fourth airport. So, tomorrow may be too late to make this start. Manana is not soon enough for me!” This was the first time a Pan Am official had stated the airline’s position on the jetport issue. (Hudson, NYT, 6/22/65, 58)
Explanation of rash of Ufo sightings was given by Howard Margolis in the Washington Post: “The latest flurry of saucer reports, according to the Air Force, seems to he based on such things as a conjunction-of the planet Jupiter and some bright stars, compounded by atmospheric conditions that produce an enhanced twinkling effect, further compounded by the annual summer meteorite showers; still further compounded by some other atmospheric effects that tend to produce bogus radar reflection, and finally compounded by the well-marked tendency of any good Ufo sighting reported in the newspapers to lead many more in the same area—in this case the Midwest—for a time thereafter.” (Margolis, Wash.- Post, 8/10/65)
FCC rescinded an earlier order and granted a group of communications companies temporary authority to provide television service from EARLY bird i comsat. The order authorized AT&T, ITT, RCA Communications, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc., to pool their efforts and resources in a consortium which would buy the television service from ComSatCorp and then sell the service to American television networks. In its earlier order, FCC had granted temporary authority to ComSatCorp to provide the television service directly to the television networks. (Weekley, Wash. Post, 7/16/65)
First s-il-s ground test stage in the Saturn s-n program was completed by North American Aviation at Seal Beach. The stage would be used for structural tests simulating critical thrust and pressure loads anticipated during Saturn V/Apollo flight missions. This stage would not be fired—it would have no engine, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/5/65, 1)
Senate adopted a resolution requesting President Johnson to proclaim Sept. 17 and 18 as special days in honor of the memory of James Smithson, the Englishman who willed all his property for establishment of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. 200th anniversary of his birth would be celebrated this year, (ap, NYT, 6/26/65, 20)
North American Aviation Co.’s xb-70a experimental bomber reached altitude of 59,000 ft. and speed of 1,500 mph on its tenth flight from Edwards afb. Duration of flight was 1 hr. 39 min., of which 1 hr. 14 min. was at supersonic speed, boosting its total supersonic flight time to 5 hrs. 5 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65, A7)
“Early Bird should not be construed by any government as just another door to be opened when there is a self-serving point to be made, and a door to be slammed when that point is in danger of being questioned,” said Dr. Frank Stanton, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System, in a speech at the Career Services Awards dinner of the National Civil Service League in Washington, D.C. Dr. Stanton said it was agreed the peoples of the world should have an opportunity to hear foreign leaders, but that this must be done in an atmosphere of freedom “with openness and in candid discussion.” He added: “Early Bird must not be transformed from the unprecedented opportunity into the most universal and pervasive censorship—both affirmative and negative—ever known.” (NYT, 5/20/65, 75)
Vice Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn) spoke before the Publishers’ Lunch Club of New York. In his speech Admiral Rickover said: “How to resolve the antithesis between technology and individual liberty; how to insure that technology will be beneficial, not harmful, to man, to society, and to our democratic institutions—this, I would say, is a public question. I raise it here because I believe the members of this audience are particularly well qualified to explore this problem. In your business the conflict between technology and liberty —so prevalent everywhere else in our society—is muted, if not absent altogether. “Improvements in the mechanics of producing and selling books have not diminished the importance of the author. Your success still depends on	him. He cannot be rendered	obsolete by automation. The human factor therefore continues to outweigh the technical. As in the past, your main function is to discover talent and help bring it to fruition. You know that liberty enhances creativity, that men with a special competence must be allowed to follow their own judgment. . . . “How to make technology most useful to ourselves and our society, yet prevent it from controlling our lives—that is the problem. The problem is aggravated by the bureau-cratization of American life, itself largely a result of technology.” . (Text, CR, 1/29/65, 1522-24)
North American Aviation, Inc., and United Aerospace Workers Union announced approval of a new three-year contract covering 35,000 workers in four states, (ap, NYT, 10/11/65, 28; ap, Wash. Post, 10/11/65, A19)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told the National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C., that a significant announcement on the Mol program would be made in the “near future,” according to Missile/Space Daily. When asked if Mol would match the capability demonstrated by the U.S.S.R. in July 16 launch of proton i, Dr. Hall replied: “We feel a capability in the order of placing 25,000 lbs. in orbit would enable us to meet DOD needs.” Dr. Hall said that DOD was interested in the development of recoverable, reusable boosters and he felt that the reduction of problems in mating payloads to boosters had been a “significant event during the past year.” (M/S Daily, 7/21/65; nsc Release)
In a report to President Johnson on the Titan II missile silo disaster of Aug. 9 which had claimed 53 lives, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert said: “The cause of death was almost exclusively asphyxiation. A number of men had attempted to escape by the emergency ladder which apparently was blocked by two men who became jammed together in trying to pass simultaneously through a restricted area on the ladder, thus denying access to those on the ladder below them.” (Text)
“We are already getting ready for the next manned flight,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev’s backup pilot wrote in a Soviet air force journal. “We are getting acquainted with the construction of a new ship” and “planning new flights on new courses with more complicated assignments.” {Wash. Post, 5/8/65)
Suggestion that synthesis of life should be a national goal by Dr. Charles C. Price, president of the American Chemical Society, received comment from the New York Times: “Could such an effort be added to the total national scientific enterprise or could it be fitted in only by cutting back on other sectors, particularly the very expensive programs in space or particle physics? Would mankind benefit more if the funds needed for this project were devoted instead to less exotic but perhaps more vital needs of ending the pollution of the air we breathe and the water we hope to drink? The verdict on Dr. Price’s proposal is by no means immediately obvious. “The most unfortunate result that could come from Dr. Price’s suggestion would be the mounting of a new international competition, a ‘life race’ that would produce the same tension and needless duplication that the space race has produced. Men of many nations have contributed to the progress that makes it possible now to consider the goal Dr. Price has put upon the public agenda. If any such effort is undertaken it should be as international as the common humanity that makes all men brothers.” (NYT, 9/15/65, 43)
Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert placed further restrictions on simulated bombing missions of b-58 Hustlers over Chicago: the supersonic bombers would fly at higher altitudes (48,000-49,000 ft. instead of 41,000-44,000-ft. range originally programed) to reduce impacts of sonic booms; flights would be canceled during bad weather. It had been announced earlier that the number of training missions per day would be reduced from a maximum of four to two. (Chic. Trib., 1/7/65)
Dr. Charles H. Townes, provost of MIT, reported at the meeting of the American Physical Society in Washington, D.C., that a laser beam had been used to produce sound waves more than a million times higher in pitch than those audible to the human ear. Dr. Townes explained that the laser beams at MIT had been used to produce oscillations constituting sound waves in solids and liquids. Sound had been produced by means of the laser at 3,000 me in a fluid and 60,000 me in a solid. It should be possible, Dr. Townes said, to generate sound at 300,000 me in diamond. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) announced the activation of the Contract Management Div., Air Force Systems Command (afsc), under the command of Col. Fred L. Rennels, Jr. (usaf). Located at Los Angeles Air Force Station, the new division would be responsible for DOD contract management activities in those plants assigned to the Air Force under the dod National Plant Cognizance program, (afsc Release 61.64)
Aerospace Corp. was accused of practices that were “uneconomical, unnecessary, unreasonable, or unjustified” by the Special Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Forces Committee, in a report on an examination of business management and fiscal controls at Aerospace that had culminated in hearings in May 1965. The report recommended a reappraisal of the usaf concept that had led to the creation of Aerospace, the abolishment of the fee-funding system, a review and reform of Aerospace’s security procedures, and a study of personnel policies and salaries. It also said usaf exercised improper and inadequate control of its contracts with Aerospace, often resulting in fees being provided “for purposes for which they were never used,” and Aerospace using “fees for purposes never intended by the Air Force . . .” (Committee on Armed Services Report)
The House Armed Services Real Estate Subcommittee approved Air Force plans to dispose of Atlas and Titan missile sites representing an investment of $856,900,000. The 14 missile complexes, embracing 113 missile launching silos, were being declared surplus as a result of the obsolescence of the missiles they were built to accommodate, (ap, NYT, 5/29/65, 25)	_
New York Times editorialized: “The Aerospace Corporation, a multimillion-dollar nonprofit organization sponsored and financed by the Air Force, has been subject to a searching scrutiny by a House Armed Services subcommittee. Its report is a devastating indictment of Aerospace’s financial management. . . . “The abuses at Aerospace are mainly the fault of the Air Force, which indulged its prodigal offspring by failing to exercise any real control. Aerospace is only one of a growing number of Government-owned non-profit companies working on important defense assignments; there is no evidence that all are as expensive in their spending practices, but we agree with the subcommittee that it would be a good idea to examine the function and the costs of the rest and bring their fees under strict regulation. There is no reason for maintaining such operations if their work can be done cheaply and effectively either by the Government itself or by private enterprise.” (NYT, 9/7/65, 34M)
Sen. Ralph Yarborough (D-Tex.) said on the floor of the Senate that results of Government-sponsored research should be “freely available to the American public” and that he “viewed with . . . skepticism any proposal to create a private monopoly” over this information. (CR, 3/16/65, 5051)
Pan American World Airways had ordered four Boeing 727-QC (quick change) jet aircraft that could be converted in less than half an hour from an all-cargo plane to a complete passenger aircraft or a passenger-cargo plane. Aircraft would have a psssenger capacity of 119; in an all-cargo operation the plane could carry a payload of 41,000	lbs. more than 1,400 mi. Delivery was scheduled for summer 1966. (NYT, 7/26/65, 39M)
A six-and-one-half-minute captive test firing of Saturn V booster’s second (S—II) stage was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA announced. The test—first full-duration firing—continued until the stage’s propellants were depleted, slightly longer than normal flight duration, (msfc Release 65-203; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 7)
In an editorial titled “Loss of a Leader,” the Washington Sunday Star concluded a review of Dr. Hugh L. Dryden’s contributions to American aeronautics and astronautics: “It is in the tradition of NASA, and of NACA before it, to name its research centers and after important figures in the development of aeronautics and astronautics: Langley, Lewis, Ames, Marshall, Kennedy. One major center—the one at Houston— remains unnamed. It would be a fitting tribute to a dedicated American if that center were henceforth to bear the name of Hugh L. Dryden.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, B2)
usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell told a meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., that “any reports of the impending demise” of the flying Air Force were “slightly exaggerated.” In fact, he added, a wide variety of new and better aircraft was needed to meet “the ever-changing nature and scope of the threat to our national interests.” (Text)
British Minister of Aviation Roy Jenkins said at a London conference on European cooperation in advanced technology that Britain might seek collaboration with France in developing the VC—10 aircraft into an “air bus” capable of carrying 265 passengers. This move was thought to be precipitated by activities of two American companies, Boeing and Douglas, both of which had approached boac with their versions of an air bus. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/6/65, 54M)
L/Col. Pavel R. Popovich, who orbited the earth 48 times in vostok IV in August 1962, said in an interview with Izvestia that the rendezvous of GEMINI vi and Gemini vii was “a great achievement of American cosmonautics on the way to exploiting space around the earth.” (Reuters, NYT, 12/22/65,19)
Britain and France signed an agreement to jointly build two supersonic military aircraft for the 1970s: (1) a strike trainer; and (2) a pivoting-wing attack plane. The strike trainer, to be based on France’s twin-engine Breguet 121, would be built by the British Air-, craft Corp. in cooperation with the Societe des Ateliers d’Aviation Louis Breguet. Rolls Royce, Ltd., and Turbomeca, a French engine concern, would supply the engines. The variable sweep wing, aircraft similar to the American F-lll fighter-bomber, but smaller, would be based on the concept of British aircraft designer Dr. Barnes Wallis and built by the British Aircraft Corp. and the Societe Generale Aero-nautique Marcelle Dassault. The agreement committed each country to an initial expenditure of $56 million, most of which would be spent on a prototype for the strike trainer. (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/18/65, 8)
Hsinhua, official Chinese Communist press agency, announced public display in Peking military museum of a pilotless JJ.S. reconnaissance plane, shot down over central south China, Jan. 2, 1965, “by the Air Force.” {NYT, 4/3/65, 2)
A commercial model of the military c—5a subsonic jet was being considered by Pan American World Airways to provide cheap air transportation, reported the Wall Street Journal. The aircraft would measure 230 ft. or more from nose to tail, weigh over 700,000 lbs., and carry a payload of over 250,000 lbs.; four jet engines would propel it at 550 mph. The passenger version would hold between 700 and 1,000 people. The jet bus could cut cargo rates 50% or more and cut fares 20 to 25%. Problems would arise, however, in that present airport runways might not be able to sustain the great weight and new procedures would have to be developed to handle the increased traffic. (Cooke, WSJ, 7/16/65,1, 8)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff, was awarded the 1965 Collier Trophy, U.S. aviation’s highest honor, in a ceremony at the Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C. General LeMay was cited for “development of high performance aircraft, missiles, and space systems which in 1964 significantly expanded the frontiers of American aeronautics and astronautics.” (naa News, 10/18/65; Raymond, NYT, 10/22/65,1)
Discussing the problems of organizing and consolidating the vast amounts of technical and scientific data at the Congress of the International Federation for Documentation in Washington, D.C., Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is felt by many that the most highly advanced information system in the Federal Government has been and remains the program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This program has been a pace-setter lor information advances, both on the part of the Government and private sectors of our economy. The NASA contractors and grantees get the benefit of the most widely-diversified and promptest information service rendered by any government agency. The NASA attempts to cover world space literature, star [Scientific and Technical Aerospace Reports] is reproduced semi-monthly and through arrangement with the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s open literature is covered in the international aerospace abstracts. A total of more than 50,000 items a year are indexed in depth on magnetic tape for use in the NASA computer base literature research system. Tapes are updated monthly and distributed to the NASA Research Centers, a dozen major NASA contractors, and three university research centers that use them in dissemination of technological information to industry. . . .” (Text)
H. Z. Hopkins, Jr., chief of North American Aviation, Inc., flight test operations at Edwards afb, Calif., was named president of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots (setp). Also honored by setp during its annual meeting in Los Angeles was A1 White, naa’s chief test pilot, who was recipient of the Ivan C. Kincheloe Award. White was cited for his role in development and testing of XB-70a research aircraft. (naa Release NL-19; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65,2)
American Airlines would directly support San Francisco Oakland Helicopter Airlines under the terms of an agiecment recently submit* ted to the cab for approval. (ATT, 7/28/65, 54M)
In a farewell speech at a dinner meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M.	Zuckert said that in contrast to five years ago, the Air Force today was better. He predicted it would continue to improve: “We have not reached a plateau in technology, strategy, concepts, or doctrine. All kinds of changes will continue—in both hardware and ideas.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/18/65, 5)
Representatives of companies planning to buy the supersonic Concorde airliner were told in a report prepared by the joint builders, British Aircraft Corp. and Sud Aviation France, that the makers were confident, following extensive wind tunnel tests, that the Concorde represented “the best possible compromise for a supersonic transport” and would be “safe and easy to fly.” A special report on the problem of sonic boom said tests had shown that the calculated extent of these sharp detonations had been “generally pessimistic.” It said that climb and acceleration techniques were being developed that would keep the shock waves of air causing these booms as slight as possible. The experts present for the three-day talks on the airliner’s progress were from Air France, British Overseas Airways Corp., Pan American World Airways, American Airlines, Continental Airlines, Qantas, Air India, and Middle East Airlines, which had together ordered or taken options on 45 of the aircraft, valued at $560 million. (Reuters, NYT, 5/19/65, 94C)
Final test in North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div.’s seven-month paraglider operational test program was successfully completed at Edwards afb, when Gemini boilerplate suspended beneath an inflated paraglider was towed to 9,000- to 10,000-ft. altitudes and released for free flights that averaged four and one half to five minutes. The test program, in which 12 consecutive successful flights and landings in tow-test vehicles were executed by company pilots, was not related directly to the NASA Gemini program but was an investigation in general operational aspects of manned landing using deployable maneuverable landing systems and emphasizing pilot problems. No further NASA funding was expected but naa was performing some company-funded work on adapting the paraglider for controlled delivery of air-dropped cargo and had submitted a proposal to the U.S. Army for further work on this technique, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 11/12/65, 1)
The 10 crew members of a Pan American World Airways Boeing 707 jetliner that caught fire just after take-off and lost an engine and part of a wing would receive faa’s Exceptional Service Citation and medals, faa announced. Capt. Charles H. Kimes and his crew landed the plane safely at Travis afb; all passengers were clear of the plane within the two-minute goal set by faa as a maximum safe evacuation time. (NYT, 6/30/65, 59)
Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine system had been successfully fired for the first time using flox, a combination of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen, as the oxidizer. This was the first time a complete engine system had been fired using this high-energy oxidizer. Approximately 20 firings would be conducted in the series using the standard concentration of 30'/ liquid fluorine to 70% liquid oxygen. Conditions involving thrust level, oxidant fuel ratio, and other engine variables would be run to establish engine performance limitations. The tests were being conducted under LRC contract, by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div., Canoga Park, Calif. ( LRC Release 65-211
In a congratulatory wire to President Johnson, Yugoslavia’s President Tito called the gemini v spaceflight a “major achievement of American science” and expressed hope that it would “serve peace in the world.” (upi, NYT, 9/5/65, 28)
Science interest among U.S. high school students was declining, Dr. Robert Jastrow, director of the New York branch, nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies, told the New York City Youth Board, meeting to inaugurate Youth Week. Citing figures from a study covering 1958 to 1963, Jastrow reported a 30% decline in the number of semi-finalists competing for National Merit Scholarship Awards who whose physics as a career preference. He suggested that the image of science as “a dehumanized field of work open only to a gifted few” could be counteracted only if scientists “are willing to step down from this pedestal and interact with voung people.” (Whitehouse, NYT, 12/5/65, 71)	'	“ ‘ '
First regularly scheduled air cushion service in the U.S. was initiated between Oakland and San Francisco over San Francisco Bay in a yearlong test, authorized by the Civil Aeronautics Board, to determine feasibility of using Hovercraft in ferrying passengers in metropolitan areas. Eight round trips a day would he provided by a seven-ton, $300,000 craft by Bell Aerosystems. (NYT, 8/8/65, 74)
Formation of Institute for Oceanography, part of the Environmental Science Services Administration, was announced by Dept, of Commerce. Interaction between ocean, earth, and atmosphere would be studied in programs designed to gain new knowledge of the ocean. Headed by Dr. Harris B. Stewart, Jr., formerly chief oceanographer of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Institute had headquarters in Washington, D.C. (Dept, of Commerce pio; NYT, 12/30/65,42)	_
In an interview on the eve of his retirement as Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Curtis E. LeMay discussed the role of the military in space: “Developing military capabilities in space is a task that I think we ought to accept as an unavoidable requirement. It is the only way that we can establish control over corridors of access to our country that would otherwise be open to exploitation by aggressor forces. . . . “I am confident that man will prove useful in this medium. Just as he has adapted aircraft to tasks no one could foresee in 1903, he will undoubtedly discover uses for space systems over the years ahead that go far beyond the observation and inspection functions we envision at this time.” (ap, Haugland, Balt. Sun, 2/1/65)
Extraterrestrial dust particles would be collected by U.S. and foreign scientists using five rockets launched into the extreme upper atmosphere from Churchill Research Range, Canada, by the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl), NASA and USAF announced jointly. Each of the five Aerobee 150 rockets would carry a recoverable device called a “Venus Flytrap” designed to capture micrometeoroids and noctilucent cloud particles at various altitudes for laboratory inspection. NASA had provided partial funding for the project and had arranged for participation of organizations from abroad: the Commonw'ealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Radio Physics Laboratory, Sydney, Australia; the National Center for Radioactivity Research (CNRS), France; the Meteorological Institute, Stockholm Univ., Sweden; Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany; and the Univ. of Tel Aviv, Israel, (nasa Release 65-223; afoar Release 7-65-1)
North American Aviation’s xb—70a made its fifth flight from Palmdale, Calif. Maximum speed was mach 1.6; maximum altitude 45,000 ft.; duration of flight, 1 hr. 10 min. During the flight the wingtips were folded to 25° and then to the full-down position of 65°. It was the first time this total deflection had been attempted. Flutter and stability characteristics, the inlet control system, and the air inlet bypass door system were investigated during the flight. Although the emergency landing parachute system did not function during landing at Edwards afb, the aircraft completed a normal landing with normal braking. The drag chute had deployed, but the three-chute pack did not deploy. (Av. Wk„ 2/22/65, 22; upi, NYT, 2/17/65, 74)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $17 million increment to a previous contract for the xb-70 flight test program. USAF Aeronautical Systems Div. was the contracting agency, (dod Release 374-65)
Prof. Robert H. Dicke of Princeton Univ. suggested in the Astronomical Journal that a way to map the sun’s shape as a test of Einstein’s theory of relativity would be to use measurements of the orbit of the asteroid Icarus as it passed within 4 million mi. of earth on June 15, 1968. Two peculiarities would make Icarus, discovered in 1949, valuable for such an experiment: (1) Icarus was the only body in the solar system known to pass inside the orbit of Mercury; and (2) Icarus’ orbit was highly inclined to that of the other planets. Dr. Dicke proposed that measurements be taken when the planet cut across the plane of the earth’s orbit. If the two measured points changed with each close passage to the sun, then the sun would be known to be less than a perfect sphere. And, the amount by which it was not truly spherical would be known precisely. If the sun’s radius at the equator exceeded its polar radius by as little as 0.005%, the distortion of the sun’s gravitational field that this would cause would be enough to account for 10% of the predicted effect on Mercury’s orbit. But the general theory of relativity had already accounted for the peculiarities in Mercury’s orbit. Therefore, if the distortion were found, the theory must be incorrect. In other words, said Dr. Dicke, gravitational attraction of one body for another must be accounted for, not by relativity, but by some other mechanism. (AIP News, 8/28/65)
Positive action must soon replace delay and procrastination” on the development of an American supersonic airliner, Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, told a Washington, D.C., meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers. Monroney said that U.S. failure to build the plane could “choke off” 375,000 jobs within several years. Sen. Monroney added that if U.S. carriers did not fly supersonic planes as early as foreign airlines, it could mean a loss of $1 billion a year in passenger revenues. “If we capitulate, it would mean the eventual loss of technical superiority and a second class airline industry,” he said. (NYT, 4/15/65, 15)	.	.
Dr. Robert H. Goddard was posthumously awarded the Daniel Guggenheim Medal by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Mrs. Goddard accepted the medal. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 13)
Concern regarding the secrecy shrouding the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “The President has given assurances that although information gained through MOL will relate to America’s defense capability, the thrust of the project is peaceful. On the other hand mol’s director seems quite willing to provoke a military race in space. There is one easy, proven method by which the doubts and misgivings about MOL can be allayed. The Air Force should adopt NASA’s open public information policies at once and apply them to every stage of MOL.” {Wash. Post, 10/22/65, 24)
Much has been done in an effort to alleviate aircraft noise. Annual expenditures have risen from $100,000 in 1961 to $1.3 million to be spent by faa alone in 1965,” faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told a National Aircraft Noise Symposium in New York City. He warned: “If we fail to make progress in reducing noise . . . pressure may perhaps ultimately exclude the availability of aviation facilities to our centers of trade and commerce. I feel it is essential that we all recognize the price that we may be forced to pay for a tolerable environment next door to our airports.” (Text)
Richard E. Horner, former Associate Administrator of NASA (1959-60), was installed as 1965 president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 13)
Two workmen were killed and three were injured in an explosion and fire in the propellant preparation building at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Minuteman missile facility. The accident occurred at Minuteman Plant 78, an Air Force facility operated by Thiokol. An investigation was underway to determine the cause, (ap, NYT, 10/28/65, 43M)
North American Aviation’s xr-70a supersonic bomber reached 2,000 mph and 60,000-ft. in a one-hr. 47-min. experimental flight from Edwards afb across Calif., Ida., Nev., Utah, and Ariz. The aircraft was powered by six 1,500-lb. turbojet engines, each with more than 30,000-lb. thrust. XB-70a flights were being used to obtain data valuable for design of the supersonic transport (Sst) now in the design study phase. (NYT, 10/15/65, 45)
Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara confirmed that the U.S. had given Great Britain option to purchase F-lll aircraft and spare parts totaling more than $1 billion for its Royal Air Force. Delivery orders for the F-lll were expected to be placed after completion of the British defense review, (dod Release 210-65)
boac announced in its annual report that it had asked British and American aircraft manufacturers to submit plans for a subsonic airliner accommodating up to 250 passengers. Sud Aviation of France and Hawker-Siddeley of Great Britain told the Corporation they were not interested in the project. (Reuters, NYT, 7/29/65,48)
Prime Minister Harold Wilson announced plans to buy American military aircraft to replace British aircraft, an action he said would save more than $840 million over a 10-yr. period. The two U.K. projects being dropped were the P-1154 vertical take-off supersonic strike aircraft and the hs-681 short take-off military transport. Both were made by the Hawker Siddeley group. American Phantom iTs, made by McDonnell Aircraft, would be ordered to replace the P-1154. Phantoms were already on order to replace the Royal Navy’s Sea Vixens. Lockheed’s C-130’s would replace the hs-681. The American planes would be equipped with British engines. On the question of the tsr-2, which the U.K. was considering replacing with General Dynamics’ F-lll, Mr. Wilson said there was not enough information yet to make a final decision. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/3/65, 9; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 2/3/65)
The Space Act of 1958 may have unwittingly provided competition that is getting results, said an editorial in the Cleveland Plain Dealer: “There was conjecture then, and there is conjecture now, that NASA and the Air Force duplicate efforts in the parallel development of rockets. There are rumors of smouldering controversy. “But yesterday’s dramatic blastoff of the triple-barrelled Titan 3-C by the Air Force, coming closely on the heejs of NASA’s sensational Gemini performance, indicates the competition, thus far is beneficial to both.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 6/19/65, 23)
FCC approved ComSatCorp’s proposal to build a ground station at Brewster Flat, Wash.—a U.S. link in their proposed worldwide communications system. The approval applied only to transmission and receiving facilities; other portions of the application such as ownership of the station and establishment of its links with San Francisco were still under consideration. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A17; WSJ, 10/14/65)
Najeeb Halaby, faa Administrator, announced that he would ask Congress for enabling legislation authorizing a ten-day, federally-sponsored International Aerospace and Science Exposition, to be held the summer of 1966 at Dulles International Airport, Washington, D.C. The Exposition, approved by President Johnson March 31, 1965, would attempt to stimulate export sales of U.S. products and to demonstrate U.S. accomplishments in aerospace and related sciences, (faa Release 65-25)
Brig. Gen. Charles A. Lindbergh (usafr) was elected to the Board of Pan American World Airways. During his 36-year association with the airline, he had helped develop several aircraft from the Fokker and Sikorsky to the Boeing and Douglas jets. Recently he had worked on the supersonic transport and the fan jet Falcon. He was also a member of the naca from 1931 to 1939. {NYT, 3/18/65, 47)
Israel, to reassure U.S. of her peaceful intentions for use of atomic energy, had permitted two aec commissioners to inspect Dimona reactor, a natural uranium, heavy-water-moderated type, capable of producing enough plutonium for several relatively small atomic weapons. Israel had imposed strict secrecy on the inspections, one a year ago and a second last month. U.S. tentatively concluded that Dimona was not being used to produce plutonium for atomic weapons but suggested that reactor be placed under inspection by International Atomic Energy Agency. Israel refused, explaining: (1) she should not be forced to place her national development under agency inspection until international inspection had been accepted by all nations, and (2) the Agency had discriminated against her in favor of Arab states in membership of its board and location of research centers. Many American and British specialists feared that Israel could be “keeping the option open” to develop atomic deterrent against Arab nations. (Finney, NYT, 3/14/65, 1)
A new telescope on Mt. Wilson, after surveying more than half the sky visible from that site, had detected from 400-1,000 celestial objects cooler than 1,500° F, reported Dr. Bruce T. Ulrich of Cal Tech at a meeting of the American Physical Society in Chicago. Since between 70% and 80% of them lay along the Milky Way, it was theorized that they were “very large—probably thousands of times larger than the sun, very distant, and quite rare.” The new telescope was novel in several ways: its concave mirror was of an epoxy plastic coated with aluminum; the mirror rocked back and forth at 20 cps, so that light from an infrared source in the sky would sweep across detectors of lead sulphide and silicon; the detectors, kept at —320° F, were sensitive enough to detect the slight increase in the infrared as the arm of the telescope swept past one of these objects. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
U.S. and Argentina jointly announced plans to collaborate in launching weather rockets to gain information about hemispheric weather patterns. Under terms of an agreement, Argentina would provide launching facilities, would transport rockets and equipment from the U.S. where they would be manufactured, and would assemble and launch the rockets. U.S. launchings would be made from Wallops Station; launching pads in Argentina would be at Chamical. Other Latin American countries had been invited to participate in the program, (ap, NYT, 5/22/65)
Distinguished Lecture Series sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade was opened by Dr. James A. Van Allen, head of the Univ. of Iowa’s physics and astronomy department. Dr. Van Allen discussed “Space Science.: Past, Present, and Future” at the Univ. of Maryland. Series of seven lectures was designed “to foster bettef understanding between industry and local universities in an effort to create a research community in the Washington [D.C.] area equivalent to the Harvard-MIT complex in the Boston area.” (Wash. Post, 10/3/65, B2)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, National Aeronautics and Space Council Staff, in NASC compilation of international space programs, predicted that future Soviet activities in space would include: manned circumlunar flight; development of a Soviet version of Mol; large manned stations maintained for indefinite periods by supply ferries; manned lunar landing; major new version of an interplanetary probe, notably on using Venus as a target this fall. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 10/11/65, 32) During October: USAF had formed a seven-member, top-level policy committee to function as chief advisory group of manned orbital laboratory (Mol) objectives and problems, reported Aviation Week and Space T echnology. Chaired by Air Force Secretary Harold Brown, the committee would establish program objectives, plans, schedules, milestones, and development and test goals; make program and system changes; define major technical developments; and identify management and fiscal problems, as well as problems that affect other military departments and Government agencies. (Av. Wk., 10/4/65, 25)
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. made the first formal bid to become a customer of ComSatCorp. In a filing with the FCC, AT&T asked for the right to lease 100 voice-grade channels that would operate through early bird I comsat and connect with European telephone companies. AT&T also asked that it be allowed to acquire a television channel for use from time to time in providing TV service to and from Europe in ventures with various European communications carriers. (WSJ, 6/3/65, 4)
The President has taken the moderate and, in this case, wise course in deciding to speed up the development of an American supersonic commercial airliner with an additional $140 million in research over the next IV2 years,” said a Washington Post editorial. It continued: “He could have called a halt to the program and abdicated America’s aviation industry leadership to France and Britain, who already are developing their Concorde, or to the Soviets with their TU-144. Or he could have followed the recommendation of some of his advisers and spent even greater sums of money to build two competing types of planes which both might end up as impractical white elephants. . . the President’s moderate speed-up decision certainly is justified on scientific grounds, for research invariably turns up new ideas for progress. And it is justified on political grounds as well, for this country must maintain its pioneering leadership in all forms of transportation.” {Wash. Post, 7/17/65)
dod announced Peter Kiewit Sons Company had received a $9,495,000 contract for modification of Titan II launch facilities in the vicinity of Davis-Monthan afb, Ariz.; Little Rock afb, Ark.; McConnell afb, Kan.; and at Vandenberg afb, Calif. The Army Corps of Engineers awarded the contract, (dod Release 18-65)
Commercial aviation’s first nonstop crossing of the Pacific was made by Qantas Airlines Boeing 707: San Francisco to Sydney in 14 hrs., 33 min. (Wash. Daily News, 3/8/65)
President Johnson’s order for the Air Force to proceed with development of a Manned Orbital Laboratory produced a quick reaction in Wall Street: stock of the companies involved registered rapid and sometimes sizable gains. {NYT, 8/26/65, 46)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert Gilruth received the China-Burma-India World War li service group’s annual Americanism award at the national convention in Houston as “the man who has contributed the most during the past year to the American way of life.” (Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
SlO-million seismometer post was dedicated in Billings, Mont., at ceremonies attended by more than 60 scientists from 30 nations who would tour the 525 seismometer sites in Montana. President Johnson, in Washington, D.C., said: “This new Department of Defense installation, the first of its kind, will help detect and identify earthquakes. It brings us closer to the day when science can distinguish with certainty between underground nuclear explosions and other forms of seismic disturbances.” Scientific data would be made available to the world, Johnson added, (ap, NYT, 10/14/65, 3)
AFSC announced that an airspace surveillance and weapons control system had been proposed for installation in the Ryukyu islands, southwest of Japan. Through use of semi-automatic data processing, the Ryukyu Air Defense System (Rads) would pick up airspace intruders in its area almost instantly, enhancing defense capabilities of the Pacific Air Force in that area. The system would consist of radars, ultra-fast communications, data processors, display consoles and command posts where decision makers could direct manned or unmanned weapon interception. Returning aircraft could be directed home or to alternate bases through the system, (afsc Release 54.65)
65-ton Saturn s-ivb “battleship” tankage and associated vehicle equipment were shipped from San Francisco by msfc to usaf Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma, Tenn., for use in high-altitude tests of the stage’s J-2 engine, (msfc Release 65-291)
A working model of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc.’s new 100-lb., 15in.dia. ion engine, using accelerated ions to gain thrust, was presented to Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for display in the Arts and Industries building. {Wash. Post, 5/27/65, F3) May 27-29:	Forty educators from Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee attended a NASA-Univ. of Alabama Educational Symposium whose prime purpose was to determine the impact upon the curriculum of secondary schools of new knowledge and developments in science, sociology, and human relations created by NASA MSFC activities. Symposium and workshop were conducted by the University under a msfc contract, (msfc Release 65-129)
A “Dictionary of Scientific Biography” containing essays on careers of scientists and mathematicians would be published by Scribner with a National Science Foundation grant of more than $250,000. Dr. Charles C. Gillispie, Princeton professor of History of Science, had been named Editor-in-Chief. {NYT, 3/7/65, Book Review Sec., 8)
X-22a vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft (V/Stol) was inspected by Government and military representatives at the Bell Aerosystems plant in Niagara Falls. Its unique characteristic was the ducted fan concept of propulsion consisting of four shrouded propellers—two forward and two on the tips of the 39-ft. wing aft—driven by four T-58 turbine engines. The four engines, expected to propel the aircraft at a cruising speed of 300 mph, were run for about five minutes. X-22a was constructed for the Army, Navy, and Air Force under a Navy-administered contract for $25 million. First flight test would be made in September 1965. (dod Release 341-65: ap, NYT, 5/26/65, 94)
usaf was reported to be considering the use of surplus Wing 1 Minuteman ICBMS as Guidance Error Analysis Vehicles (Geav). According to Air Force Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility (cigtf), surplus Minuteman boosters could be the cheapest means to evaluate future inertial guidance systems in a true missile environment. ETR was selected for Geav because no other range could measure missile velocity in three axes to the required accuracy. The Minuteman guidance system itself would be reprogramed and located in a recoverable payload for reasons of economy. (M&R, 1/25/65, 34)
Dr. Edmund Klein of Roswell Park Memorial Institute for Cancer Research and Dr. Samuel Fine, Northeastern Univ. professor, in a report prepared for the 149th national meeting of the American Chemical Society, disclosed that laser beams may cause damage to the eyes, brain, and other organs in a way that may not be immediately apparent. Klein recommended that researchers “err on the side of safety in precautionary measures.” Lasers are devices for concentrating light into extremely powerful beams; researchers were exploring their usage in fields of communications, eye surgery, cancer treatment, and in chemical and other industrial applications, (ap, Houston Post, 4/5/65)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller announced that the New York State Atomic and Space Development Authority had selected American Machine and Foundry Co. for a $2.75-million fixed-price contract to design and build a nuclear-powered plant which would produce a million gallons of fresh water daily from seawater. Named Surfside (Small Unified Reactor Facility with Systems for Isotopes, Desalting and Electricity), the plant would be constructed on Long Island and would also be able to generate 2,500 kw. of electricity and produce high-energy radioactive isotopes. (Sibley, NYT, 7/20/65, 1, 14)
For more than six years, U.S. nuclear warheads had been mounted secretly on planes and missiles of West Germany and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, the New York Times reported. Through a combination of physical and electronic controls, the warheads had remained under American custody, and the allies could not use the weapons without specific approval of the U.S. (Finney, NYT, 11/21/65, 1)
afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. had awarded to North American Aviation, Inc., an $8,150,000 increment to previously awarded contract for the xb-70 aircraft, dod announced, (dod Release 100-65)
20th anniversary of the United Nations celebrated in San Francisco. President Lyndon B. Johnson said in an address to the General Assembly: “The movement of history is glacial. On two decades of experience none can presume to speak with certainty of the destiny of man?s affairs. But this we do know and this we believe: Futility and failure are not the truths of this organization brought into being here 20 years ago. “Where historically man has moved fitfully from war toward war, in these last two decades man has moved steadily away from war as either an instrument of national policy or a means of international decision. . . . “The promise of the future lies in what science, the ever more productive industrial machine, the ever more productive, fertile and usable lands, the computer, the miracle drug and the man in space all spread before us. The promise of the future lies in what the religions and the philosophies, the cultures and the wisdoms of 5,000 years of civilization have finally distilled and confined to us—the promise of abundant life and the brotherhood of man.” (Text, NYT, 6/26/65)
American Institute of Physics established a Center for History and Philosophy of Physics, which was the merging of aip’s Niels Bohr Library of the History of Physics, History of Physics Archives, and Project on the History of Recent Physics in the United States, (aip Release)
French Ambassador-designate Charles Lucet awarded gold medals and citations to French and American scientists who had worked on the FR-1 project. The French satellite was launched from the Western Test Range Dec. 6 with a nasa Scout booster, nasa officials honored at the French Embassy ceremony in Washington included Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert C. Baumann, Chief of Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., gsfc; and Dr. Robert W. Rochelle, Chief of Flight Data Systems Branch, Spacecraft Technology Div., gsfc. (Ross, Wash. Post, 12/9/65, Kl)
A new theory for the behavior of matter, called SU-6, was presented in New York at the annual meeting of the American Physical Society by Dr. Abraham Pais of the Rockefeller Institute. The concept, based on a branch of mathematics known as symmetry group theory, supported views that all matter might be composed of basic building blocks, or “quarks,” that could be either real fragments or mathematical entities smaller than the electron. It grouped the 100+ known fragments of matter into groups and then predicted behavior. A modification makes the theory also compatible with Einstein’s relativity theory. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/28/65, 1, 10)
A Titan II icbm was fired from Vandenberg afb underground silo on a routine flight down the Western Test Range by a Strategic Air Command (sac) crew, (upi, Boston Globe, 6/30/65)
