Communist China conducted "a nuclear explosion that contained thermonuclear material” over its western areas, Hsinhua, Chinese Communist press agency, reported. U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., surmised that explosion indicated China was on the verge of developing a thermonuclear or hydrogen bomb. (AP, NYT, 5/10/66, 4; Topping, NYT, 5/10/66, 1)
Hourly bus tours—for a fee—began at ksc. Announcing the new service, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said: "We want to provide the public with as meaningful a tour as can be permitted without interference with mission operational requirements. On Sundays, the public will continue to have the option of the free drive-through, in private vehicles, of the [nasa] center and the Cape Kennedy Air Force Station.” (NYT, 5/12/66, 21; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/13/66, El)
msfc awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $23,438,532 modification to an existing contract for "additional work in building and testing the Saturn V launch vehicle’s second stage [S-II].” Work would include redesign of stage’s umbilical system and additional testing of stage’s hardware under simulated flight conditions, (msfc Release 66-181)
A phased-out Bomarc missile, serving as target for USAF and USN missiles, exploded shortly after it was fired from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 8/27/66, A3)	...
cab study revealed that in 153 U.S. air carrier accidents between 1955 and 1964 caused by or resulting in fire, 297 of 1,955 fatalities would not have occurred had fire been prevented. 1,628 persons died of impact forces, and 30 for other-reasons. All fire victims were involved in 13 of the accidents. Report recommended strengthening of structures to withstand impact, improvement of onboard and ground fire-fighting and rescue equipment, continued improvement of exit facilities, development of emergency communication systems, and more detailed passenger briefings. (cab, bosp, 7-6-3) During April: Men and women engaged in the national space program should reverse defensive and apologetic attitudes toward the commitment to space exploration, according to Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., addressing American Astronautical Society annual meeting in San Diego. "If we were the only nation in the world that had the capability to proceed into this new dimension, we should do it,” Harr said. "We should do it as part of a national renaissance on all fronts; for a great society . . . cannot confine its attention to certain challenges selected under past conditions, but must . . . move comprehensively to accept the challenge of the future. ".. . As the huge challenge of space generates and consumes and then regenerates our material and human resources, so does it widen the scope of the environment in which our citizens will exist and make their contribution in the years ahead.” (Aerospace, 4/66, 7-9)
In a press interview, Capt. Charles Oglesby (usaf) of the North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracking center in Moorestown, N.J., said scanners were checking on 1,100 items in orbit, including functioning payloads and debris. 95% of items in orbit were from the U.S. Of payloads, the U.S. had 167; U.S.S.R., 43; U.K. and Canada, two each; and France, three. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
Rufus E. Miles, Jr., director of mid-career programs at Princeton Univ.’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and former hew Assistant Secretary for Administration, was sworn in as a NASA consultant on management operations, (nasa Release 66-277)
Dr. Carl Schreiber, Procurement Specialist with NASA Hq. Office of Industry Affairs since Aug. 2, 1964, died in Washington, D.C. Dr. Schreiber, naca employee since 1939, had been Assistant Procurement and Supply Officer from 1958-64. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
Aeronautical exhibition tracing aviation’s history from supercharger to turbojet opened in new Hall of Aeronautical Propulsion at Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (Wash. Post, 7/9/66, B2)
Dr. George P. Woollard, president of the American Geophysical Union and director of the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics, said in agu Transactions that there was a "crisis in science” requiring bold Government action. Stating that less and less of nsf’s budget was going into basic research, Dr. Woollard called on Congress to assess the overall scientific needs of the country, including "ambitious” programs in various fields proposed by NSF and NAS panels. "Research proposals that were good enough five years ago to obtain NSF support now would not stand a chance,” he said. "They would be turned down not because the projects lacked significance but because funds are short and only the most established and influential researchers win out.” (agu Transactions, 1/66)
faa announced that Washington (D.C.) National Airport would be open to short-haul jet traffic April 24. (faa Release 66-5) James W. Miller, Office of Naval Research, reported that results of the Sealab II experiment had indicated that at ocean depths 600 ft. and below man could perform useful tasks such as salvaging ships and aircraft if he were equipped with electrically heated diving suits, diver-to-diver communications, and underwater swimming aids. Outside of Sealab II, the aquanauts had been cold, frustrated, unable to talk to one another, limited in their visibility, and constantly in danger. Inside the capsule, they had experienced difficulty in sleeping and had had speech problems because of the helium atmosphere. There were no serious medical problems, and "an unprecedented amount of useful work was accomplished.” (Text)
NASA awarded five contracts to Saturn contractors to continue studies to improve Saturn concepts of an intermediate vehicle with a payload capability between that of Saturn IB and the Saturn V. On Saturn V, Boeing Co. received $370,500; North American Aviation, Inc., $329,624; and Douglas Aircraft Co., $96,730. Eight variations of the Saturn V vehicle would be examined. Boeing would be study systems integration contractor for all prospective configurations involving the S-IC stage, naa for all others. On Saturn IB, Chrysler Corp. received $450,000; Douglas, $116,345. Six Saturn IB configurations would be studied. All five contracts would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 66-3)
faa cautioned airline executives during briefing in Washington, D.C., not to let desire for a "fly-off competition” keep them from making as clear-cut a first choice as possible for the supersonic transport. If they did not, they might get aircraft they did not want or Congressional critics might use indecisiveness to stall or kill program. Possibility that prototypes of both the Boeing and Lockheed airframe designs would be built was virtually ruled out. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 25) During October: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown summarized USAf’s position on its future in space in an interview with Armed Forces Management: "It is not a matter of desiring to conduct military campaigns in space but rather to preclude any aggressor from using space as an area of operations for launching attacks against the U.S. . . . "We should not be doing things just to be doing them. Rather, they must have direct relation to establishing military needs. "Space is not a mission but a place to perform a mission. When a mission can be performed from space, the Air Force will perform it from there. . . .” (Armed Forces Management, 10/66, 69)
Pan American World Airways’ fan-jet Falcon claimed new speed record for business aircraft when it flew from St. John’s, Newfoundland, to Lisbon, Portugal, covering 2,388 mi. in 4 hrs. 38 min. 28 sec. North American Aviation’s Sabreliner had set previous record of 4 hrs. 45 min. 59.4 sec. on Oct. 26, 1963. Both flights had been piloted by George Eremea of Petit Jean Air Service. (NYT, 9/29/66, 86)
faa lost its first customer for supersonic transport (Sst), paid Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) $200,000 refund requested by company on Feb. 25. Panagra was one of eight U.S. and 14 foreign customers which had deposited money to reserve delivery positions for Sst. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
Biologist Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, Dean of Princeton Univ. Graduate School, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics that biological exploration of the planets would be "a milestone in modern science,” but such an undertaking, he cautioned, would first require scientific readiness and organization. Without adequate preparation, outright commitment now would risk the political consequences that would attend failure of a major, costly project. "Could commitment now to the opportunities in mid-1970s fail to freeze an inadequately formulated strategy? Could it avoid outright assignment of responsibility and the authority for decision on design and tactical detail to one of several single laboratories, no one of which can marshal the necessary scientific talent to ensure a competent project? . . . The task immediately confronting those of us anxious to see Voyager go in the 1970s is thus more organizational than scientific. . .	(A&A, 11/66, 76-89) During November: Department of Transportation would be the means and choice to begin a new era in transportation planning, Alan S. Boyd, Under Secretary of Commerce for Transportation, wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . transportation policy-making today necessitates a resolving of three different elements: The methodology for planning and programming; the organization to parallel such methods; and the leadership to carry them out. These three ingredients have never been combined in an effective manner. ... If the nation takes this opportunity, benefits to the public and to the users of transportation will be tremendous. . . .” (A&A, 11/66, 112-116)
nasa’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe launched from etr Dec. 16, 1965, completed six-month nominal mission at a range of 54.6 million mi. with all spacecraft systems performing well. Perihelion had been passed May 20, 1966, and aphelion passage would occur Oct. 24. Preliminary results of experiments had been reported Apr. 19 at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Two solid-fueled Minuteman icbms were launched simultaneously from Vandenberg AFB, to evaluate multiple-firing techniques which could be used "under combat conditions at operational bases.” This was first salvo launch down wtr. (sac Release 6-17)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received National Aviation Club’s (nac) 1966 Award of Achievement for his "significant contributions to the creation of the Air Force strategic missile force.” The award would be presented Aug. 16 in Washington, D.C. (Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 13)
usaf successfully carried out second launch from Vandenberg AFB in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program to investigate and measure infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products. Nike-Javelin combination carrying payload of plume measurement was launched seconds after launch of its target, a Titan II icbm, and data were telemetered back to Vandenberg station. Preliminary reports indicated that missile was on target for preselected Pacific target area. (upi, NYT, 3/26/66, 27; dpi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)	/
Pan American World Airways, Inc. (Pan Am), would purchase 25 new Boeing 747 jet transports—including twenty-three 490-seat passenger models and two all-cargo models which would carry 214,000 lbs. freight—for over $525 million, announced Pan Am’s chairman and chief executive, Juan T. Trippe. Deliveries of order, reported to be largest and most expensive in airline history, would be made between September 1969 and May 1970. The 680,000-lb. aircraft would be powered by new Pratt & Whitney JT9D-1 fan-jet engine capable of delivering 41,000-lbs. thrust and would have 45,O0O-ft. cruise altitude— nearly one mile higher than current transports—and mach .90 cruise speed—compared with mach .82 for current models—and would provide "safety margins superior to any previous commercial airliner” with multi-gear landing system which would require only 9,150 ft. of takeoff runway. Trippe forecast lower passenger fares and reduced cargo tariffs because of 747’s large capacity and efficiency of operation. (Pan Am Release; Bedingfield, NYT, 4/14/66, 1; Edwards, Wash. Post, 4/14/66, Kl)
afsc had completed 110 successful tests of Bak-11 (Barrier Arresting Component)—device to stop aircraft on runway during emergency—at Air Force Flight Test Center (afftc), Edwards afb. Device, developed by Research, Inc., consisted of an arresting cable which engaged main gear struts when actuated by aircraft’s wheels rolling over switches mounted on the runway, (afsc Release 46. 66)
It was one minute after Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra, Jr., decided not to eject in the Dec. 12, 1965, Gemini VI launch failure at etr, that his pulse rate increased, reported Gemini medical director Dr. Charles A. Berry in the American Medical Assn. News. Delayed reaction was viewed as supporting theory that fear follows action in an emergency— particularly in the case of a highly trained subject, (msc Morning Neivs Flyer, 1/7/66)
NASA-sponsored space science course—including lectures, demonstrations, and experiments—began at (Washington) D.C. Teachers College to help local elementary school teachers understand space-age fundamentals and interpret them to their pupils. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/66, D9)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, at Armed Forces Management Assn., in Washington, D.C., predicted a management revolution commensurate with the explosive advance of technology and the pressing nature of military requirements. "I think that the biggest challenge to management in the years ahead will be to find ways to encourage and use the full creative potential of individuals. . . . We must create the atmosphere where the unique human capacity for innovation and judgment can be fully developed and employed. . . .” (Text)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling $1.5 billion to Avco Corp., Martin Co., North American Aviation, Inc., Northrop Corp., Fairchild Hiller Corp.. and LTV, Inc., for work on Sst prototype. (Boeing Release S-8928)	'
Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) asked faa to refund $200,000 which company had deposited to reserve delivery on Sst being developed under faa contract. This was first Sst cancellation request. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
nas Committee on Public Engineering Policy (copep) held first meeting in New York City; chairman was Dr. Chauncey Starr, president of Atomics International Division of North American Aviation, Inc., and as of January 1, 1967, UCLA Dean of Engineering. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 10/66, 1, 3)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown, testifying before Senate Armed Services Committee and Subcommittee on dod of Senate Appropriations Committee, said usaf was "working on” increasing procurements directly with prime contractors, but with Government-furnished equipment. He added: "There comes a point, however, where the trouble that the Government buys itself by furnishing equipment is more than the money it saves . . .” (Testimony; Senate, Military Procurement Auth. for FY 1967, 907)
Advanced Minuteman icbm was launched from a modernized Minuteman I silo at Vandenberg afb as part of a series of tests to verify modernization procedures for upgrading of Minuteman I silos and control centers. (upi, NYT, 1/23/66, 57)
usaf announced it would award contracts to "individuals within the scientific community” to conduct "prompt, in depth investigation of selected Ufo reports.” Funds for study, which had been recommended by Air Force Scientific Advisory Board in March, would be requested from FY 1967 and FY 1968 budgets, (dod Release 388-66)
Pictures from U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft that apparently entered lunar orbit were received and tape recorded by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. Although unable to immediately decipher pictures, Station officials said . . they appear to be similar to those of Luna 9 and the American Lunar Orbiter transmissions.” U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Aug. 24 launch, (upi, NYT, 8/29/66, 11; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/30/66; upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/30/66)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s contention that Nike-X antimissile missile system was incapable of defending U.S. against Soviet attack and should be kept in r&d stage, received support from Society of American Scientists’ executive board. In a statement opposing Senate vote providing $168 million toward deployment of Nike-X system, the sas board said: "These expenditures, truly enormous over extended periods, would be the hallmark of a frightened, not a great society. . . .” {Wash. Post, 5/8/66, P14)
Absence of statement by President Johnson and West German Chancellor Erhard after their September meeting in Washington, D.C., on suggested U.S.-Western Europe program of unmanned exploration of Jupiter indicated that the proposal had been "killed for the foreseeable future,” Technology Week speculated. (Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 3)
Dr. Hans-Joachim von Merkatz, member of West German Bundestag, charged in report prepared for delivery before meeting of Assembly of the Western European Union that U.S. was trying to "break up” Western Europe’s space program with "tantalizing” offers for joint U.S.-European planetary exploration: "In other words, the exploration of Jupiter could divert us from the essential economic benefits to be derived from space through the exploration of communications satellites. The American approach to date has definitely been aimed at insuring United States monopoly and leadership in this field as in the nuclear field.” Western European Union was composed of U.K., France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. (NYT, 6/9/66, 3)
New mineral named "djerfisherite”—a copper-iron sulfide—had been found in meteorites. Since it does not exist naturally on earth and could be formed only at high temperatures, it was speculated that djerfisherite might have originated in the sun’s outermost layer. Report of finding was released through American Assn, for the Advancement of Science by Dr. Louis H. Fuchs. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/66, D2)
Federal mediators in San Francisco announced interim agreement in wage dispute between International Union of Electrical Workers and United Technology Center. Striking electricians would return to work by April 28; negotiations for a new contract would continue until May 20. AP dispatches from ksc reported union, which had limited picketing to one gate April 20, had resumed picketing all five gates, charging "bad faith on the part of utc.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/26/66, A6; AP, NYT, 4/26/66, 14)
H.S. Becker, former North American Aviation, Inc., executive, had been appointed Deputy Director of msfc’s Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-199)
Air Force Assn, honored four officers for exceptional achievement at its second annual fall meeting in Washington, D.C.: Col. Robert A. Berman, Wright-Patterson afb, Logistics Executive Management Award; Col. Spencer S. Hunn, Hanscom Field, Mass., afsc Distinguished Award for Management; Col. Gregory C. Frese, Jr., Washington, D.C., afsc Meritorious Award for Support Management; and L/Col. Martin H. Brewer, Vandenberg afb, afsc Meritorious Award for Program Management. (J/Armed Forces, 9/10/66, 25)
nasa awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $37-million, costplusaward-fee contract supplement for launch preparation and checkout of ten Saturn V 2nd stages (S-II). (nasa Release 66-281)
Atlas F advanced ballistic reentry system icbm fired from Vandenberg AFB apparently exploded and fell into the Pacific, usaf was investigating causes of the failure, (upi, NYT, 8/9/66)
NASA awarded contracts totaling $825,000 for study of methods to explore the planets and to design advanced launch vehicles: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $200,000; Boeing Co., $150,000; Lockheed-California Co., $250,000; and North American Aviation, Inc., $225,000. Contract management would be performed by nasa Hq. Mission Analysis Div. (nasa Release 66-302)
faa awarded $65,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., to study competing Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Sst designs for possible size reduction that would reduce sonic boom. (WSJ, 12/5/66,12)
usaf announced Dr. J, Allen Hynek, chairman of Northwestern Univ.’s Dearborn Observatory and scientific consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, would investigate reported Ufo sightings in the Ann Arbor, Mich., area, (upi, NYT, 2/23/66, 22) March 22-25; Air Force Assn, held its 20th annual convention in Dallas, Tex. usaf Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell told the meeting that U.S. and U.S.S.R. had enough long-range nuclear weapons to make a nuclear war between them extremely costly for either side, but that a stalemate did not exist between them: "It follows that each country has its own nuclear threshold, that is, the point or level of restraint above which it may no longer be deterred from war. This threshold is by no means static but dynamic, as it is determined by a number of factors which are both variable and unpredictable.” McConnell said the strategic superiority of usaf during the past 20 yrs. had kept the nuclear threshold of all potential aggressors at a safe level. (Text) USAF’s first priority—continued maintenance of strategic superiority over any potential enemy—required a mixed force of missiles and manned bombers, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told the convention. "We will continue to need manned bombers in our strategic forces as far ahead as any of us can see, and I think that should include at least the entire decade of the 1970s. ". . . There is no doubt about the technical feasibility of advanced manned bombers of all sorts of designs. The questions which have to be answered . . . are how we propose to use such a weapon system and how it fits in to the missions of assured destruction and damage limitation. . . . This issue is under intensive study by the Air Staff. . . .” (Text) A Citation of Honor—Air Force Assn.’s highest award—was presented to B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier for "outstanding management achievements while directing the Air Force’s development program for the Titan III-C space booster,” and to ssd’s 655th Aerospace Test Wing, at Patrick AFB, for "successful missile and space launches, including six Gemini launches which placed ten astronauts in orbit and achieved the first manned rendezvous in space.” (afsc Release 48.66)
Successful 384-sec. captive firing of first flight model of Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) was conducted at mtf by North American Aviation, Inc., prime contractor. State was powered by five Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-hydrogen-fueled engines capable of developing a total of 1 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-290; upi, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/66)
Blanche W. Noyes, faa air marking specialist and veteran pilot, was awarded the Brazilian Medal of Merit of Santos Dumont at the Brazilian chancery in Washington, D.C., for outstanding and meritorious services to Brazilian aviation. Mrs. Noyes was the first American avi-atrix to receive the award, (faa Release 66-8)
usaf successfully launched Nike-Javelin combination carrying a payload of plume measurement instrumentation seconds after launch of its target—an Atlas-D icbm—from Vandenberg afb. Launch was first in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program in which data on infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products were telemetered back to Vandenberg telemetry station, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/20/66, 22; upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 82; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)
Russian-born Igor I. Sikorsky, "father of the helicopter,” was honored as Air Force Man of the Year by the New York chapter of the Air Force Assn. He was cited especially for the outstanding work helicopters had done in the Vietnam war. (N.Y. News, 2/21/66)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $1,550,000 initial increment to a $5,671,000 usaf contract for development work on vertical takeoff and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Contract would be managed by afsc’s Systems Engineering Group, (dod Release 760-66)
Four-stage usaf Trailblazer was launched from nasa Wallops Station in second of a series of six Air Force Avionics Laboratory launches to study communications blackout during space vehicle reentry. (Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 10)
U.S. embassy confirmed that West Germany was negotiating with several unidentified American aircraft companies for technical assistance in removgin flaws from the F-104G Starfighter jet aircraft. Since beginning of 1965, 29 Starfighters had been destroyed in accidents and 16 Luftwaffe pilots killed. (NYT, 2/20/66, 9)
Commentary in New York Times on difficulty of allocating limited funds for scientific research: "The eminent Soviet physicist P. L. Kapitsa has published an article [see Jan. 20] acknowledging that American science is still contributing far more to mankind’s knowledge than its Soviet counterpart. He attributes the United States lead largely to the wiser American technique for Government subsidy of research.... Ironically, several months ago President Johnson . .. directed that Federal funds be more equally distributed among the nation’s universities and geographic areas and that a larger proportion of this money be allocated to universities for distribution as their administrators see fit, rather than directly to research scientists. "If the Kapitsa analysis is correct, the President’s order was a mistake and may lead to reduced productivity in American science.” (NYT, 1/26/66, 32)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first U.S. astronaut to walk in space, received the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy from Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown at National Geographic Society ceremony in Washington, D.C. Established in 1S61 by Dr. Thomas W. McKnew, chairman of the National Geographic’s Board of Trustees, trophy was awarded annually to the usaf officer or unit that made the foremost contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. nasa Administrator James E. Webb said at the ceremony: "I think . . . that no factor has been more important in the advances made in aviation and in space than the continued and dedicated driving leadership of the officers of the Air Force and the personal willingness to take the risks involved of these outstanding test pilots and combat pilots and those who have done the intervening jobs from transportation to helicopter work. We have a great Air Force.” (Text; NYT, 7/12/66)
Comment in the Washington Sunday Star called U.S. Sst program a "dubious” venture moved by extraordinary pressures: "This is a project the taxpayer should view with more than a little interest, if not apprehension, for its cost is coming out of his pocketbook and the price tag is escalating. Industry may repay the cost some day, but no one is sure just when. The sst, in fact, has become a symbol of national prestige. If we do not produce such a plane, American leadership in the aircraft industry will sustain a loss of face from which it could not recover. Perhaps it is impossible to back away from the situation. But the American public is at least entitled to know what kind of mare’s nest this rivalry has got us into, and the hazards that must be faced.” (Wash. Sun, Star, 8/14/66, Cl)
In unpublished letter to Science, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, head of Northwestern Univ.’s Dept, of Astronomy and usaf consultant on Ufo’s since 1948, criticized the "American scientific establishment” for failure to investigate persistent Ufo phenomena [see Oct. 21]. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A12)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown issued memorandum approving recommendations of panel appointed to investigate usaf relations with "not-for-profit” corporations and ordering that fees paid to the corporations be substantially reduced. In report, issued Feb. 1, panel had said that nonprofit corporations . . continue to be an indispensible factor in developing and acquiring complex aerospace systems and in assuring their function through command and control,” but that "guidelines . . . point to a fee substantially lower than at present.” (Text; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/17/66, A10; Wash. Post, 4/17/66, A14)
Under Secretary of the Air Force Norman Paul told Rep. George H. Mahon (D-Tex.), chairman of House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, in closed session that usaf officials were unaware that the XB-70 which crashed June 8 was to be used for commercial publicity purposes: "The Air Force definitely does not put its stamp on this sort of business. . . . Had we been aware, I think it is safe to say it would not have happened.” Representative Mahon said Committee would "insist that procedures be established which will make impossible a recurrence of such misuse of men and military equipment.” (Morris, NYT, 6/11/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A8)
usaf awarded contracts totaling over $6 million to Lockheed-Georgia Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., to advance Vtol aircraft development. naa received $5,671,000 to develop and demonstrate a Vtol integrated flight system; Lockheed received $975,000 to modify XV-4A "Hummingbird” to new system with direct lift and diverted thrust engines, (afsc Release 288.66)
North American Air Defense Command (norad)—nerve center of North American air and space defense—took formal possession of new headquarters built 1,200-1,400 ft. into the solid granite of Cheyenne Mountain, Colo., to insure survival of a retaliatory capability in the event of nuclear attack. Eleven interlinked, steel-framed, steel-sheathed, three-story buildings constituting the command post were mounted on coil springs that would protect equipment from ground shock of nearby thermonuclear blast. (Eng. Opp., 2/66, 20-28)
Twenty-one Long Tank Thors were purchased from Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. by usaf for use in its programs at Vandenberg afb. Expected to succeed the present Thrust Augmented Thor (Tat), the Long Tank Thor would provide increased payload capability by enlarging the volume of Thor’s liquid propellant tanks; result would be a 20% increase in payload capability over Tat. Although its total thrust of 330,000 lbs. would be essentially the same as that for Tat, the Long Tank Thor would have a burn time of 216 sec. as compared to 146 sec. for Tat. (afsc Release 205.65)
NASA’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe, launched Dec. 16, 1965, passed near earth after 76 days of near-perfect operation in solar orbit. Probe was 84,190,800 mi. from the sun, passing 7,775,600 mi. closer than earth does, and in earth’s orbital plane on a course which would ultimately take it within 75.6 million mi. of the sun. Devised to study interplanetary space, pioneer vi had telemetered 250 million readings from its six scientific instruments covering 3,300 separate measurements and taken 2.5 million readings of 100 engineering measurements. It had also registered solar wind speed of 1,636,000 mph on Feb. 23, close to highest speed previously recorded of 1,675,000 mph by explorer xviii in earth orbit. Preliminary scientific findings would be presented to American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C., April 19-22. Pioneer project was managed by arc. (nasa Release 66-43,)
NASA-sponsored space exhibit opened in Arts and Industries Building of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; exhibit would begin U.S. tour Sept. 5. (EH)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received Henry H. Arnold Gold Medal for "distinguished service to augment progress and readiness in air and space” and. for "distinguished service in defense of our country” at American Ordnance Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C. In his acceptance speech, General Schriever quoted General Arnold’s 1938 prediction: " 'Planes of the future may have telescopic wings, which, once in flight, can be foreshortened, telescoped, or pulled in . . . thus greatly accelerating the forward progress of the vessel of reduced size and decreased air resistance.’ This description . . . anticipated the principle which is employed today on the F-lll sweepwing fighter. . . .” (Text)
U.S. Ambassador-at-Large and newly appointed Ambassador to U.S.S.R. Llewellyn E. Thompson and Soviet Minister for Civil Aviation Yevgeni F.	Loginov signed agreement authorizing direct commercial airline flights between New York and Moscow at State Dept, ceremony. Service would begin in spring 1967 with weekly flights by ran American World Airways and U.S.S.R.’s Aeroflot. (Eder, NYT, 11/5/66, 1; Roberts, Wash. Post, 11/5/66, Al)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling more than $25 million to Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General Precision Equipment Corp., Litton Industries, Inc., North American Aviation, Inc., General Telephone & Electronics Corp., and Universal Match Corp. for help in developing a short-range attack missile (Sram). Boeing had received $142.3-million usaf contract Oct. 31. (WSJ, 11/8/66, 13)
Study of Ufo’s had been "relegated to the bottom of the barrel” by usaf, Dr. James C. McDonald, Univ. of Arizona professor, charged at Washington, D.C., American Meteorological Society meeting. Attacking usaf’s Project Bluebook as "extremely superficial and of a low level of technical competence,” he urged that Ufo responsibility be taken away from usaf and put "into scientific hands.” The hypothesis that Ufo’s might be "extraterrestrial probes” could not be ruled out, he said. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/66, C14)
afsc awarded 12-mo. study contracts totaling $900,000 to LockheedCalifornia Co., North American Aviation, Inc., and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to develop a high-altitude, hypersonic Scramjet-powered cruise vehicle with potential military applications, (afsc Release 188.66)
Juan T. Trippe, chairman and chief executive officer of Pan American World Airways, in remarks made when he received National Defense Transportation Assn. Award in Dallas, urged development of both Boeing and Lockheed supersonic transport prototypes: "Only further competition between these two manufacturers, during the three years required to build and flight-test the prototypes, can insure that the American supersonic transport ultimately selected will have the maximum attainable performance.” (Text; Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 21)
nas Space Science Board chairman Harry H. Hess, Princeton Univ. geology professor, received Geological Society of America’s Penrose Medal "for distinguished achievement in the geologic sciences” at society’s 79th annual meeting in San Francisco, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 11/66, 6)
Air traffic control radar equipment which could automatically display the third dimension of aircraft position—altitude—would go into service in New York City metropolitan area by late 1967, according to faa. Present radar equipment employed by faa air traffic controllers provided only two-dimensional—distance and direction—picture of air traffic, (faa Release 66-6)
