ERC appointed 0. Hugo Schuck Director of Office of Control Theory and Application. Schuck had been Visiting Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Stanford Univ. while on leave as Director of Research at Honeywell, Inc. In his new position Schuck would supervise research on application of control theory to complex aeronautics and space vehicle systems. He had been President of the American Automatic Control Council, heading U.S. representation in the International Federation of Automatic Control, (erc Release 67-37)
Representatives of 62 nations signed space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. Notable absentees were Communist China, Albania, and Cuba. Representatives of France said they would sign after studying treaty further. At White House ceremony, attended by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, and U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur Goldberg, President Johnson described treaty as the “first firm step toward keeping outer space free forever from the implements of war” and said it would assure that American and Soviet astronauts “will meet someday on the moon as brothers and not as warriors.” Treaty, which limited military activities in space, had been agreed upon by U.S. and U.S.S.R. Dec. 8, 1966, and unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 1/28/67, 1; Frankel, NYT, 1/28/67, 1)
U.S.S.R. preferred “to wait for technical reasons” until its 11-62 aircraft was ready and thus was postponing first direct Moscow-New York flights until “later this year,” U.S. State Dept, announced. Commercial service by Aeroflot and Pan American World Airways had been scheduled to begin in late spring under Nov. 4, 1966, agreement. (AP, NYT, 6/14/67, 47)
nae announced establishment of an Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board to advise nasa and other Federal agencies. Board would operate under contract with nasa that estimated expenditures of $186,500 during first year of operation. Chairman was Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie Institute of Technology. Col. Robert J. Burger, Executive Secretary of Scientific Advisory Board, usaf Hq., would become Executive Director Aug. 1, following his retirement from usaf. Board’s first meeting would be held in Washington, D.C., in mid-July, (nae Release)
The 64th anniversary of first powered flights by Orville and Wilbur Wright from Kitty Hawk, N.C. Proclamation issued by President Johnson to commemorate their achievements cited “their inventive genius [which] revolutionized transportation, and gave rise to great new industries that have strengthened America’s defense and economy.” Igor I. Sikorsky, consulting engineer at United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA awarded 28 12-mo, $2,400 predoctoral training grants to Univ. of Pittsburgh for public administration and to Georgia Institute of Technology, Univ. of Kansas, Cornell Univ., Purdue Univ., and Stanford Univ. for engineering design, (nasa Special Releases)
France’s first variable-sweep-wing jet aircraft, the Mirage G, flew 1,500 mph in public debut at Istres, France, military airport. Dassault-built aircraft was world’s fourth variable-sweep-wing model and first built in Western Europe; others were American F—111, and Soviet Sukhoi and Mikoyan. {W Post, 12/21/67, A31)
The aerospace industry had a special responsibility to try to respond to the critical challenges posed by the Vietnam war and the urban riots, Robert Hotz suggested in Aviation Week. “Perhaps the aerospace industry has been so much absorbed in its traditional task of providing defense against external enemies that it has never given much thought to the contributions it can make to strengthen this nation internally. We submit that the events of this summer should stimulate the industry to take a long hard look in re-evaluating its role on the American scene and to make a bolder and more imaginative bid to offer its services to meet the new challenges of our times....” (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/31/67,11)
Rep. Theodore R. Kupferman (R-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, expressed concern about the “noise pollution problem” [see Feb. 1]. He quoted from a speech which he had presented on Sept. 12 to a luncheon meeting of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, held in Washington, D.C.: “It is possible to have noise control and industrial development without penalty to each other. . . . The idea that noise is a necessary price of industrial and economic progress is as antiquated as is the belief that contaminated waters and a polluted atmosphere must also accompany civilization’s material advances. . . . Noise pollution, however, unlike water and air pollution, is only now beginning to receive a proper share of public attention.” (CR, 9/27/67, H12606-13)
North American Aviation, Inc., merged with Rockwell-Standard Corp. to create North American Rockwell Corp. (North American Rockwell Corp. Release 092267)
Fifteen outstanding young scientists received Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) Postdoctoral Research Awards “for advanced study and fundamental research in the sciences.” Selections, made by a board of NAS-appointed senior scientists, were based on “demonstrated competence and creativity in original research and on the scientific merit of the proposed postdoctoral investigation.” (nas-NRC Release)
American Security Council (asc) released results of study prepared for House Armed Services Committee which concluded that U.S.S.R. would achieve a marked nuclear superiority over U.S. by 1971 unless steps were taken immediately to improve American strategic capabilities. Study, conducted by asc’s National Strategy Committee under chairmanship of former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), found that U.S. had “exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence” while U.S.S.R. “is driving hard toward a goal of overwhelming superiority. . . .” Report predicted that by 1971 U.S.S.R. would have a 30,000- to 50,000-mt nuclear delivery capability, contrasting with 6,000- to 15,000-mt for U.S., and recommended a rapid arms buildup or development of an antiballistic missile system. It warned that “by placing our sole reliance for deterrence on iCBMs, POLARIS and POSEIDON missiles, and the remaining manned bomber force . . . [U.S.] places itself in the dangerous position of having only one option left if it is faced with a Soviet ultimatum to surrender. It must either fire its offensive nuclear weapons or give up its sovereignty. An abm [Antiballistic Missile System] would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he is confronted with such a fateful decision, and it might stay the hand of an enemy at a critical moment. . . .” (Text; asc News) did not produce a nuclear reaction, (nasa Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/22/67, 11)
F-lll aircraft, under development by USAF and USN, was defended by Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown in letter to Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.), ranking member of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee: “There has never been and will never be a major development program that does not provide grist for the critic’s mill, and I say this without questioning either the sincerity of the critics or the utility of the function they perform.” He professed confidence in “comprehensive testimony” before congressional committees and asserted “the F-lll is the aircraft we want and need.” (CR, 10/9/67, S14445)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay (usaf, Ret.) resigned after two years as President of Air Force Historical Foundation. In accordance with Gen. LeMay’s recommendation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) was unanimously elected to replace him. b/g Monro MacCloskey (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Executive Director. (AFHF Newsletter, 12/67, 1)
usaf and usn issued statements supporting development of F-lll fighter aircraft as an all-purpose military aircraft. Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown: “The F—111A is designed to provide an all-weather strike potential superior to that of any tactical aircraft in the world today. It will fly faster, farther and carry a greater payload, nuclear or conventional, with an unexcelled capability to penetrate sophisticated enemy defenses. . . . We are confident from the level of performance already displayed in the very extensive flight tests performed on development aircraft that the operational F— 111 A will provide these vitally needed capabilities, and will meet the military requirements established for the aircraft at the inception of the program.” Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze: “. . . development of a system as complex as the F—lllB/Phoenix has produced sizeable engineering problems. I continue to be impressed with the manner in which they have been met and overcome. I have confidence that changes proposed by the Navy, approved by the Secretary of Defense and now being implemented, will make the F-111B suitable for operation from our first-line attack carriers and will give it the capabilities to perform its mission.” (CR, 4/17/67, S5300)
Many building blocks of life, “and possibly life itself,” may exist on Jupiter, arc scientists Dr. Cyril S. Ponnamperuma and Fritz Woeller suggested at American Chemical Society meeting in Miami. Using electrical discharges as an energy source the scientists had simulated activity of Jupiter’s upper atmosphere and produced numerous building blocks common to life on earth. They concluded that energy transfer and resulting chemical processes in Jupiter’s turbulent atmosphere— similar to processes believed to have produced life on earth—“may produce organic chemicals such as the forerunner compounds of amino acids and of the living cell nucleus.” (NASA Release 67-79; arc Release 67-4)
Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Roman Smoluchowski told annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York that huge amounts of energy emitted by Jupiter—three times the amount it received from the sun—could be accounted for by a gradual shrinking of the planet. Dr. Smoluchowski said that Jupiter was losing gravitational energy because it was shrinking about l/50th of an inch a year, and that it was this lost energy that it was emitting. Shrinkage was occurring, he reported, because liquid and solid molecular forms of hydrogen, which comprise planet’s outermost layer, were gradually being compressed into metallic hydrogen, which comprises the next innermost layer. Rate of compression, according to Dr. Smoluchowski’s calculations, would yield just the right amount of shrinkage to account for the observed amount of energy Jupiter emits. {NYT, 1/31/67, C52)
North American Aviation, Inc., and Rockwell-Standard Corp. announced agreement on proposal to merge into new corporation called North American Rockwell Corp. Proposal was subject to approval by directors and stockholders of each company. {WSJ, 3/23/67)
NASA Office—Downey at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant was disestablished and its functions transferred to MSC and MSFC, (NN1136)
President Johnson addressed International Conference on World Crisis in Education, Williamsburg, Va.: “. . . I would like to suggest . . . these challenges: How can we use what we already know about educational television to accelerate the pace of basic education for all the children of the world? How can we use modern technology to economize on that most essential and that most needed educational resource: the good teacher?” He added: “If future historians . , . seek, a name for this period in America, I hope they will give consideration to calling it the age of education. If our children’s children want to measure what we tried to achieve, I hope they will remember one thing: The American Government in only 3 years multiplied its commitment to education and to health four times over. Congress passed more laws and committed more funds to education and health in the last 3 years than in all previous history.” (PD, 10/16/67, 1419-23)
naa announced that Igor I. Sikorsky, popularly known as the father of the helicopter, had been selected to receive the 1967 Wright 'Brothers Memorial Trophy. Presentation would be made at the Dec. 14,1967, annual memorial dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA announced results from experiment with four “Yolo Wonder” pepper plants subjected to 45 hr of weightless flight aboard Biosatellite II (Sept. 7-9) to determine effects of space environment (weightlessness and radiation). Photographs made every 10 min (268 times) in 30 orbits appeared to demonstrate plants depend on gravity for their orientation. Plant leaves had failed to grow in normal, horizontal position, and stems had not held to the vertical position, even with supporting brackets. Disoriented condition of plants was observed when they were delivered to Dr. Samuel Johnson, principal investigator, North American Rockwell Corp. Further evidence of plants’ gravity dependence came from wheat seedlings aboard Biosatellite II; Dr. Charles Lyon of Dartmouth College experimented with 75 seedlings which, grown from seed in weightlessness, had roots curving upward toward seedling shoots and out to the side, (nasa Release 67—279)
United Air Lines President George E. Keck, in a speech before International Aviation Club in Washington, D.C., echoed similar pleas by executives of Pan Am and TWA in calling for “expeditious £ut orderly” advancement of U.S. sst program. Although sst “is a pretty real one on the drawing boards,” Keck said there were “certainly some important decisions and actions that have to be taken here to make it a reality.” Among these, determination of a “sound, reasonable” financing plan was of paramount importance. (NYT, 1/22/67,50)
Safety of combat air crews in Southeast Asia would be greatly improved by application of a new material (polyurethane foam) first used on the Indianapolis speedway, asfc’s engineers had successfully adapted the foam, which would be installed in the fuel tanks of combat aircraft in Vietnam. Under an Air Force contract, the Monsanto Research Corp., Dayton, Ohio, confirmed compatibility of the foam with military aircraft fuels. It would virtually prevent explosion in a direct hit on the fuel tank by machine gun tracer bullets or other incendiaries and would suppress slosh in the fuel tanks during flight, (afsc Release 158.67)
Sun’s illumination of a missile’s shock wave had caused strange aerial phenomenon seen throughout southwestern U.S. Jan. 17, usaf officials at Vandenberg afb reported. (AP, NYT, 1/19/67)
United Aircraft Corp. turbotrain, powered by gas turbine engine similar to those used in jet aircraft, reached 170 mph during test run in New Jersey, setting new speed record for passenger train in U.S. Train, designed for future passenger service between Boston and New York City, would be operated by New Haven Railroad under DOT contract. (W Post, 12/21/67, A7)
m/g Alvin R. Luedecke (usaf, Ret.), Deputy Director of JPL, resigned He had come to JPL on Aug. 1, 1964, after five years as general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission and 25 years as an Air Force officer. (JPL Lab-Oratory, Sept. 67)
l/g James H. Doolittle (AFRes., Ret.) received the Sixth Annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award at Air Force Academy ceremonies in Denver. An aviation pioneer and Medal of Honor holder, General Doolittle was cited for making “outstanding contributions to the national defense and security . . . [and giving] a lifetime of leadership to military and civil aviation.” (Denver Post, 5/14/67, 32)
Dr. Marshall L. Rosenbluth, Univ. of California at San Diego, was selected to receive Princeton Univ. Institute for Advanced Study’s $5,000 Albert Einstein Award for 1967 for his “outstanding contributions in the area of plasma physics.” Selection of Dr. Rosenbluth, who helped develop the hydrogen bomb, was announced by Dr. Carl Kaysen, Director of the Institute. (AP, W Post, 3/14/67, A9)
Designs of both American SST and Anglo-French Concorde would have to be modified to meet standards proposed by their potential customers, International Air Transport Assn, (lata) Director General Knut Ham-marskjold asserted. He advised that aircraft be modified to meet all of the organization’s requirements, even if it meant postponing delivery date. The Wall Street Journal later commented: “Since iata’s members include most of the world’s major airlines . . . Mr. Hammarskjold’s words plainly deserve attention. . . . [He] appears to have shot a large hole in the SST supporters’ main argument for haste. It is that the British and French are already well ahead of the U.S. . . . Calm consideration would appear even more mandatory for the Government, saddled as it is with a war and a budget whose income side long ago since has lost touch with outgo. ... A late blooming success is far better than a dismal early failure.” (upi, NYT, 1/11/67, 73; WSJ, 1/17/67, 18)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. a $1.8-billion fixed-price-incentive contract for production of 493 F-lll aircraft: 331 F-lllAs for usaf; 64 F-lll strategic bombers for sac; 24 F-lllBs for usn; 24 F-lllCs for Royal Australian Air Force; and 50 F-lllKs for British Royal Air Force. Contract included only costs of basic airframes and minor electronic equipment; additional costs for engines, major electronic equipment, and modifications had not yet been fully determined and were not included. There was speculation that congressional opposition to adaptation of F—111 (formerly tfx) as an all-purpose military aircraft—heightened by large increases in estimated costs and by January and April crashes of usaf and usn test models—might delay appropriation of production funds, (dod Release 427-67; Wilson, W Post, 5/11/ 67, Hll; Sheehan, NYT, 5/11/67,1)
U.S. should move its technology beyond the “building blocks” to break out of the “mental strait] acket which is confining the Nation to a stalemate of defeatism,” recommended a policy statement adopted by Air Force Assn., at meeting in San Francisco. Asserting that U.S.S.R. was “far ahead” of U.S. in a critical area of nuclear knowledge, afa called for a “sweeping re-examination of national strategy” to assess the impact of technology “on the world balance of power.” In a specific resolution, afa urged a full-scale U.S. SST program, claiming that U.S.S.R. had been secretly flying a supersonic aircraft prototype for “more than one year.” (Davies, NYT, 3/16/67,10; WPost, 3/17/67, A4) Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader at aec’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, said U.S. reluctance to deploy an antiballistic missile system reflected a new balance-of-power concept which was characterized by weapons judged on their contributions to world stability rather than their superiority. This philosophy was dangerous because it stifled innovation and placed the Nation continually on the defensive. “Whether we use our full technological advantage should be determined solely on whether it is to our advantage politically, militarily and economically as far as our adversary is concerned. I believe it has been a mistake to allow the fleeting opinions of every nation that has a vote in the U.N. to influence materially our actions. The inhibition of the use of our full technological advantage has hurt our technological future as well as prolonging whatever confrontation is at hand. The basis of advanced technology is innovation, and nothing is more stifling to innovation than seeing one’s product not used or ruled out of consideration on flimsy premises involving public or world opinion. . . .” (Av Wk, 3/27/67, n) . ..	.
usaf successfully launched experimental aerodynamically shaped warhead from Vandenberg afb aboard an Atlas icbm to test reentry characteristics. (AP, St. Louis PD, 2/14/67,17)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C., for “leadership in the development and establishment of . . . [dot] and for his long and successful career in . . . air transportation and public utilities.” (nac; Av Wk, 6/12/67, 23)
Atlas-F carrying unidentified payload exploded shortly after launch by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (SBD, 10/30/67,316)
Washington Daily News editorial warned that U.S. eagerness to sign space law treaty—under consideration in Senate since Feb. 7—might be costly: “Since the risks of Soviet deception are so great, it seems unwise to have accepted the Russian-proposed no-inspection honor system. . . . Since there is no provision for a check on space activity, the Soviet Union could push ahead with a variety of secret military programs in space while publicly attacking the right of the U.S. to an American military defense program in space. . . . Since the U.S. is an open society, any U.S. space defense program would be known. Since the Soviet society is closed, Moscow might well be able to keep its programs secret. “The loose way in which this space treaty was written was due in part to the Administration’s eagerness to get a treaty in hand. But that looseness could lead the U.S. into a trap.” (Cromley, W News, 4/11/67, 12) Ford Foundation consultant Fred W. Friendly said he would oppose any long-range design that relied on Treasury Dept, appropriations to produce news and public affairs programming because such funds would be subject to annual review by Congress. Instead, he suggested, news and public affairs should be underwritten from private funds—preferably out of savings from a non-profit comsat system that would employ income from commercial programs to help meet educational television’s overhead. Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., chairman of Carnegie Commission on Educational Television, urged revision of the proposed legislation so that the Corporation would have continuing responsibility for program selection to ensure freedom “from the centralization and rigidity of a network system” and to protect autonomy of local stations. net President John R. White argued that the Corporation’s role should be limited to matters of “high policy” and that operational activities, including the choice of programs to be carried on a network, should he subcontracted to other entities. The Corporation, he said, would not be able to make informed decisions until the programs had been submitted for national distribution. (Gould, NYT, 4/12/67, 79 ; 4/13/67, 75; 4/14/67, 67)
Claude Witze, in Air Force and Space Digest, claimed that usaf pilots testing F—111 A were enthusiastic about the aircraft’s potential. “These . . . pilots consider the F-111A weapon system the greatest single technological jump designed for their mission since the wedding of the jet engine and modern avionics. The F-111A, they predict, will let them hit tactical targets harder, with greater accuracy, and at longer ranges than any other airplane. . . .” Accelerated F-lllA testing and training program begun at Nellis afb, Nev., in July had accumulated encouraging statistics, he said: “By September, the new wing had set an unprecedented record. During that month, the five planes flew a total of 304.1 hours, an average utilization rate of 60.8 hours per aircraft. In October, the month in which the first production model was delivered ... it was 59.7 hours per aircraft. The stated requirement for the F— 111 A is thirty hours per aircraft. The best previous records set at Nellis on other aircraft have been in the area of thirty-eight hours a month per aircraft... with systems far less complex than those of the F-lllA.” In addition, he noted, F-lllA had set “an extraordinary record for safety. Far fewer aircraft have been lost than usaf experienced in previous similar programs.” (AF/SD, 12/67,45-55; CR, 12/5/67, S1788-90)
France and U.K. did not believe Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would be forced out of the world market by U.S. SST in 1974, Sir George Edwards, chairman of an Anglo-French management organization for the Concorde, told the Washington, D.C., Aero Club. One distinct selling advantage for the Concorde was its price—about $16,000,000, compared to an estimated $40,000,000 for sst. He predicted 150 Concordes would be sold by 1975 and about 40-50 per year after that date. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/26/67)
U.S.S.R. team to study UFO (unidentified flying object) sightings would consist of 18 scientists and Air Force officers supported by 1,000 field observers, Time reported [see Nov. 30]. Flurry of UFO sightings had been reported in recent weeks by presumably reliable Aeroflot and military pilots, who usually described them as sickle-shaped. {Time, 12/22/67,21)
usaf successfully launched Titan II icbm from Vandenberg afb toward target in the Pacific, (upi, W Post, 4/13/67, A22)
Soviet jet transport, 11-62, carrying delegation of Soviet aviation experts who would negotiate final technical details of proposed Moscow-New York'air link with faa, landed at Dulles International Airport after 11-hr flight from Moscow to Washington. As a result of increasing complaints about jet noise and faa’s lack of authority to regulate it, Port Authority of New York had insisted that noise measurement tests be made on 11-62 at Dulles before initiation of direct Moscow-to-New York flights. New York Port Authority had done pioneering work on noise problem. Operational safety of 11-62 and alternate landing sites at Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, and Boston had already been approved by faa for joint use by Pan American Airways and Aeroflot, official Soviet airline. (Hoffman, W Post, 11/21/67, A4; B Sun, 11/21/67, A8)
U.S. Government would receive in royalties more than the estimated $1.3 billion it was contributing to sst development, ata President Stuart G. Tipton told the Aero Club of Washington (D.C.): “The government ' investment is to be paid back with the 300th delivery. The manufacturer will thus pay royalties of 4.3 to 6.7 million dollars for each aircraft delivered. . . . Since these royalties are to continue for a 15-year period, they will go on well beyond the 300th delivery, and this phase of royalty payment will produce a return on the government investment comparable to levels normally received by industry.” (Text)
U.S. should develop a 5,000-mph commercial aircraft and a 8,000-mph bomber, Dr. Antonio Ferri, Director of New York Univ.’s Guggenheim Aerospace Laboratories, told aiaa luncheon meeting in Washington, D.C. “Civilization has grown with the speed of moving around. The history of civilization shows that gradually you want to get in contact with people further away.” Dr. Ferri noted that jet aircraft had made Europe accessible, and the next generation of aircraft would bring other parts of the world within equally easy reach. He concluded that the technology and the “tremendous opportunities” of hypersonic aircraft were near at hand, but that necessary decisions and funds were still lacking. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/67,16)
An Army Pershing ballistic missile fired from Utah by U.S. troops overshot the White Sands Missile Range and smashed into the Mexican countryside. The Mexican government gave permission for a U.S. helicopter to cross the Rio Grande to look for it. No injuries or property damage were reported. The test firings had been part of an annual training for West German Air Force personnel and U.S. troops based in Europe. The Utah-to-New Mexico range had been used because there was no range large enough in Europe. (W Post, 9/13/67)
Two ten-week programs for college faculty members—administered jointly by Auburn Univ., Univ. of Alabama, and msfc—opened at msfc. First program would be summer institute in space-related sciences, sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education (asee) , and would be conducted by Univ. of Alabama. (Five other summer institutes, sponsored by NASA and asee, would be conducted by NASA centers and nearby colleges at msc, GSFC, arc, LaRC, and LeRC.) Second ten-week program, administered by Auburn Univ., would be 1967 NASA Engineering Systems Design Summer Faculty Fellowship Program, (msfc Release 67-124)
The Washington Post commented on the death of Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner: “In every generation there are a few men whose personal careers reflect with precision the great changes that have come over the country in their lifetime. Lloyd Viel Berkner built his first radio transmitter as a schoolboy in Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, and in 1928 he joined an expedition to the South Pole. Three decades later he emerged as one of the most effective advocates of American exploration in space. “In those years American science had become a vast interwoven fabric of academic and Federal laboratories, foundations and private corporations, civilian operations and military operations. Mr. Berkner moved in this world, which he had signally helped to create, not only as a scientist of distinction but as an organizer and manager of extraordinary force and capacity. . . (W Post, 6/5/67)
Commercial applications of a miniaturized TV aerial developed by usaf after four years of research were being explored by at least 100 electronic companies, Jack Gould reported in the New York Times. Firms believed device, originally developed for military communications, might accommodate public preference for small antennas without sacrificing picture quality. Inventor Edwin M. Turner, attached to the Air Force at Wright-Patterson afb, told the press that the “heart” of the miniaturized antenna was the use of transistors. (Gould, NYT, 8/12/67, 27)
One-inch-diameter hollow steel spheres for use in aerospace ballbearing assemblies were being tested at Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB. Hollow spheres were half as heavy and equally as strong as solid ones currently used, had longer life expectancy, and could easily be mass produced, (afsc Release 44.67)
Negotiations were being conducted in Washington, D.C., to move Canada’s High Altitude Research Project (harp) from McGill Univ. to Univ. of Vermont, Jay Walz reported in the New York Times. Move was a result of Canada’s decision to cut off funding because it believed program should be self-supporting, harp, which maintained a launch site in Highwater, Quebec, near the Vermont border, used 16-in naval guns to launch payloads inexpensively into the ionosphere for scientific and meteorological experiments. Project, which received about $1.2 million annually from U.S. Army, employed 50 persons at McGill Univ., 70 at Highwater, and 60 at a launch site in Barbados, West Indies. (Walz, NYT, 8/20/67,20)
Cornell Univ. professor Hans A. Bethe, director of Los Alamos Atomic Weapons Laboratory’s theoretical physics section during development of atomic bomb and recipient of aec’s 1961 Enrico Fermi Award, was awarded the 1967 Nobel Prize in physics for proving that the sun and other stars produced energy through synthesis of helium from hydrogen. He was cited specifically for “his contributions to the theory of nuclear reaction, especially his discoveries concerning the energy production of stars.” Nobel Prize in chemistry was presented jointly to George Porter and Ronald G. W. Norrish of U.K. and Manfred Eigen of West Germany for their studies of extremely fast chemical reactions occurring at speeds of one-one-thousandth of a millionth of a second. Nobel Peace Prize was withheld for second consecutive year, (upi, W Star, 10/30/67, 1; Wiskari, NYT, 10/31/67,1)
Aquanauts diving to extremely low ocean depths should breathe almost pure hydrogen in their diving suits, Dr. R. W. Brauer of Wrightsville Marine Bio-Medical Laboratory suggested at Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology in Chicago. Dr. Brauer planned to subject himself to such an atmosphere—98% hydrogen and 2% oxygen—at a pressure equivalent to 700- or 800-ft depth within the next six months. Divers long ago passed the depth limits that were feasible with compressed air and were now approaching the probable safe limits with an atmosphere in which helium was the major ingredient, Dr. Brauer said. Yet oil drilling, prospecting operations, and other undersea activities were pushing divers to further depths which required new types of atmosphere and, possibly, drugs to modify the narcotic effects produced by the high pressure air. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/23/67, 60)
Continuing shortage of physicists was threatening the Nation’s scientific progress, American Institute of Physics warned in its biennial report on physics manpower. Study, prepared under an NSF grant, said U.S. colleges and universities were not producing enough graduates to meet growing demand of education, research, and industry. In recent years— during a time of rapid growth in total college enrollment—there had been a continuing decline in the number of physics majors and a leveling off of physics baccalaureate degrees awarded. (NYT, 1/29/67, 1)
F-5 supersonic fighter aircraft manufactured by Northrop Co. could be sold to Latin American governments, Covey T. Oliver, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was reported to have told key members of Congress. Because of shortage of pilots, facilities, and financial resources, only five nations would be interested—Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Venezuela. Initial congressional reaction was reported favorable, the decision being displayed as no change in U.S. policy. State Dept, informants, however, conceded that recent reports of Peru’s negotiations with France on purchase of 12 Mirage V jet fighters had a major effect in hastening DOD’s and State Dept.’s action. (Welles, NYT, 10/18/67, 1)
afosr Director of Information Sciences Dr. Harold Wooster, writing on “Basic Research and the Department of Defense,” presented his appraisal of what basic research is and why it is a benefit when Government funds support basic research. He stated that the Government had spent $2.1 billion on basic research in FY 1967 while American industry was spending $607 million. Wooster believed that basic research and its results transcend state and national boundaries, and that there were “certain large research tools and facilities” which were too expensive for private industry, or any state or combination of states to build. As an example, he pointed to the National Magnet Laboratory at mit: “This Laboratory is a national resource already making important direct applied contributions to the defense effort. It would have been impossible to build without Federal financing.” (afosr Res Rev, 10/67, 1-9)	.	.
Aircraft flown by pilots “lacking professional ability”—usually those in general aviation—were responsible for most air accidents, according to study by Cornell Univ-.’s Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Aviation Center. Fatalities involving general aviation aircraft in 1966 in U.S. totaled 1,069, compared with a loss of 59 passengers by scheduled domestic airlines, the. study noted. “It is apparently futile to try to persuade the majority of pilots to secure and maintain instrument proficiency. ... It would seem more effective to attack the problem of requiring manufacturers to incorporate better aircraft stability and controllability characteristics. . . .” Other methods suggested to improve air safety included: (1) raising airport standards by improving lighting and increasing landing aids, anti-collision devices, and weather data, accuracy; (2) reviewing pilot certification procedures and incorporating more “human factors” into aircraft design; and (3) intensifying methods of crash fire protection and reevaluating emergency evacuation procedures. (NYT, 6/15/67, 81)
NASA’s total procurement in FY 1967 fell to $4,651 billion—8% below FY 1966—and procurement actions dropped to 283,000—11% less than FY 1966—because of budget reductions, Aerospace Technology reported. NASA’s “Annual Procurement Report, Fiscal Year 1967” disclosed that 83% of net dollar value went directly to business firms; 4% to education and other nonprofit institutions; 5% to Cal Tech for operating jpl; and 8% to other Government agencies. NASA continued its policy of making greater use of incentive contracts, awarding 81 new incentive contracts and converting 11 cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts to incentive awards during FY 1967. North American Rockwell Corp. led in dollar amount of NASA awards, receiving 25.46% of total. (Aero Tech, 12/4/67, 46)
Current faa r&d programs were discussed by faa at its first annual “Report to Industry” meeting in Washington, D.C. Meeting was designed to keep aviation public informed of R&D programs which would result in new elements in the National Airspace System, (faa Release 67-8)
Number of mid-air aircraft collisions could be reduced “if pilots accept the idea that the plane can be quicker than the eye,” Lockheed Aircraft Co. aviation psychologist Dr. Earl J. Ends said in a Washington, D.C., interview. According to his calculations based on ideal conditions: “A pilot flying 600 miles an hour will travel 88 feet from the time his eye spots an oncoming plane until the message is relayed to the brain. By the time the brain interprets the message, the plane has flown 920 feet. When the pilot decides to climb, descend or turn, he has already covered 2,680 feet. And by the time he carries out his decision the plane has covered 4,792 feet. Put another way, one of the pilots would have to see the other plane 9,548 feet away before he could change course to avoid a collision, (upi, NYT, 4/13/67, 74)
U.S.S.R.’s May Day Parade was transmitted across U.S. for broadcast in Japan, but was not televised on American networks. The 1%-hr program, transmitted through the cooperation of ComSatCorp and U.S.S.R., originated live in Moscow and was picked up by Early Bird I over the Atlantic; relayed across U.S. by Andover, Me., and Brewster Flat, Wash., ground stations; and transmitted across Pacific via Intelsat II for viewing in Tokyo. Japan paid approximately $30,000 for broadcast and transmission services. (Birger, M News, 5/5/67; ComSatCorp)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Nuclear Safeguards Subcommittee, reported from Senate floor that “Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty safeguards [were] being supported and implemented in a satisfactory manner.” He said that recent Soviet and Chinese missile and nuclear developments had formed “serious challenge to the strategic superiority of U.S. power on which our defense planners have counted to maintain political stability and to keep the peace.” Sen. Jackson listed two prime requirements to maintain U.S. strategic superiority. First would be strategic offensive capability to penetrate Soviet abm defenses using new generations of land-based icbms and nuclear submarines with better missiles and using MIRVs. Second requirement would be the best ABM defense to protect U.S. retaliatory second-strike force, to safeguard American people, and to account for allies’ needs. He cited seriousness of Soviet’s doubling icbms, developing orbital nuclear bombs, and deploying abm system around Moscow, especially when combined with growing Communist Chinese nuclear threat. (Text)
m/g Vincent G. Huston, former Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and recipient of NASA Leadership Medal, became Commander of afsc’s National Range Div. He succeeded l/g Leighton I. Davis, who became Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces in Washington, D.C. (afsc Release 103.67)
On presentation of Distinguished Service Medal to l/g Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell cited him for outstanding management of range support of U.S. ballistic missile and space vehicle programs and as dod Manager for Manned Space Flight Support Operations—specifically, Projects Mercury and Gemini. Davis had been Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and National Range Div. from May 1960 through June 1967. (afsc Release 140.67)
Boeing Co. would spend $165 million and General Electric Co. $65 million in Phase III (prototype construction) of SST program, m/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf), faa Director of Supersonic Transport Development, told American Marketing Assn., in Los Angeles. Total cost of Phase III work was estimated at $1.1 billion; most of the difference would be supplied by Government and the small remainder by several U.S. airlines. Boeing and GE contracts would not be effective until President Johnson’s authorization to begin Phase III. (Reddig, Jr., W Star, 2/16/67, A17; WSI, 2/16/67,4)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at msc, received the Spirit of St. Louis medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme) meeting in Cocoa Beach, Fla. He was cited for his “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics.” (NYT, 7/19/ 67, 32)
Pilot performing with the French Patrol, the aerobatic team of the French Air Force, was killed when his jet aircraft crashed and burst into flames during final aerial display at the Paris International Air and Space Show. Aircraft failed to pull out of a dive, bounced along the airfield, and then exploded about 100 yds from the grandstand, injuring several spectators. (.NYT, 6/6/67, 77M)	_
Turbulence-measuring device developed at U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla., might be used by U.S. airports in 1968 to guide commercial airline pilots through severe and moderate turbulence areas, Martin Waldron reported in New York Times. Device measured severity of thunderstorms by analyzing and averaging radar pulses reflected from cells within the storm and then registered cloud structure on a radar scope. Data were relayed to pilots by flight controllers on the ground. Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau’s radar systems section Stewart Bigler said a refined version of the device had been installed at Washington, D.C., National Airport in January and would be tested in June. If it performed satisfactorily, similar devices would be installed in other U.S. airports in 1968. (Waldron, NYT, 5/4/67,51)
m/g Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.), oldest U.S. military pilot and first American to fly in combat, died at age 87 at Andrews afb, Md. A member of USA since 1898, General Foulois had been first person to operate an Army dirigible; first military observer on a cross-country flight (with Orville Wright); first military man to teach himself to fly; first military test pilot; first man to fly more than 100 mi nonstop; first man to use an aircraft in combat; and first Chief of Staff of the Army Air Corps to be a military aviator. He had received five campaign badges for field services, in addition to the Distinguished Service Medal, the French Legion of Honor, the Crown of Italy, and the Congressional Medal of Recognition. (upi, NYT, 4/26/67, 43; Casey, W Post, 4/26/67, B8)
North American Air Defense Command (norad ) announced officially that no flying saucers, no extraterrestrial spacecraft, and no “unfriendly objects” had ever been identified by air forces over U.S. or Canada: “There have been thousands of reports about official air force stands on UFOs from the widest variety of sources over the years-—but so far as the command is aware, it never has been shown anything but natural atmospheric or astronomical phenomena or airborne objects—birds, insects, hardware—seen under unusual circumstances, or misinterpreted.” (Thomis, C Trib, 8/18/67,1)
Thomas O’Toole, writing in the Washington Post, reviewed nasa’s “growing role in the Vietnam war.” Both NASA and dod were reluctant to disclose the size of NASA’s defense effort, he charged, “but it’s known that [oart] is spending between $4 million and $5 million a year directing the efforts of 100 scientists and engineers to tasks vital to the Vietnam war.” Results of NASA research, he said, included a new acoustic detector able to locate mortars by measuring ground vibrations, a more-steerable parachute, aircraft engines too quiet to be heard during approach, a scissors-like sling for helicopter rescues, and a helicopter which did not make a chopper noise. Although NASA willingly participated in defense research, its authorization to do so was “fuzzy,” he said, based only on a section of the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act which directed NASA to make available to defense organizations “discoveries that have military value or significance.” NASA was “nervous” about its military role, he asserted, because of its unclear authorization, fear of congressional inquiry, and fear of international reaction. Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) later attacked O’Toole’s article on the Senate floor: “One might expect that if ... a story of this sort were to be dug up, the article would express gratification that the taxpayer’s money was being used on behalf of the American people . . . [and not purport to be] shocked that NASA projects help our national objective. ... I am firmly of the conviction that anything that can be developed technically to save a single American life in Vietnam, especially by any individual or organization that is being paid by American taxpayers, belongs freely to our soldiers. . . . “The article is obviously a patently calculated leak. The informed details it provides on NASA’s research and technical work proves this. . . . This is a shocking thing, that is not a matter of press freedom, or even of press license, but plain aid and comfort to the enemy. . . . Publishers and editors should accept their responsibility to prevent such . . . news coverage and to prevent, too, the violation of security classifications on subjects that involve adversely the preservation of the lives of American fighting men.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/67, Al ; NASA lar VI/128)
The New York Times called for fuller and more open debate on cost and consequences of SST program: “The sst’s priority is debatable and so is its financing. The industry may be right in asserting that the costs of development are so huge that no company can afford to take the risk on its own. It points out that the backing of both Britain and France has been required to launch the Concorde. But if the combined efforts of two countries and their aircraft industries are needed for that much less ambitious project, the American sst might be more safely and soundly developed if it commanded the combined resources of the entire American industry and the Government. “What is at stake is not the commitment to proceed with the sst. That decision has been made and cannot—and should not—be reversed. But if the sst is to be sound economically as well as technologically, the Administration and the industry must be less secretive and indefinite about the costs and how they are to be financed. An open debate is needed on how to get the most for the taxpayers’ money.” (NYT, 1/2/67,18)
James Smith McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., received National Academy of Engineering’s second Founders Medal at NAE’s third Annual Meeting in Washington, D.C. Medal honored “outstanding contributions by an engineer both to his profession and to society.” (nae Release)
President Johnson, in a White House ceremony, presented m/g James W. Humphreys, Jr., of the Air Force Medical Corps, the Distinguished Service Medal for helping to develop “a national medical program for the Vietnamese people.” General Humphreys would become Director of Space Medicine, OMSF, June 1. (PD, 5/29/67, 778; W Post, 5/25/67)
Dr. Louis B. Amoldi, former Command Surgeon of Air Force Logistics Command, had been named nasa Director of Occupational Medicine, succeeding Dr. Harold H. Stoddard, who resigned, (nasa Release 67-45)
Soviet mathematician Dr. Alex M. Letov, visiting Huntsville for the Guidance, Control, and Flight Dynamics Conference sponsored by Alabama chapter of the aiaa, said he supported the exchange of technical information between U.S. and U.S.S.R. After delivering an important technical paper, Letov remarked: “I am hopeful that I may have initiated some steps in this area of exchange. I am completely satisfied with my presentation and the response of the American scientist. In my report I will reflect this.” One of the world’s leading authorities on spacecraft guidance and control, Letov outlined a complex theory for stabilizing a large manned spacecraft, which he considered a major problem. “You can’t consider die other problems of engineering if your system is not stable. It must be stable.” (KC Star, 8/15/67)
U.S. scientists’ interest in military research had declined substantially, Bryce Nelson wrote in Science: “Since the beginning of the Second World War, many American scientists have regarded it as a duty to work on military research in times of national emergency and have often done so with enthusiasm. However . . . many scientists now seem to show little feeling of obligation to do military research.” Suggested reasons for lack of interest: (1) disagreement with U.S. policy in Vietnam; (2) boredom with defense problems; (3) higher salaries in private industry than in dod; and (4) increased interest in civilian problems such as urban development, poverty, and transportation. (Nelson, Science, 4/21/61, 24)
Editorial comment on authorization for sst prototype construction [see April 29]: Washington Post: “President Johnson made the right decision in requesting that Congress appropriate Federal funds for the development of the supersonic transport plane. . . . But in proposing what it calls ‘a creative partnership between our Government and American industry,’ the Administration should provide more adequate protection for the taxpayer who will bear a substantial share of the development costs. “Why should not the taxpayers, who are to provide about 25 per cent of the capital required, be permitted to share proportionately in the enormous profits that would be earned by a successful SST? Although it is necessary to launch the sst project with the shortest possible delay, Congress should be concerned with a more adequate protection of the public interest.” (W Post, 5/1/67) World Journal Tribune: “Actually, the basis of the SST project is coldly commercial. At stake is not some vague blue ribbon of achievement but American leadership in the highly profitable business of supplying planes to the world’s airlines. “sst, by its size, speed and sonic boom, will cause a number of pro'blems which have not yet been solved. But it was inevitable that this country should enter the supersonic race—not for national pride or out of scientific curiosity, but as a matter of good business. “The international plane market is too good for America to let it go by default.” (WJT, 5/4/67,22) New York Times: “Mr. Johnson acknowledged that the building of an American sst ‘carries high technical and financial risks.’ Yet in his anxiety to get on with the job he has increased the potential hazards to the taxpayer. . . . “Congress has a responsibility to establish guidelines to keep the Administration’s investment in the sst from getting out of hand. It should see to it that the Government does not write any blank checks and become overly involved in what is supposed to he a commercial venture. And industry, too, should recognize that if it asks Washington to shoulder the costs, then Washington may well end up running the entire operation.” (NYT, 5/2/67,43)	_	_
American Helicopter Society, meeting in Washington, D.C., presented the Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Avco Corp. executive Dr. Anselm Franz for “leading the development of a noteworthy series of gas turbine engines for helicopters and other VTOL aircraft. . . .” (Av Wk, 5/29/67, 55)	_
frc had awarded 15-mo, $8.9-million contract to North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), for maintenance and support of XB—70 supersonic research aircraft. As under previous support contracts, NAA would provide manpower, facilities, material, and equipment to support flight operations and would conduct data reduction. Overall management of XB—70 program was assigned to frc under March 15 NASA—usaf agreement, (nasa Release 67-75)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd outlined major goals of Dept. of Transportation (dot) at ceremony in Washington, D.C., marking its first official operating day. DOT would (1) “insist that all forms of transportation become safer and more reliable for the user” and make increased effort to meet transportation needs of the physically handicapped; (2) strive for increased intermodal efficiency through promotion of integrated systems; (3) explore new possibilities to help transportation advance technologically and keep pace with progress of American industry; (4) encourage transportation industry in a selective expansion program for the domestic market; (5) seek ways for transportation to assist economic development of underdeveloped areas; and (6) make more positive contribution to urban development and quality of urban mass transit service. “At the very least, this Department must work to make transportation more efficient, more economical, more expeditious, and more socially responsible. . . . America, today, has the best transportation system of any nation in the world. But it does have its faults. It can be, it must be substantially improved.” (Text)
Special nsf panel to screen radio astronomy proposals advised nsf Director Leland J. Haworth to accept immediately only two of the six recommendations presented to the panel during July hearings: (1) Cornell
Single global time zone would be advantageous with the speed of communications and transportation in the space age, ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffee told the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C. “We are almost approaching the point where the remaining obstacle to global business, aside from the political problems, will be the zonal time differences. “At the moment time differences are aggravations to the total realization of our new-found communications and transportation capabilities, but not complete deterrents. . . . Today, if it is important enough, we make allowances for and tolerate time differences—tomorrow we may have to do something about [them] . . . because as our business and cultural patterns change in this space era, these time differences will become intolerable. “. . . the space age has already contributed the concept of ‘one world-one time.’ By creating a common time and acceptance of a day not geared to the rising and setting of the Sun, we may be able to extend this to an acceptance of ‘one day’ consisting of 24 hours . . . during which we will make optimum use of our roads, our schools, our factories, our communications and transportation facilities . . . [with] 3-shift use . . . [so that] current facilities could handle three times as many people.” (Text)
President Johnson called for more Inter-American cooperation at conference of Latin American leaders in Punta del Este, Uruguay. U.S., he said, would aid Latin American development by (1) helping to develop a new common market; (2) contributing additional funds to Inter-American Bank for “special operations” such as construction of comsat earth stations; (3) exploring possibility of temporary preferential tariff; (4) offering agricultural and educational assistance; (5) increasing food program for pre-school and school-age children and operating a nutrition demonstration project; (6) establishing Alliance for Progress centers at U.S. colleges and universities; and (7) aiding development of science and technology, especially in areas of educational broadcasting, marine science, and atomic energy. (PD, 4/24/67, 636)
The Soviet Anti-Ballistic Missile (abm) System: a Survey of Soviet Strategic Doctrine, Arguments on Deployment, Intentions and Fulfillment, American Reaction and Implications,” Library of Congress document F-239, evaluated the dangers for Soviet abm deployment. Author, Specialist in Soviet and Eastern Europe Affairs Joseph G. Whelan, summarized present state of affairs, noting Russia’s historic preoccupation with the defensive and her clear intent not to accept permanently a second position to the U.S. Whelan quoted from Feb. 23, 1967, speech of Presidential adviser Walt W. Rostow at Univ. of Leeds, Great Britain: “We are all actively trying to find the terms for a non-proliferation agreement; and the emergence of [abm defense] for Moscow has posed for the United States and the Soviet Union the question of whether the nuclear arms race shall be brought under control or go into a vast and expensive round of escalation on both sides with respect to both offensive and defensive weapons.” (Text)
