Flight of Soviet heavy turboprop Bear aircraft had made most southern penetration over North American waters, coming close to Newfoundland coast in early February, Charles W. Corddry reported in Baltimore Sun. According to DOD officials, flight was closest to date but was not first; several Soviet aircraft had been detected 75—100 mi from Newfoundland coast since January. (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/68,1)
New York Times editorial said first flight tests of Multiple Independently Targetable Reentry Vehicle (mirv) and prototype missile carriers Poseidon and Minuteman III had taken U.S. “into a new nuclear arms race—with itself. The critical question now is whether the Soviet Union will feel sufficiently challenged to run along. Future generations undoubtedly will look back with disbelief at the way the United States again has invented, publicized and tested a deadly new weapon which, instead of improving American security, creates an added threat to it by putting the Soviet Union under pressure to produce the same weapon and aim it at the United States.” (NYT, 8/17/68, 26)
usaf launched experimental Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, W Post, 11/25/68, 9)
President Johnson announced resignation of Leonard H. Marks as Director of U.S. Information Agency in time to head U.S. delegation to negotiate permanent arrangements for INTELSAT at February 1969 conference in Washington, D.C. (PD, 10/7/68, 1433; Halloran, W Post, 10/2/68, A8; AP, NYT, 10/2/68,23)
Australian Air Force was sending technical team to U.S. to investigate airworthiness of F—111 aircraft. Australian government had ordered 24 F—Ills in 1963 for estimated $112 million. Cost had already increased to $266 million, and additional increases were expected. Delivery would be refused until Australia was satisfied mechanical faults had been eliminated. (NY Post, 5/20/68,21)
New York Times editorial urged congressional passage of legislation to ban sonic booms: “While technical and budgetary difficulties have slowed development of an American supersonic aircraft, the British and French are progressing with their joint-venture model. It is important to have some protection on the law books before the booms come crashing down on the nation’s ears. . . . Developers . . . say they ‘assume’ it will fly at supersonic speed only over water but this is too important an issue to be left to anyone’s assumption.” (NYT, 5/16/68, 46; 5/25/68, 32)
National Sporting Aviation Council, formed Feb. 16, adopted official charter at first meeting held in Washington, D.C., affirming its original mission to promote progress and development of all forms of sport aviation in U.S. through National Aeronautic Assn, and worldwide through Federation Aeronautique Internationale, (naa News)
Jet flying belt designed to propel wearer for minutes over multimile range at speeds from hovering to 70 mph and at varying altitudes was described by manufacturer, Bell Aerosystems Co., at Washington, D.C., press briefing. Miniature turbojet engine using kerosene fuel was designed by Williams Research Corp. for dod Advanced Research Projects Agency. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/28/68, 18)
DOD announced second $1 -million installment on contracts for design of Navy vfx, substitute aircraft for F—111B, held by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., General Dynamics Corp., LTV Aerospace Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 19]. Five contractors would eventually get $3 million each under contract definition phase to end Oct. 1. (dod Press Off; W Post, 8/14/68, D9)
Cornell Univ.’s association with Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory had been ended by Univ.’s Board of Trustees on recommendation of special committee headed by Univ.’s law professor W. David Curtiss. Reasons cited included overlap and potential conflict between Laboratory’s overseas research projects and Univ.’s expanding program of international studies. {Science, 2/2/68, 515)
naa selected Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) to receive its 1968 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “more than two decades of dynamic leadership in developing national and international policy that has assured United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world and has contributed immeasurably to the health and vitality of America’s economic structure.” Trophy would be presented Dec. 17 at Annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
In answer to queries [see Nov. 16] DOD issued statement on increased cost of C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. “At the beginning of this program over three years ago, the Air Force estimated that the cost of development and production of the first 58 airplanes would be $2.3 billion. The corresponding estimate for the 120 airplanes ultimately contemplated was $3.1 billion. Current estimates, including economic escalation and all other factors, are $3.25 billion and $4.3 billion, indicating increases of 41% and 39% respectively.” Additional costs had resulted from increased labor and materials costs due to Vietnam war and “unprecedented demand for civilian aircraft,” introduction of new technology, and modifications to overcome technical difficulties. (Text; WSJ, 11/20/18, 2; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, A3; Kelly, W Star, 11/20/68, All)	_
Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. received $5,700,000 usaf contract for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb from Oct 1, 1967, through Sept. 30,1968. (dod Release 64—68)
nasa announced that North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. injector would be used in Bell Aerosystems Co. engine of first manned lunar module. Decision on whether to use Bell or nar injector for lunar mission had not yet been made, (msc Release 68-41)
Long-nosed USAF C—131 research aircraft was being developed for Air Force Systems Command by Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., as unique flying simulator to test controls, instruments, and aircraft configurations of advanced aircraft such as Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa), military C—5A cargo and passenger aircraft, and SST. Total In-Flight Simulator (tifs) configuration—with nose length varying to simulate advanced aircraft and with second cockpit below and ahead of main cockpit and six independent controls—would realistically reproduce handling conditions of modeled aircraft and enable USAF to determine inexpensively in advance correct design and instrumentation for advanced aircraft, (afsc Release 45.68)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner, Washington, D.C., sponsored by NAA, Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) received Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “assuring United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world.” (naa pao)
World’s largest commercial jet—360- to 490-passenger Boeing 747 with mach 0.84 to 0.90 cruising speed—was rolled from factory for first time in ceremony at Everett, Wash. The $20-million aircraft was scheduled for first flight in December 1968 and first passenger service, with Pan American World Airways, Inc., one year later. (Boeing pio; AP, W Post, 9/30/68, A22; 10/1/68, A9; Witkin, NYT, 10/1/68, upi, W Star, 10/1/68, A6)
Dept, of Commerce announced that “the exploration of Antarctica has now been virtually completed,” with conclusion of two-month, 815-mi scientific journey led by C&GS geophysicist Norman W. Peddie. “There are now no major areas [of Antarctica] which have not been explored,” Peddie said. Expedition, which started Dec. 5 and ended Jan. 30, was made by nine-man party of Belgian, Norwegian, and American scientists. Trip covered region in Queen Maud Land between South Pole and Princess Ragnhild Coast in direction of Africa (W Post, 4/21/68, A12)
Prototype four-engine turboprop stol aircraft built in France as Breguet III and in U-S. as McDonnell Douglas 188 was demonstrated for press in flight over Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Eastern Airlines, McDonnell Douglas, and faa were testing aircraft as possible replacement for jet aircraft on Eastern’s crowded shuttle service between Washington, New York, and Boston. When fully developed, aircraft would carry 100 passengers at 400 mph with all-weather capability. It would take off and land on less than 800-ft runway and operate on more direct routes closed to conventional aircraft under noise-abatement rules. Airline spokesman had said aircraft could be operational in “early 1970.” (Yarborough, W Star, 9/18/68, Al; Valentine, W Post, 9/19/68, Bl)
German scientist Dr. Otto Hahn, who had won 1944 Nobel Prize for chemistry for his 1938 discovery of nuclear fission, died at Goettingen, Germany, of heart failure at age 89. He had been consistent opponent of use of atomic weapons, urging scientists to concentrate on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, (upi, W Post, 7/29/68, B4) July 28—August 3: Australian astronomers using Mills Cross antenna array at Univ. of Sydney had detected first two pulsars to be found in southern sky. They brought to nine total pulsars discovered to date. Pulse rates of once every 0.56 and 1.96 sec were similar to all others, which ranged between 0.25 and 2 sec. Cornell Univ. astronomer, Dr. Yervent Terzian, had observed that two-second pulse rate made it appear unlikely that pulsating neutron stars could account for the signals. Calculations indicated that, if they were quivering, or “ringing” like bell, it should be at much shorter intervals than those observed. Pulse rates were more compatible, he said, with proposal that they emanated from white dwarfs, “cinders” of stars that had consumed their nuclear fuel but were larger and less dense than neutron stars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/68, 30)
At Fort Worth, Tex., ceremonies, Australian Minister for Defence Allen Fairhall accepted first of Australia’s 24 F—111C aircraft on order from General Dynamics Corp. U.S. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, told assembled dignitaries F—111 “institutes a new generation of aircraft. ... We have discovered . . . that when compared to fixed-wing aircraft, the variable geometry wing requires far fewer compromises to obtain the desired performance.” (dod Releases 779—68, 812—68; afsc Newsreview, 9/68,1)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Abraham N. Geller issued temporary order blocking sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to edp Technology, Inc., Washington, D.C., for $25 million. Order had been requested by State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz, who alleged alteration of Laboratory from public purposes to profit-making organization would be a “major change detrimental to the national interest, to the quality and effectiveness of the laboratory and to the . . . public.” New York State had sought to purchase facility but was reportedly unable to match edp Technology, Inc., offer. (AP, NYT, 11/13/68, 11) Day preceding conference, eldo meeting had resolved, with U.K. abstaining, to proceed with launcher development on scale designed to hold down costs. U.K. had proposed European nations abandon project, rely on U.S. boosters, and concentrate on space applications, particularly communications. U.K. agreed, however, to fulfill commitment to support launcher program until 1971. (W Post, 11/15/68, A20; Greenberg, Science, 12/6/68, 1108-9)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) said on Senate floor: “I am now confident . . . serious consideration should be given to canceling the entire Air Force F—111 series. ... If the plane is fundamentally unsound—and that would now appear to be the case—its termination would prevent the loss of additional billions of dollars—and what is more important, save the lives of many pilots.” He said October report of Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee of Senate Committee on Armed Services “points up the grave security deficiencies that have resuited from the Department of Defense forcing the Air Force and Navy to put all the eggs of their aircraft development into one unfortunate basket.” (Text; CR, 10/7/68, S12148-51; Witkin, NYT, 10/8/68, 18; W Post, 10/8/68, All)
NASA awarded North American Rockwell Corp. 12.575-million contract modification to continue Saturn V (S—II) “battleship” or ground test program at Santa Susana, Calif., test center through July. Modification increased total contract for S—II stage development testing and facility maintenance planning to $1,281 billion, (msfc Release 68—109)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $9,666,800 NASA contract for 10 additional Improved (Long-Tank) Delta launch vehicles for use in variety of launches, including TOS—E for ESSA in August, Intelsat III for Com-SatCorp in September, idscp/a for dod in May 1969, heos (Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite) for esro in late 1968, and ISIS—A (International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies) in late 1968. North American Rockwell Corp. was awarded $6,968,038 contract extension for material, facilities, manpower and equipment for XB—70 flight operations, and General Electric Co. was awarded $1,957,323 extension for maintenance of XB—70 engines. Both extensions covered July 1, 1968, through June 30,1969. (nasa Release 68-116; FRC Release 19—68)
New subdivision of Air Force Systems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (afhrl), became operational at Brooks afb, Tex., as focal point for USAF R&D effort to satisfy technology needs in human resources education, training, and management. It would also provide technical and management assistance in support of studies, analyses, development planning activities, acquisition, test evaluation, modification, or operation of aerospace systems and related equipment, (afsc Release 93.68)
nasa successfully launched Stratoscope II, Princeton Univ.’s balloonborne telescope, from Scientific Balloon Flight Station, Palestine, Tex., to altitude of 80,000 ft. Purpose was to photograph sky from altitude above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 68—93)
New York Times editorial commented on NAS report on status and needs of American mathematics [see Nov. 22]: “. . . this era—often called the age of the computer—is really the time of the most widespread and fruitful application of mathematics ever known. . . . The cost of supporting American mathematics is so slight in relation to the vast potential benefits that even the most economy-minded Congressman should be chary of using his ax” on Federal support. (NYT, 11/25/68, 46)
At signing in Washington, D.C., of nuclear nonproliferation treaty, President Johnson said: “The conclusion of this treaty encourages the hope that other steps may be taken toward a peaceful world. And ... I have described this treaty as the most important international agreement since the beginning of the nuclear age. . . . After long seasons of patient and painstaking negotiation, we have concluded just within the past five years, the limited test ban treaty, the outer space treaty, the treaty creating a nuclear-free zone in Latin America. And the march of mankind is toward the summit and not the chasm.” Agreement had also been reached between TJ.S. and U.S.S.R., President Johnson announced, “to enter in the nearest future into discussions on the limitation and the reduction of both offensive strategic nuclear weapons delivery systems and systems of defense against ballistic missiles.” At Moscow signing of treaty, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin called agreement a “major success for the cause of peace.” He disclosed contents of U.S.S.R. memorandum to all nations proposing nine-point disarmament and arms control program and called on 18-nation Geneva disarmament conference to take up proposal. (PD, 6/8/68; Sherman, W Star, 7/1/68, Al; upi, 7/1/68; Grose, NYT, 7/2/68, 1, 2)
dod announced usaf scientists, in study conducted by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, would fly KC—135 flying ionospheric laboratory around auroral oval in Arctic during seven-day series of first flights attempted along this route. Purpose was to obtain data on spatial extent and intensity of optical and radio auroras in midwinter and define relationships between them, usaf was interested in influence of auroras on radio communication and navigation and on radar surveillance. afcrl scientists hoped, eventually, to predict occurrence and severity of auroral activity, (dod Release 1065—68)
faa awarded $3.8-million contract to IBM’s Federal Systems Div. to modernize air traffic control at 100 U.S. facilities by installing printers and keyboards for faster coordination and reduction of controllers’ oral and manual workload. Delivery of equipment, to begin April 15, would be coordinated with delivery of other automation components for National Airspace System, (faa Release 68—24) U.S. Public Health Service in Washington, D.C., and Univ. of Texas. Demonstration was directed by itt World Communications, Inc., with cooperation of ComSatCorp and Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co., Ltd., Japan. (ComSatCorp Release 68—17: AP, W Star, 4/10/68, A18; dpi, W Post, 4/12/68, A15)	'
Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Government Operations, praised March 28 decision of Senate Committee on Armed Services to disapprove additional funds for F—111B aircraft and urged that F—lllAs in combat zone “be brought back immediately . . . and not returned to combat until they are fully tested and ready.” He said it was “imperative that the production line be held up until the design of the airplane number 160 configuration is completed and tested and can be incorporated into the very next plane the Air Force buys. If this drastic step is not taken, then we will truly be committing another billion dollar blunder in this tfx program which already has cost the American taxpayers many, many fruitless billions of dollars.” (CR, 3/29/68, S3657-60)
edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., independent concern providing technical support in computer use and technology, had announced it would purchase Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Buffalo, N.Y., from Cornell Univ. for $25 million, (nyt, 9/26/68)
Fiftieth anniversary of U.S. Airmail Service was celebrated in Washington, D.C., with gathering at National Air and Space Museum of pioneer airmail pilots and presentation by Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson of commemorative 10-cent postage stamp. Watson observed that, from small beginning, “virtually all first class mail which can be effectively airlifted is now so moved and almost 80 per cent of all letter mail now travels by air.” (Text; Lidman, NYT, 5/16/68, 30; Aerospace, Spring 68)
Inauguration of direct air service between New York and Moscow had been set for “on or after July 15” by letters between U.S. Moscow Embassy and U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry. Soviet airline Aeroflot announced 11—62 jet aircraft service would start from Moscow July 15. U.S. carrier Pan American World Airways expected to start Boeing 707 service from New York same date. Bilateral air agreement of Nov. 4, 1966, had stipulated once-weekly return flights over 4,700-mi route. May 6, 1968, agreement added intermediate stop at Montreal, Copenhagen, Stockholm, or London, (cab Docket 6489; State Dept Release 94; AP, NYT, 7/9/68, 65; Ward, B Sun, 7/9/68,1; AP, W Post, 7/9/68, A15) First had interfered with short-wave transmissions worldwide, according to ESSA Chief of Forecast Services, Robert Doeker; second had seemed weaker. Scientists were watching for effect of cloud of electrons spawned by first solar flare, biggest and brightest since 1966. (AP, LA Her-Exam, 7/10/68; AP, NYT, 7/10/68, 17)
Ralph Hazlett Upson, aeronautical engineer who won James Gordon Trophy in 1913 International Balloon Race from Paris to England and American National Balloon Races in 1913, 1919, and 1921, died in Burien, Wash., at age 80. (NYT, 8/15/68, 35)
USN awarded five Sl-million contracts for preliminary design and engineering work on FB—11 IB replacement to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., ltv Aerospace Corp., General Dynamics Corp., North American Rockwell Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp. Substitute for F—111B, designated VFX—1, would have vertical sweep wings and same jet engine. (AP, NYT, 7/20/68, 27; W Post, 7/21/68)
USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded North American Rockwell Corp. $1-million initial increment to $4-million fixed-price contract for production of Thor propulsion systems, (dod Release 215-68)
Dr. Walter Haeussermann was selected to Fellowship in American Astronautical Society for “direct and significant contribution to the field of astronautics,” as Director of Astrionics Laboratory, msfc. (msfc Release 68—102)
MIT physicist Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro, speaking at American Physical Society meeting in Boston, said he and associates had successfully tested refined radar technique that might prove validity of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Using 20-ft-dia Haystack, Mass,, dish antenna, scientists observed impulses which they bounced off of Venus and Mercury as planets passed behind sun. Results, which confirmed theory’s prediction that signals would be slowed down slightly by gravitational pull, were more precise than those from previous tests but were not clear enough to resolve completely debate on theory’s validity. Dr. Shapiro believed greater precision could be achieved. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/28/68, 22; O’Toole, W Post, 2/28/68, 1)
U.S. patent No. 3,390,853 was issued to North American Rockwell Corp. mechanical engineer Raymond P. Wykes for inflatable drag balloon (ballute) to be released behind reentry vehicle or lifting-body vehicle at end of a cable which pulled spacecraft’s wings out from its body on reentry and slowed it down for landing. Patent No. 3,390,492 was issued to General Electric Co. engineer Edwin T. Myskowski for glass deep-submergence module in titanium alloy frame usable as laboratory or living quarters on ocean floor in anchored or mobile form. (Patent Off pio ; Jones, NYT, 7/6/68,25)	_
U.S.S.R.’s leading geneticist, Prof. Nikolay P. Dubinin, told International Symposium on Genetic Effects of Space Environment^ in Tokyo biological experiments on various Soviet satellites beginning with Sputnik I had disclosed that space flight caused higher frequency of mutation, chromosome damage, and disruptions in normal cell division mechanisms. “Dynamic flight factors,” he said, were responsible; doses of cosmic radiation registered were too small to account for all . genetic changes observed. Symposium was held in conjunction with 12th International Congress of Genetics. American scientists also suggested “dynamic flight factors” of vibrations, acceleration, and weightlessness might be factors in genetic damage observed aboard American spacecraft. (Reinhold, NYT, 8/26/68)
Wall Street Journal reported interview with Prof. Edwin L. Resler, Jr., Director of Cornell Univ. Graduate School of Aerospace Engineering, on possibility of reducing sonic boom created by supersonic transports to tolerable level by changing design of engines for big aircraft to slow down expansion of exhaust stream. “We can . . . reduce the shock wave effect and its consequent boom to a tolerable level so that overland flights of supersonic transports would be feasible,” Prof. Resler said. (WSJ, 6/28/68)
Cal Tech trustees announced choice of Dr. Harold Brown, Air Force Secretary, to replace Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who resigned effective Jan. 20 to become Science Adviser to President-elect Richard M. Nixon. (upi, W Star, 12/14/68, A3; W Post, 12/15/68, A6)
NASA announced it had terminated production of 60 H—1 engines for post-Apollo Saturn IB missions under contract with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. Delivery of 32 engines to msfc had already been completed. Of remaining 28 engines, 1 would be complete; 1, complete without firing; 6, assembled; and hardware for 20, delivered in present production state, (nasa Release 68—154; msc Roundup, 9/13/68, 1)
aec Chairman, Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, was named 1968 winner of Arches of Science Award presented annually by Pacific Science Center of Seattle, Wash., to American who had contributed to public understanding of science. Award of $25,000 would be presented Oct. 16 to Dr. Seaborg, who won Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1951 and was codiscoverer of plutonium. (W Post, 9/18/68, B5; AP, NYT, 9/18/68, 12)
New York Times editorial commented on failure of swing-wing design for SST: “More than ever now the burden of proof is on those who urge that billions of taxpayers’ dollars be spent on an American SST. The fallibility of their judgment has been demonstrated in the loss of the swing-wing gamble. Is there reason to suppose that their optimistic forecasts about the profits to be made from such an airplane are any sounder? The aerodynamics of different wing configurations is not the only thing that needs to be assessed in the current re-examination of the sst.” (NYT, 10/25/68, 46)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched largest research balloon—28.7-million-cu-ft polyethylene sphere—to record 158,000-ft altitude from wsmr. Flight carried instruments for atmospheric measurements near stratopause and terminated near Needles, Calif., after 18 hr. Previous record size for polyethylene balloon was 13.5 million cu ft. Previous balloon record, 26 million cu ft, was held by five fiber-reinforced Mylar balloons flown by AFCRL for NASA in 1966 and 1967. (oar Research Review, 1—2/69, 8—9)
usaf announced launch of 200th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg afb. Since September 1962, Vandenberg had been launch site for missiles fired over Pacific Ocean for crew training, reliability tests, and developmental work. (Boeing Release)
First short-takeoff-and-landing strip for commercial aircraft in U.S. opened at La Guardia Airport in New York. Called STOLport, it was 1,095 ft long. Shortest regular runway at La Guardia was 4,000 ft. FAA said STOLport would be used for visual flying only, stol aircraft landed and took off at 60 mph, rather than regular commercial aircraft’s 105 mph. Three more stolports were to open Sept. 1 to provide taxi service between National and Dulles Airports in Washington, D.C., and Friendship Airport in Baltimore. (Shipler. NYT, 8/6/68, 1; AP, W Star, 8/6/68, A5; W Post, 8/14/68,1)
Approximately 36 Soviet Air Force flights with more than 85 bombers had been identified off northern coasts of North America during first half of 1968, six times scale of operations reported during last half of 1967, according to Charles W. Corddry in Baltimore Sun. Soviet aircraft had cruised over international waters, dod reportedly considered flights routine. (B Sun, 6/9/68, 1)
arc Director H. Julian Allen had been elected Fellow of U.K.’s Royal Aeronautical Society for outstanding contributions to aeronautics, ARC Astrogram announced. Allen, who had served naca and its successor NASA since 1936, had received naca Distinguished Service Medal for originating concept of bluntness as aerodynamic technique for avoiding severe reentry heating, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy, and NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, (arc Astrogram, 3/28/68, 1)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford wrote in Air Force and Space Digest: “Not too many years ago, the War and Navy Departments were concerned almost exclusively with men and simple machines. Defense industries were regarded as mere munitions-makers. ... We now have a military-industrial team with unique resources of experience, engineering talent, management and problem-solving capacities, [and it] must be used to help find the answers to complex domestic problems as it has found the answers to complex weapon systems. Those answers can be put to good use by our cities and our states, by our schools, by large and small businesses alike. The nation will be the better and the stronger.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 76—7)
Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, told Los Angeles Junior Chamber of Commerce that if U.S.S.R.’s long-range bomber force improved, U.S. might need new 2,000-mph F—12 interceptor rejected by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara in 1967. Although U.S.S.R. had about 155 long-range bombers and U.S. had 680, USAF officials feared U.S.S.R. might build advanced manned aircraft to overpower what McNamara had acknowledged to be an obsolete conventional air shield. DOD had announced major cutbacks in existing air defense units May 13. (Text; Omaha W—H, 5/15/68, 21)
New York Times editorial on F— 111 A aircraft: “The difficulties that have beset the controversial F—111 swing-wing plane recently provide new evidence of the folly of allowing political factors to veto Or dilute technical judgment. “These additional blows to a plane that still has great potential promise emphasize what most experts have been saying for seven years —the F— 111 has been built the wrong way from the beginning. It reflected former Secretary of Defense McNamara’s insistence, in the name of ‘commonality’ and savings, that the Navy and the Air Force buy one plane for two entirely different missions. “But, though the Navy’s version may never—as Congress believes— meet the Navy’s needs, the Air Force model has great potential capabilities as a supersonic high- and low-level all-weather fighter-bomber . . . [and] must be developed, tested and utilized to its fullest capability.” (NYT, 4/1/68)
nas released Space Applications Summer Study, 1967 Interim Report, Volume I, Central Review Committee Conclusions and Recommendations and Summaries of Panel Reports. Chaired by Dr. W. Dem-ing Lewis, study treated aspects of space technology “likely to produce practical benefits to large segments of the American and world economies.” Report urged extensive and coherent program and said NASA should double $100 million it currently spent to develop technology of space applications. (Text; Clark, NYT, 2/9/68, 6)
