Drone aircraft was reportedly impaled with spear of light from experimental laser and destroyed in three milliseconds at Air Force Special Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland afb, N. Mex. Account in Aviation Week & Space Technology was later denied by usaf officials. Tri-service laser weapon research programs, principally sponsored by arpa, were studying number of military applications of lasers, according to magazine, usaf had increased planned funding of high-energy gas laser development in FY 1969 from $0.5 million to $2.5 million to make use of power output increase achieved by United Aircraft Corp. in 1968. And $1.5 million had been given to exploratory development of high-power solid-state lasers. For FY 1970 usaf had asked $8 million to exploit United Aircraft development. (Av Wlc, 1/12/70, 16-7; usaf pio; A&A, 4/70, 16-21)
Smithsonian Institution celebrated 50th anniversary of May 8, 1919, takeoff of first aircraft to cross Atlantic Ocean with display on Washington, D.C., mall of original NC-4 (restored by Smithsonian Air Museum Curator Paul Garber) and with presentation to Institution of Plaque and aircraft’s log. Glenn Curtiss-built, long-range seaplane ordered by usn as bomber during World War I but completed too late to see service had been flown by usn crew from Rockaway Beach, N.Y., to Plymouth, England, with two sister aircraft which crashed in Azores. NC—4, known as “Nancy,” made journey in 53 hrs 58 min flying time and 23 days elapsed time. (Lydon, NYT, 5/1/69, 22; Durbin, W Post, 5/8/69, Cl)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced it had reduced its activity on usaf’s Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa) but was maintaining team effort in connection with program. Reduction was made to permit maximum attention to F—15 fighter weapon system competition. (nar Release NN—28; Wilson, W Post, 5/31/69, Al)
At international airline conference in Dublin, U.S.S.R.’s First Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Gen. Leonid V. Zholudev, denied Tu-144 supersonic transport had been in accident, American Aviation said. It was “undergoing tests according to our program,” Gen. Zholudev said. He declined to speculate when Soviet aircraft would go into service and said “many complex problems must be solved.” Tu-154, 170-passenger trijet, would enter service “in near future”; An-22 turboprop, with reported maximum takeoff weight of 551,160 lbs, was being used exclusively as cargo carrier. (Amer Av, 4/28/69, 17)
Research to improve materials and lubricants for aerospace might aid in replacement of human hip joint with prosthesis better than any yet developed, LeRC scientist Robert L. Johnson announced. Bearing properties of materials—like cobalt alloy—used in commercial hip joints could be improved by changing crystal structure of metal to hexagonal form, Johnson had found in NASA studies. Interest in these alloys had led to cooperative program with Cornell Medical Center in New York. (LeRC Release 69-66)
Termination of Project Blue Book—usaf investigation of UFOs—was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Project’s continuation could not be justified “on the ground of national security or in the interest of science.” Decision was based on evaluation of Jan. 9 report by Univ. of Colorado, NAS review of Univ. of Colorado report, and usaf investigations of UFO reports since 1948. usaf had concluded: no UFO reported, investigated, and evaluated by usaf had threatened U.S. security; there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings represented technological developments or principles beyond range of scientific knowledge; and there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings were extraterrestrial vehicles. Project Blue Book records would be retired to usaf archives at Maxwell afb, Ala. (dod Release 1077—69)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Frederick M. Marshall issued temporary injunction to block sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., for $25 million. He directed case be given preference on trial calendar. {NYT, 1/4/69, 23)
faa Government-industry conference in Washington, D.C., discussed faa role in stol development, stol noise sources, stol operational considerations related to noise abatement, noise source reduction techniques, and review of existing aircraft certification concepts and considerations for stol noise certification, (faa Release 69—5)
President Nixon announced decision to continue development of SST. “The supersonic transport is going to be built. The question is whether in the years ahead the people of the world will be flying in American supersonic transports or in the transports of other nations . . . whether the United States, after starting and stopping this program . . . finally decides to go ahead. ... I have made the decision that we should go ahead . . . because I want the United States to continue to lead the world in air transport. And it is essential to build this plane if we are to maintain that leadership. ... I have made the decision, also, because . . . through this plane we are going to be able to bring the world closer together in a true physical and time sense. . . . This is a massive stride forward in the field of transport.” President said prototype would be flown in 1972. (PD, 9/29/69, 1309)
Strategic threat to U.S. security was rapidly increasing, Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Chamber of Commerce Armed Forces Day luncheon in New Orleans. U.S.S.R. had built intercontinental missile force from 250 in 1966 to 1,150 operational or under construction. “With their large SS—9 missiles, the Soviets will soon have about twice as much missile payload ... as our missile force, even including our advantage in submarine launched missiles. In addition, the Soviets have already deployed an antiballistic missile system that includes some 60 long-range ABM missiles.” (Text)
President Nixon addressed 2,000 American Field Service students from 60 countries on White House lawn: “. . . in the year 2000 we will, on this earth, have visited new worlds where there will be a form of life. I know this will happen, and I want to tell you as I look forward and dream about that future . . . this is the kind of world I would like to see and the kind of exploration of that new world that I know all Americans want. I hope that when the next great venture into space takes place that it will be one in which Americans will be joined by representatives of other countries.” (PD, 7/28/69, 1016—7)
In $100,000 experiment to evaluate claims that jet noise had caused female minks to panic and eat their young, usaf planned to send jet aircraft through sound barrier over Univ. of Alaska’s experimental mink farm near Petersburg. On ground, observers from Dept, of Agriculture and Cornell Univ. would study mink reaction to sonic boom. Since 1962 usaf had paid 25 claims totaling $67,000 for mink problems alleged to have been caused by supersonic aircraft. (Pinto, W Star, 10/26/69, A22)
Sir George Edwards, Chairman and Managing Director of British Aircraft Corp., told American Newcomen Society meeting in New York that Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport had completed 75 flights and approximately 128 flying hrs. (bac Release 42/69)
West German ambassadors in Moscow, Washington, D.C., and London signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty sponsored by U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Morgan, W Post, 11/29/69, Al)
American Security Council published The ABM and the Changed Strategic Military Balance, U.S.A. vs. U.S.S.R. Although U.S. GNP ran almost twice that of U.S.S.R., latter was investing two to three times more in strategic military forces annually. Report concluded: “Antiballistic missile defense is not a cure-all for the security of the United States. It is not the ultimate defense system, for technology knows no limits and each decade produces fresh challenges and fresh need for response on the part of free nations. But anti-missile defense is an essential component in the network of military systems designed to give the American people a seamless garment of security in an age of acute danger. . . . We firmly believe that an American abm system is the soundest insurance for peace and against war that the United States can buy in 1969, for the 1970s. ... It may well be . . . the single most important step the United States can take toward a real and lasting peace at this moment in history.” (Text)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin Feoktistov spent half hour riding into Grand Canyon on mules after arriving in Arizona from San Francisco during two-week U.S. tour, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A3)
msfc announced two contract awards. Definitive $38,340,000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for J—2 engine operational and flight support Jan. 1, 1969, to June 30, 1970, replaced letter contract which earlier authorized $9 million. Contract modification of $15,253,945 was given to Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for extending delivery schedule of Saturn IB boosters and stage storage. (msfc Releases 69—97, 69—96)
Soviet Embassy Second Secretary Oleg M. Sokolov said in Washington, D.C., that U.S.S.R. definitely would display supersonic Tu-144 airliner at 28th Paris Air Show, May 29—June 8. He said aircraft would beat Anglo-French Concorde into operation and plans were under way to set up worldwide logistics support for Tu-144. dot officials said West would be watching closely to see whether U.S.S.R. could fulfill pledge and, if so, would take good look at Tu-144, which could hurt commercial market for sst if it had worldwide logistics backup, (Bentley, B Sun, 5/19/69, A5)
FAA announced proposal to extend hourly flight quotas in effect at five high-density airports serving New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., for 9-12 mos beyond Dec. 31 expiration date. Experience with quota system since June 1 inception indicated it had relieved congestion and reduced delays, (faa Release 69—125)
Pan American World Airways took delivery of first Boeing 747 to be turned over to commercial line in ceremony at Boeing Field in Seattle, Wash. Later in day, 362-passenger transport left on six-hour flight to Nassau, Bahamas. It was scheduled to fly to New York same day. (AP, W Star, 12/14/69, A25)
Robert E. Bernier, former ComSatCorp systems engineer for Intelsat III program, became NASA European Representative in Office of International Affairs. He replaced Clotaire Wood, who would return to Office of Advanced Research and Technology at nasa Hq. Bernier would begin his duties at American Embassy in Paris in early October. (nasa Release 69—125)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) told House Dr. Franklin A. Long of Cornell Univ. had been asked to withdraw from nomination as nsf Director after refusing to support Administration’s abm system. “It is unfortunate that the Nixon administration is sacrificing the National Science Foundation on the altar of the abm, and, by so doing, seriously affecting its unique capability to be of service to our country.” (CR, 4/17/69, H2759)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. as prime contractor for development and production of F—15 advanced tactical fighter aircraft. Initial award would be $1,146,385,000 fixed-price contract for engineering, design, and fabrication of 20 aircraft. First wing of 107 aircraft would be produced under later contract, not to exceed $936,591,000. (dod Release 1095—69)
In Astrophysical Journal, Princeton Univ. astronomers Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn predicted few pulsars should be found with periods more than 1.5 secs, from results of their quarantine exploration of pulsar model. (Astro Journ, 9/69, 1395—1417)
Four contract modifications totaling nearly $10 million, for- change orders issued in connection with Saturn Y 2nd stage, had been awarded to North American Rockwell Corp., MSFC announced, (msfc Release 69-127)
U.S.S.R. was testing 150-ton, 250-passenger “compound” helicopter, American Broadcasting Co. reported. Largest helicopter in Western world was 19-ton Sikorsky CH-54H Flying Crane. Soviet 47-ton Mi-10 was world’s largest. New compound helicopter had wings that assumed lifting function from rotors at cruising speed; it obtained most of its thrust from conventional propulsion when it converted from vertical to cruising flight. Sikorsky had proposed 32.5-ton compound helicopter to dod and U.S. civilian transportation authorities. (NYT, 1/12/69, S23)
White House announced President Nixon had established interdepartmental ad hoc committee to review SST program’s technology, commercial potential, schedule and costs, and environmental side-effects, particularly sonic boom phenomenon. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs was designated chairman of 11-member committee, which also included Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge; Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator Charles W. Harper. (PD, 3/3/69, 329-30)
Walter Sullivan described mystery of cosmic rays in New York Times. “No natural phenomena with which we have intimate contact are more awesome.” Scores of these high-energy particles flashed through human body every second with energy capable of piercing six feet of lead. Some believed them accountable for aging process. Recent Australian observations had shown some particles (mostly protons) hit atmosphere with 100-billion-bev energy. Princeton Univ. physicists Dr. Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn had suggested pulsars might be superaccelerators of cosmic ray particles. (NYT, 10/12/69,8)
msfc announced resignation of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), Director of Program Management, would be effective July 31. Gen. O’Connor, on loan to NASA from USAF for past five years, would become Vice Commander of Air Force Aeronautical Systems Div. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Saturn V Manager, msfc. (msfc Release 69—166)
Senate confirmed nomination of Philip N. Whittaker, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, to be an Assistant Secretary of the Air Force. (CR, 5/5/69, S4668)
At American Cancer Society Seminar in New Orleans, La., Clarence D. Cone, Jr., head of LaRc’s Molecular Biophysics Laboratory, discussed his discovery of intercellular linkages and its application to understanding behavior of certain cancer types. His basic research into effects of space radiation on body cells had enabled him to observe phenomenon in which dividing cancer cell appeared able to induce connected cells to divide by transmitting chain-reaction stimulation through thin linkage of cytoplasm. Networks of these stimulus-transmission bridges permitted continued division of cells and, in human body, might constitute basic mechanism for cancer spread, (nasa Release 69—45) During March: NSF published Scientific Activities of Nonprofit Institutions, 1966	(nsf 69—16). Full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed by independent nonprofit institutions in January 1967	totaled 24,300, annual increase of 12.4% from 1954 to 1967. In 1966 expenditure for R&D in independent nonprofit institutions was $800 million—about seven times the $100 million in 1953. Federal r&d expenditures contracted to nonprofit institutions reached $540 million in 1966, nine times 1953’s $60 million. (Text)
Five-year program to improve detection of clear air turbulence (cat) — with cooperation of NASA, dot, dod, and ESSA—was announced in Washington, D.C., by ESSA Administrator, Dr. Robert M. White. Project would seek improvement of long-range weather forecasting and development of onboard portable detection devices for aircraft to locate cat in time to permit pilot to take evasive action or prepare for penetration, (upi, NYT, 12/29/69, 57)
George J. Vecchietti, NASA Director of Procurement, would serve as Acting Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, replacing Philip N. Whittaker, who had assumed new duties as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, NASA announced, (nasa Ann)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, mit Dean of Engineering, received faa’s highest honor—Extraordinary Service Award—in Washington, D.C., ceremony for service as technical adviser on SST program. Gold medal, lapel ribbon, and citation for exceptional contribution were presented by Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs. He noted Dr. Bisplinghoif’s extraordinary competence and knowledge of aeronautics had played significant role in analyzing complex technical aspects of SST development program. Dr. Bisplinghoff had served as technical adviser to faa Administrator on SST program since April 1966, had held key scientific posts with NASA since 1962, and was member of NASA Historical Advisory Committee, (faa Release 69—69)
World’s largest passenger airliner, 629,000-lb Boeing 747, landed at Dulles Airport, Washington, D.C., en route from Paris Air Show. Pan American World Airways would take delivery of its first 747 in September and inaugurate passenger service shortly after first of year. (W Star, 6/8/69, A23)
USAF released Air Force Review of the C—5A Program. Total cost of 120 Lockheed C—5A aircraft had increased from $3,369 billion at 1965 contract award to total $5,125 billion, overrun of $1,756 billion. At dod press conference Air Force Secretary Robert C. Seamans, Jr., criticized “ambiguities and deficiencies” in original contract and hinted remaining 39 aircraft in 120-plane package might not be purchased unless revisions were made in contract. (Text; Phillips, W Post, 7/29/69, Al)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched 997-ft-tall, 34-miIIion-cu-ft helium balloon—largest ever built—from Holloman AFB, N. Mex. Balloon, part of NASA’s cosmic ray ionization program (crisp), was to have provided high-altitude platform for 13,800-lb payload to measure cosmic radiation in upper atmosphere. It had been scheduled to drift eastward at 108,000-ft altitude for 24 hrs, but descended 3 hrs after launch because of leak, (msc Roundup, 11/14/69, 2; msc Release 69—70)
nsf published American Science Manpower, 1968, report of National Register of Scientific and Technical Personnel: Almost 298,000 scientists—nine percent of whom were women—reported to National Register in 1968. Of these, three-fifths were in physical and mathematical sciences, one-fifth in life sciences, remainder in behavioral and social sciences. Registration was up 23% over 242,800 in 1966. Industry employed 32% of 1968 registrants, down from 34% in 1966. Scientists employed in educational institutions increased from 36% to 40%. Those in Federal Government remained at 10% both years. Federal Government provided funds for at least some of work of 127,400 scientists, or 43% of total registrants. (Text)
Gen. James Ferguson (usaf), AFSC Commander, said in keynote address before Air Force Fatigue and Fracture Conference at Miami Beach, Fla.: “Our potential adversaries are pushing on all frontiers of technology. We cannot safely do less, and yet we must achieve our technological goals with less in the way of money, manpower, and facilities.” Each aircraft “will have to be better, more capable, stronger, more durable, and preferably less costly.” (Text)
American Embassy science attache in New Delhi reported completion of India-U.S. project to erect 48-in telescope at Hyderabad. Project was started in 1955 and completed just before U.S. lunar landing. (O’Neill, W Post, 8/31/69, D5)
Smithsonian Institution Curator of Meteorites, Dr. Kurt Fredriksson, arrived in Washington, D.C., carrying 10 gr of lunar material from lrl in nitrogen-filled plastic bag inside steel briefcase. One of six men in U.S. who had studied lunar samples, he later said Smithsonian scientist Dr. Bryan H. Mason would receive another 10-gr set. (Conroy, W News, 9/16/69, 5)
National Aviation Club’s highest honor, Award for Achievement, was presented at Washington, D.C., ceremony to m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), Director of Supersonic Transport Development for faa, for “laboring so magnificently and conscientiously in the public and national service.” (faa Release T 69—25)
fa A, Air Transport Assn., and manufacturers McDonnell Douglas Corp., Bendix Corp., and Wilcox-Sierra Div. of American Standard, Inc., successfully flight-tested three separate but compatible devices composing aircraft collision avoidance system (cas) capable of issuing microsecond warning. Tests were held at Martin-Marietta Airport, Baltimore. cas included cesium atomic clock so precise that watch of similar construction would lose only one second in 67 yrs. System operated like balloon around aircraft which, when penetrated by similarly equipped plane, provided pilots with command to make evasive maneuver. All aircraft would need system for it to be effective. Product of $12-million, 13-yr r&d, system could be operational by 1971. (Yarborough, W Star, 9/24/69, A7)
aiaa announced former arc director H. Julian Allen had been named to receive 1969 Daniel Guggenheim Medal. Medal—presented annually by aiaa, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers for achievement in advancement of aeronautics —would be awarded Oct. 21 during aiaa Sixth Annual Meeting and Technical Display in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—7) was successfully captive fired for full flight duration, 369 secs, by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel at Mississippi Test Facility. Stage developed thrust equivalent to 1 million lbs at operating altitude, (msfc Release 69—25)
At American Chemical Society meeting in Minneapolis, Univ. of California at Berkeley nuclear scientist Albert Ghiorso reported discovery of element 104 isotopes 104-257 and 104-259 and possibly 104-258. Discoveries, made by bombarding target in heavy ion linear accelerator (hilac), were announced by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, operated at Univ. of California for aec. (aec Release M—87)
New York Times editorial said: “The Administration’s action in ordering production started on MIRV multiple warhead missiles before opening negotiations for a moratorium with Moscow touches the most sensitive point in the projected missile-curb talks. Equally grave is the manner in which the Air Force quietly awarded the $88-million contract to General Electric, on the day President Nixon spoke favorably of proposals for a Soviet-American moratorium on mirv flight testing to head off production and deployment of the weapon by either side. Given this situation, the country is entitled to an explanation from the President of his intentions in the Soviet-American missile-control talks, which he has personally held up for more than seven months.” (NYT, 6/29/69, 10) .
Lunar rock sample weighing 34.1 gm left Lisbon, Portugal, for Washington, D.C., after eight-day exhibit that attracted some 60,000 persons, including 400 leaders of Portuguese scientific, military, and educational world. Rock, shown on Portuguese TV to estimated 9 million viewers, would be sent to Prague. {NYT, 12/21/69, 22)
msfc announced $8,391,052 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for support services to J—2 rocket-engine program from June 1, 1969, through April 30, 1970. (msfc Release 69—104)
President Nixon signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty in Washington, D.C. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ratified treaty simultaneously in Moscow, with President Nikolay V. Podgorny signing document. U.S. and U.S.S.R. were 23rd and 24th nations to ratify treaty, which would become effective after ratification by 43 countries. (PD, 12/1/69, 1658; NYT, 11/25/69, 1)
Rise of costs of Mark II electronic equipment for F—111 aircraft of more than 100% above original contract with Autonetics Div. of North American Rockwell Corp. were described by Bernard D. Nossiter in Washington Post article based largely on memo from dod official. Memo had warned, “If it fails to enforce the contract, the Air Force and the entire Department of Defense can count on many more years of misleading promises from contractors and failures to meet contractual requirements.” (W Post, 5/11/69, Al)
msfc announced it had signed agreement with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for extension of J—2 engine production through April 30, 1970, at reduced rate of one engine per month instead of three. Engines would not be used as rapidly as originally planned because of overall extension of launch vehicle production schedule. Modifications amounted to $8,423,454. (msfc Release 69-70)
National Transportation Safety Board opened hearings in Washington, D.C., on midair collisions. In last 31 yrs of recorded aviation history there had been only 12 midair collisions with passenger fatalities, Clifton F. von Kann, Vice President for Operations and Engineering of Air Transport Assn., testified. “Even with the explosive growth of airline service during the last ten years, there have been just four collisions with airline passenger fatalities.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/5/69, A9)
Dr. Harold Brown, former Secretary of the Air Force, was inaugurated as president of Cal Tech during day-long ceremonies on campus. He succeeded Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who had become Presidential Science Adviser. (LA Times, 9/4/69)
