FAA and Eastern Air Lines demonstrated “smokeless jet” at National Airport in Washington, D.C. Boeing 727 with JT8d engines modified to reduce carbon particulates by 75% took off with thin trail of smoke. Pratt & Whitney engineer Gerald R. Daly, who designed pollution-fighting equipment, explained that modified engines reduced smoke but did not eliminate it. (Latham, WPost, 9/10/70, A27)
Test flights of Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde had gone well and protests against its sonic boom had been “less than expected,” AP article reported. Big hurdle would come in spring when U.K. and France .would decide whether to go into full production. Decision would depend on number of aircraft ordered by then. To date, 16 airlines had taken options on 74 Concordes, with first batch going to Pan American World Airways, Air France, and British Overseas Airways Corp. None had made firm commitment to buy and U.K. and France had assured foreign airlines they could revoke their options if Air France and boac backed out. AP said major airlines doubted Concorde would be profitable. It would carry 130 passengers, against Boeing 747’s 490, and require more fuel than conventional jets. At possibly $52.8 million, its cost would be about five times that of conventional airliner. Concorde’s only selling point was speed. It would halve flying time across Atlantic to IVi hrs. (Pinder, WPost, 12/5/70, A13)
Status of C-5 Galaxy aircraft program funding was described by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, before Senate Armed Services Committee during hearings on usaf FY 1971 budget request: In 1969 it had appeared “that the 120 aircraft program would cost about $4,831 million, including initial spares. As we interpreted the contract, the contractor would lose some $285 million on 120 aircraft, and any smaller buy the contractor’s loss would be higher. The contractor disagreed. By his interpretation. . .he expected to make a small profit on the total program. As a consequence of budget restraints, rising costs, and an overall reappraisal of defense requirements, we have now limited the program to 81 aircraft. The program’s final cost to the Government, however, depends on resolution of the issues between the Air Force and contractor over the contract. We are still trying to work these out with Lockheed but.. .litigation may be required. If the Air Force wins all the arguments, the 81 aircraft program will cost about $4 billion. If the contractor wins all his points, the cost will be. . .on the order of $500 million more.” It might be “several years before we know the exact outcome of this program.” (Testimony)
usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was described in Christian Science Monitor article: “Oldest and largest military aviation museum in the world, the display.. .portrays the history of the United States Air Force in such away as to interest all ages. Nearly half of the aircraft and missiles have to be exhibited outdoors, so construction is under way on a new $6 million facility. . .to contain the collection of 8,000 planes and other items.” (CSM, 8/4/70)
First total solar eclipse seen over heavily populated areas of U.S. since 1925 was greeted by millions of viewers who crowded beaches, towns, and islands where viewing was most favorable. Eclipse was total along path 137-161 km (85-100 mi) wide through Mexico, Florida, Georgia, the Carolinas, Virginia, and Nantucket Island, Mass. It was 96% total in New York City and 95% in Washington, D.C. (Wilford, NYT, 3/8/70,1)
Mrs. Richard M. Nixon christened Clipper Young America, Pan American World Airways’ first operational Boeing 747, in Dulles International Airport ceremony. Aircraft was parked alongside Boeing 707 and 40-yr old Ford Trimotor, first aircraft flown by Pan Am. (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, 14)
World’s largest tuna fishing boat was launched in San Diego, Calif. It was insulated with polyurethane foam which had been developed for use as insulation in Saturn V 2nd-stage fuel tank. North American Rockwell Corp. had used foam in 61-m (200-ft) clipper, (msfc Release 70-23)
Discovery by radar astronomers at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station of several nearly continent-sized rough areas on Mercury’s surface was reported by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein, head of jpl Communications Research Section, at meeting of U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union in Washington, D.C. Areas were similar to ones observed on Venus but “larger relative to the size of the disk,” and had much less contrast to the surrounding areas, (jplRelease 550)
Nuclear nonproliferation treaty went into effect. President Nixon in Washington, D.C., and Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin in Moscow presided in ceremonies at which last of 47 nations deposited instruments of ratification. (Finney, NYT, 3/6/70, 1)
N.Y. State Supreme Court Appellate Div. ruled unanimously that Cornell Univ. had right to sell Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to private, profit-making company, Edp Technology, Inc. Decision upset 1969 State Supreme Court ruling that laboratory had been created as public trust and therefore could not be sold to private company. Appellate Div. held that laboratory had been transferred to Cornell as gift without any restrictions. (AP, NYT, 11/6/70)
Four-man crew successfully completed 159-day, 11 000-km (7000-mi) journey from Guayaquil, Ecuador, to Mooloolaba, Australia, in 7.9m (26-ft) raft to prove South American Indians could have sailed to Australia centuries ago. Expedition was headed by Prof. Vital Alzar of Spain, who was making second attempt to cross Pacific on raft. Others were Marco Modena of France, Norman Terenault of Canada, and Gabriel Salas of Chile, (upi, WPost, 11/6/70, A18)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., news conference he was limiting F-111 procurement to four wings. “In order to have four wings of the F-l 11, it would be necessary to purchase an additional 40 aircraft. The decision as to whether those 40 aircraft will be purchased or not is dependent upon the scientific review that we are making now and the Air Force has set up a special committee of outstanding scientists and technical advisors” to make review. (Transcript)
Consumer adviser and safety advocate Ralph Nader released report in Washington, D.C., to Government agencies and industry spokesmen. It charged that travel by light aircraft was most dangerous form of transportation in U.S. and that general-aviation industry had neglected simple remedies which could save hundreds of lives annually. (AP, W Star, 1/22/70, A4)
intelsat international planetary conference convened in Washington, D.C. U.S. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson welcomed 100 delegates to meeting, which was to work out definitive arrangements for establishment of single global commercial comsat system with control apportioned among members. (UPI, W Post, 2/17/70)
L/G John W. O’Neill, AFSC Vice Commander, delivered keynote address at afsc Air Force Materials Symposium in Miami Beach, Fla.: usaf was finding it “essential to push harder against the material and structural limits” of knowledge than at any time in its history. “We are forced to look over and beyond the horizon for new materials; new combinations; new structural concepts; and new methods of fabricating, testing, inspecting—and predicting.” New aircraft had to “fly higher and faster than ever before—in some cases at the fringes of space—and still be large enough to carry an effective combat payload over extended ranges.” Missiles had to “do incredible things under even worse conditions, with the added proviso that no humans will be aboard to make in-flight corrections. . . . With our spacecraft. . .we simply combine the harshest requirements imposed on both aircraft and missiles. And the difficulties will be compounded as the Air Force and NASA jointly develop reusable boosters, shuttles and tugs for the space transportation system.” (Text)
President Nixon commented on SST during Washington, D.C., press conference: “I have satisfied myself, after long deliberation. . .that the arguments with regard to the environment could be met, that this prototype should be built. What is involved here is not just 150,000 jobs which will be lost if we don’t build it, not just the fact that billions of dollars in foreign exchange will be lost if we do not build it; but what is lost here is the fact that the United States of America which has been first in the world in commercial aviation from the time of the Wright Brothers decides not just to be second but not even to show.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1652)
nas panel headed by physicist Dr. Thomas F. Malone of Univ. of Connecticut warned that large-scale deployment of SST might increase incidence of skin cancer if exhaust from aircraft thinned protective layer that separated earth’s atmosphere from solar rays. Warning was issued during meeting with dot’s Office of SST Development in Washington, D.C. (Randal, W Star, 12/1/70, All)
Our World in Space—Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow,” illustrated lecture by artist Robert McCall, was presented by Smithsonian Associates in Washington, D.C. (Program)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Australian Minister for Defence Malcolm Fraser reached accord in Washington, D.C., on Australian purchase of F-111C aircraft. Delivery of aircraft would be delayed until technical difficulties were fully evaluated and corrected; Australia would be provided on lease or other reimburseable basis up to 24 F-4E Phantom aircraft in interim; alternative Australian actions to meet strike aircraft requirements remained as options. (dod Release 301-70)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached tentative agreement to expand commercial airline service between New York and Moscow to permit s Pan Am and Aeroflot to land at Leningrad and Washington, D.C., AP reported. Agreement also would increase flights from two to six weekly. Diplomatic sources had reported U.S. rejection of Soviet bid to permit transcontinental flights over both nations. {NYT, 8/11/ 70,55)	.
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4024 to Observe Dec. 17 as Wright Brothers Day: “The names of Orville and Wilbur Wright symbolize American ingenuity and courage.” Their Dec. 17, 1903, flight was “forerunner of the aviation and space technology which today strengthens America’s defense and contributes to better understanding throughout the world by promoting commerce and encouraging travel.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1649)
Edgar M. Cortright, LaRC Director, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on NASA’s time for decision: “We in NASA recognize that our program no longer enjoys the number one priority but is now but one of a number of priority areas competing for scarce funds. But we also recognize that our program, in addition to its intrinsic value, sets the pace for much of the technological development of this country and promises to do so for the foreseeable future. ... We do not believe that we could long survive and prosper without this preeminent technological position. Therefore, we have to stand and fight off the stampede by other groups to acquire funds now being channeled into our national technology through NASA and the Department of Defense. It is a veritable ‘run on the bank.’ The withdrawal slips carry such catch terms as relevancy, poverty, pollution, and housing, and are designed to shame us into sacrificing our space program and national technology in the name of ‘humanity.’ I would reverse the logic and say—in the name of humanity we should maintain our national technology.” Cortright also described nasa-dot-dod experimental program to introduce v/stol aircraft into commercial use: “We have chosen the externally blown flap and augmentor wing jet stol airplanes for initial attention. Jet vtol aircraft will come later. . . . We envision a combination of v/stol and high-speed ground transportation as offering the best hope for continued mobility as the megalopolis continues to spread. We are also preparing a program to develop an Advanced Technology Experimental Transport using Whitcomb’s [Dr. Richar.d T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of LaRC’s 8-Foot Tunnels Branch] supercritical aerodynamic concepts to explore the problems of efficient cruise at Mach numbers approaching one.” (Text)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of Boeing Co. as prime contractor for Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs). Boeing was issued $16 500 000 initial increment of $169 982 522 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for Phase I, which required modification of Boeing 707 aircraft to accommodate 30-ft-wide, mushroom-shaped radome on top of fuselage aft of wings, (dod Release 564-70)
President Nixon signed E.O. 11523 establishing National Industrial Pollution Control Council to advise on industry programs on environmental quality. He announced appointments of Bert S. Cross, board chairman of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co., and Willard F. Rockwell, board chairman of North American Rockwell Corp., as Chairman and Vice Chairman and appointments of 53 members to Council. Council would submit, through Secretary of Commerce, specific recommendations for further action on industrial environmental pollution and consider “role it can play in helping to implement the Nation’s environmental protection program." (PD, 4/13/70, 502-4) *	Senate, by vote of 72 to 6, adopted S.R. 211, which sought agreement with U.S.S.R. on limiting offensive and defensive strategic weapons and suspension of test flights of reentry vehicles. (CP, 4/9/70, S5479-508)
Staran IV system to reduce midair collisions—by computer performing more than 40 million mathematical operations per second to predict collision courses and determine evasive maneuvers—was introduced at Washington, D.C., press conference by developer, Goodyear Aerospace Corp. System could single out aircraft on collision course and show them to air traffic controllers on viewing screen as though they were only aircraft in air. faa was studying proposal for adoption of system. (Goodyear Aerospace Corp Release)
North American Rockwell Corp. would lay off 8000 employees between April 1 and Nov. 1, Wall Street Journal quoted NR Chairman Willard F. Rockwell as saying in interview. Most reductions would be in aerospace operations at Southern California facilities. About 30% of workers to be laid off were engineers and 10% were management employees. (James, WSJ, 3/23/70)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union Message before Joint Session of Congress: “The moment has arrived to harness the vast energies and abundance of this land to the creation of a new American experience. . .more truly a reflection of the goodness and grace of the human spirit. The seventies will be a time of new beginnings, a time of exploring both on the earth and in the heavens, a time of discovery.” gnp would increase by $500 billion in next 10 yrs—increase greater than entire growth of U.S. economy from 1790 to 1950. “Our purpose in this period should not be simply better management of the programs of the past. The time has come for a new quest—a quest not for a greater quantity of what we have had but for a new quality of life in America.” President proposed total reform of welfare system; assessment and reform of institutions of government at Federal, state, and local level; and “reforms which will expand the range of opportunities for all Americans.” Greatest question of seventies was “shall we surrender to our surroundings or shall we make our peace with nature and begin to make reparations for the damage we have done to our air, to our land, and to our water?” President would propose to Congress $10 billion nationwide clean waters program “to put modern municipal waste treatment plants in every place in America where they are needed to make our waters clean again.. .now.” He called for further advances in engine design and fuel composition for automobile, “our worst polluter of the air,” and new rural environment to reverse migration to urban centers. He also planned balanced FY 1971 budget to help stop rise of cost of living. . I see a new America as we celebrate our 200th anniversary 6 years from now. I see an America in which we have abolished hunger, provided the means for every family in the nation to obtain a minimum income, made enormous progress in providing better housing, faster transportation, improved health, and superior education. . . . I see an America in which we have made great strides in stopping pollution of our air, cleaning up our water, opening up our parks, continuing to explore in space. Most important, I see an America at peace with all the nations of the world. “This is not an impossible dream. The goals are within our reach. . . . Let it not be recorded that we were the first American generation that had the means but not the vision to make this dream come true.” (PD, 1/26/70,58-66)	.
USAF K-30, one of largest aerial reconnaissance cameras, had been retired to Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, AFSC announced. Camera, which had more than 20 yrs service, measured 0.9 by 1.4 by 1.5 m (3 by 414 by 5 ft), weighed 300 kg (665 lbs), and used 254-cm (100-in) focal-length optical system, (afsc Release 153.70)
Authorization to proceed with B-l Advanced Strategic Bomber development programs was issued by Deputy Secretary of Defense David M. Packard in memo to Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. It would be “several years” before production decision would be made. “Factors to be considered . . . will include the progress and success of the engineering development program, the progress of the salt talks, and the relationship of the program to these talks.” Dr. Seamans announced selection of North American Rockwell Corp. and General Electric Co. as airframe and propulsion contractors for engineering development of bomber. Total estimated cost of airframe contract was $1 350 814 739 exclusive of avionics. Total estimated propulsion cost was $406 654000. (Text; dod Release 47970)
Air Line Pilots Assn, had asked U.S. District Court of Appeals for District of Columbia to stop simultaneous landings on intersecting runways at National Airport in Washington, D.C., Friendship Airport in Baltimore, and other airports around U.S., Washington Evening Star reported, alpa said procedures authorized by faa in April lowered safety standards. (Kadis, W Star, 8/5/70, F9)
Permanent injunction to bar sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to EDP Technology, Inc., private research company, was issued by Justice Harold P. Kelly of New York State Supreme Court. He ruled Cornell should continue to operate laboratory and its work should be restricted to public research projects. (.NYT, 3/5/70, 40C)
F-14, “first completely new American fighter plane. . .since the XF4H1—prototype of the F4 Phantom,” would “skim down the runway” at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. before end of January 1971, Washington Sunday Star said, usn would attempt to buy 710 F-14s over next decade at $8 billion including r&d costs. Aircraft would have titanium wings. It was first time any manufacturer had used as much as 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of titanium in aircraft production. (Kelly, W Star, 4/26/70, A7)
Exhibit of 23 paintings of space subjects by Chesley Bonestell opened at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York. (Am Mu-seum-Hayden Planetarium Release)
NASA sources quoted by New York Times said Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov—due in Washington, D.C., Oct. 18 for 10-day NASA tour—had not yet accepted NASA invitation to visit ksc. Acceptance would signify thaw in U.S.-U.S.S.R. space relations, since there was tacit understanding that U.S.S.R. would have to reciprocate with invitation to tour Soviet launch facilities. (NYT, 10/14/70)
Gen. George S. Brown—former Commander of Seventh Air Force and Deputy Commander for Air Operations, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (macv)—assumed command of afsc. He succeeded Gen. James Ferguson, who retired Aug. 31. (afsc Release 246.70)
Washington Airways, Inc., had told CAB it was abandoning its application for helicopter route approval between downtown Washington, D.C:, and Washington’s three major airports, Washington Post reported. District zoning commission had refused to act on request by consortium of nine airlines to amend zoning law to permit rooftop helipads. (WPost,9/22/70, Cl)
AP interview of Dr. Charles H. Townes, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist and Nobel laureate, on possibility of life in outer space was published in Washington Evening Star: “It is clear that we already have found most of the molecules that biologists have postulated are necessary for the beginning of life.” Scientists were also finding particles of dust in “interstellar smog” that were similar to earth rocks. “.. .we can see in space many of the materials from which planets are made and which life needs to begin.” (W Star, 11/ 4/70, A2) political terms. Delegation would visit Washington, D.C., at undecided date for further talks. (Reuters, NYT, 11/6/70, C9)
Presidential Management Improvement Award was presented to Van A.Wente of NASA Information Systems and Development Branch for conception, planning, design, and implementation of NASA recon computer system for on-line retrieval of scientific, technical, and management information. Presentation was made at Presidential Awards Dinner in Washington, D.C. (NASA Org & Mgmt Off)
naa President Frederick B. Lee announced selection of C. R. Smith, former Secretary of Commerce and President of American Airlines, to receive Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Smith would be honored at annual memorial dinner Dec. 17 for outstanding contributions to aviation over four decades. (W Star, 9/16/70, A2)
Inter-Academy Exchange program of nas and Soviet Academy of Sciences, renewed and broadened for 1970 and 1971, was signed. Agreement, negotiated in Washington, D.C., was latest in series of two-year agreements begun in 1959. It was retroactive to Jan. 1, 1970. Pact provided for 180 man-months of study in U.S. by scientists designated by Soviet Academy and for 180 man-months of research in U.S.S.R. by scientists selected by nas. It also contained
Charles Scribner’s Sons published first two volumes of 13-volume Dictionary of Scientific Biography, first comprehensive biographical reference work covering science exclusively. Project was under auspices of American Council of Learned Societies and had nsf financial support. (Whitman, NYT, 7/11/70; Charles Scribner’s Sons)
Dr. James F. Danielli, Univ. of Buffalo biologist, in Washington, D.C., press conference called for “watchdog agency” to steer scientists clear of experiments in germ warfare or genetic engineering that might change fundamental nature of man for the worst. Dr. Danielli was head of Buffalo Univ. team that synthesized single-celled organisms from component parts of other similar organisms [see Nov. 12]. (Randal, W Star, 12/9/70, A21)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was being awarded $1 098 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for operation, maintenance, and improvement of radar-target-scatter facility to obtain characteristic radar data of signal return from various aerospace vehicles. Work would be managed by Air Force Missile Development Center and would be conducted at wsmr. (dod Release 561-70)
Dr. James G. Allen, professor of history at Univ. of Colorado, authority on history of space, and NASA consultant, died of heart ailment at age 69. He had authored several books and articles on space history and had received special citation from American Astronautical Society for work on historical and philosophical background of space age. (Boulder Daily Camera, 9/19/70)
usaf launched experimental reentry vehicle down afwtr from Vandenberg afb. Launch was part of Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) program, (upi, NYT, 6/10/70, 6)
USMC Sikorsky S-65 helicopter set record for intercity travel in 1-hr 17-min 11-sec flight between Wall Street heliport in New York and Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D. C. Flight was organized by Pan American World Airways and Sikorsky Aircraft Corp. to demonstrate feasibility of inter-inner-city helicopter transportation. (Cushing, WPost, 6/10/70, D10)
Aircraft arresting system of barrier net linked to energy absorbers to prevent transport aircraft from taxiing off runway was undergoing final tests at Edwards afb, Calif., AP reported. Net developed by Aerazur Constructions Aeronautique of Paris and energy absorbers developed by All American Engineering Co. could be available to airports in one year. Installation sufficient to stop aircraft of DC-8 size would cost $500 000 to $600 000; tandem system durable enough to stop Boeing 747 at end of runway would cost about $800 000. Major airports could require 10 such devices—one at each end of runway. (Huntsville News, 12/2/70)
First inflight interception of ICBM by ABM was successfully conducted by dod, demonstrating use of Safeguard ABM system to defend U.S. offensive missile sites. Minuteman I test vehicle, launched from Vandenberg AFB, was detected by prototype missile site radar at Kwajalein Atoll in Pacific, which controlled launch of Spartan missile and flight of Spartan to intercept point outside atmosphere. Range instrumentation, which determined successful intercept, indicated Spartan’s final stage (which in operational situation would carry nuclear warhead) had flown close enough to nosecone to have caused its destruction. (DODPIO; NYT, 9/1/70,18)
North American Rockwell Corp. received applications from more than 1000 unemployed aerospace workers during week following June 5 announcement that NR had been awarded $1.35-billion USAF B-l bomber contract. (Wright, NYT, 6/10/70,63)
MSFC announced award of $4 435 275 contract modification to North American Rockwell Corp. for changes in seven Saturn V 2nd stages, S-II-9 through S-II-15. Work, which included testing and replacing components that caused corrosion, would be completed by March 31, 1973. (MSFC Release 70-79)
At NAS annual meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institute geophysical laboratory and editor Of Science, said cutbacks in Government research funds during last five years had dealt devasting blow to U.S. colleges and reduced Nation’s total scientific research effort by at least 30%. If cutbacks continued, U.S. would become “second-class nation in science.” Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Harvey Brooks said surge of science funding in Japan, Western Europe, and U.S.S.R. had cost U.S. its research lead in astronomy, radioastronomy, biology, and physical and organic chemistry. It was doubtful U.S. would ever regain supremacy it once enjoyed in virtually every scientific field. (Kirkman, W News, 4/28/70,20)
USAF science policy was outlined by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development: “Air Force will still support long-range, fundamental research, but in fewer areas than previously.” Research “in aerodynamics, aeropropulsion, and structures will always be directly related to the Air Force missions.” Research “in solid state physics and chemistry will be directly related to the Air Force mission as long as we need new electronic systems and lighter, higher temperature materials. But research in fields such as astrophysics (other than solar phenomena that do affect our operations) is probably permanently removed from the Air Force program.” (Testimony)
Last test model of usaf Minuteman III missile was launched from underground silo at etr toward South Atlantic target, ending 28-mo development program. Missile was 17th Minuteman III launched from etr since Aug. 16, 1968; 15 had been launched under simulated operational conditions at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Tests at Vanden-berg would continue, (upi, W Star, 12/14/70, A6) December 15:	U.S.S.R.’s Venus VII, launched Aug. 17, reached atmosphere of Venus. At 8:02 am Moscow time (12:02 am est) orbital module and descent package separated, Tass announced. After aerodynamic braking of descent package, parachute system was deployed, antennas unfolded, and transmission begun. Data was transmitted for 35 min during descent. Soviet scientists later reported surface of Venus had been calculated to have temperature of 773 K (500° C; 932°F) and pressure of 100 atmospheres. On Jan. 26, 1971, Tass announced Venus VII had landed and had continued transmitting data from surface fpr 23 min. Longest survival time of three previous Venus landing missions attempted by U.S.S.R. had been 94 min, recorded for Venus IVOct. 18, 1967. (Sov Rpt, 12/20/ 70; 2/2/71; SBD, 12/21/70; 204; O’Toole, WPost, 12/16/70, A25)
U.S. intention to begin deployment of mirv missiles in June was disclosed by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., at closed session of Senate Armed Services Committee, AP reported. (CTrib, 3/11/70,18)	_
Chicago Daily News said student antiwar demonstrations at Univ. of Illinois in Urbana might have caused dod to reevaluate decision to locate world’s largest computer—Illiac IV—on University campus. Sources in Washington, D.C., had said dod was reevaluating whether to locate computer center in Urbana. Computer, being funded by dod at cost of more than $24 million, would be used two thirds time for military work, such as plotting operations of U.S. missile defense systems under enemy attack. During remaining time, computer would be available for academic work by university scientists. Computer had been target of student and faculty protests at Urbana since Nov. 15, 1969, when university newspaper revealed it would be built on campus. (C Daily News, 5/14/70,5)
Coalition Against the SST—23 groups including Sierra Club, Friends of the Earth, and United Auto Workers Union—urged Federal law banning SST sonic booms over U.S. Coalition spokesman, Dr. Karl M. Ruppenthal of Stanford Univ., told Washington, D.C., news conference Government officials ‘‘state that no annoying overland flights are contemplated, but they refuse to cooperate when meaningful noise legislation is proposed.” (Cohn, WPost, 7/21/70, A2)
U.S.S.R. had made first tests of warheads on SS-11 icbm, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird reported at Washington, D.C., press conference. Laird also announced decision to establish all-service Blue Ribbon Action Commission to assist in implementing dod decisions in response to recommendations of Blue Ribbon Defense Panel [see July 1]. (Transcript)
Harry Schwartz commented in New York Times on Aug. 17 launch of Venus VJIby U.S.S.R.: “Some of the space age’s richest scientific dividends have been the surprising findings of Soviet and American instrument-carrying rockets sent to Venus in the past decade. The excitement generated by this new information explains the widespread approval from the world’s scientific community of the news last week that Moscow had launched still another unmanned spaceship toward Earth’s nearest planetary neighbor.” (NYT, 8/23/70, 4:5)
Treasury Dept, graduated first class of 46 customs security officers to replace temporary sky marshals serving aboard U.S. international and domestic flights to combat skyjacking. Washington, D.C., ceremony marked transition of sky marshal program from multiagency to permanent single-agency status. Treasury Dept, would graduate about 50 officers a week until complement of 2100 was qualified for duty. (Av Wk, 1/4/71,22)
At meeting of American College of Cardiology in New Orleans, La., ARC-Stanford Univ. team of scientists reported successful use of sonar to provide data on heartbeat and blood circulation formerly unobtainable from cardiac patients without cardiac catherization, blood sampling, or x-rays. Stanford work—supported by arc, nih and American Heart Assn.—used commercially available machine which emitted and received high-frequency sound waves. As sonic impulses were bounced against walls of heart, they were recorded and converted into electrical signals which were displayed on TV screen. Sonar also was being used at Stanford to detect heart changes that led to early rejection in heart transplant patients. (NASA Release 70-32)
LeRC and Northern Ohio section of American Nuclear Society held combined meeting at LeRC. Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Environmental Planning for Republic Steel Corp. and of Lake Erie International Jetport Project, discussed technology and society. Dr. Silverstein had retired as LeRC Director in 1969. (LeRC Release 70-69)
afsc announced senior staff changes: Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, would retire Sept. 1. Gen. George S. Brown, Deputy Commander, Seventh Air Force (pacaf), would succeed Gen. Ferguson. L/G James T. Stewart, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, had been reassigned as Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd), Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, effective June 1, replacing m/g Lee V. Gossick who assumed Gen. Stewart’s previous duties. m/g Clifford J. Kronauer, Jr., Commander, Space and Missile Test Center, would become afsc Chief of Staff on Aug. 1. m/g Louis L. Wilson, Jr., Vice Commander, Armament Development and Test Center, Eglin afb, Fla., would become Vice Commander, Ninth Air Force on Aug. 1. b/g Jack Bollerud, Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, had announced retirement effective July 31. (afsc Release 156.70)
SoyuzIXCosmonautsi Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin 10-day goodwill tour in U.S. as NASA guests. (WPost, 10/19/70; NASA Release 70-170)
MSC announced award to North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. of $250 000 contract for lunar orbit station study to define configuration, refine functions of station, detail feasible scientific investigations, and develop rescue capabilities. Station would operate in zero gravity but would be modifiable to artificial-gravity environment. (MSC Release 70-60)
Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead in New York Times Magazine discussed prefigurative society in which young became mentors of elders. “A scientist friend of mine was having a conversation with his son and wasn’t getting anywhere until he realized that he was standing on the earth looking at the moon, and the boy was standing on the moon looking at tne earth.” (NYTMagazine, 4/26/70, 102) Dr. Reuven Ramaty of gsfc reported measurements of low-energy cosmic-ray positrons by Ogo II satellite (launched June 6, 1966) had indicated that relatively young and close cosmic-ray source—a supernova explosion—might have occured 100 000 yrs ago and 300 light years from earth. (Crab Nebula, closest known remnant of any supernova previously discovered, was 5000 light years from earth.) (Press Coni Summary; Text; AP, CSM, 5/2/70) During meeting, 32 APS members marched on dod to oppose Vietnam War, abm and mirv missile systems, and dod ties with American universities. (WPost, 4/30/70, A35)
One hundred twenty-fifth anniversary of ScientiGc American. Magazine had been founded in New York by Rufus Porter, New England electroplater, who had invested $100 in venture. It now had circulation of 450 000—90 000 of it overseas, including Italian language edition. Soviet Academy of Sciences distributed facsimile. Magazine had published works of 45 Nobel Prize winners, 25 of them before they became laureates. (Lipman, WPost, 8/30/70, C5)
Development of Airplane Stability and Control Technology,” 1970 von Karm&n Lecture by Courtland D. Perkins, Associate Dean of Princeton Univ. School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, was published by Journal of Aircraft: “As the airplane becomes larger, faster, and as a result, more complex, the balance between inherent aerodynamic stability and stability provided through automatic sys-terns must be made on an overall aircraft performance judgment. There is much yet to be done with the technology....” (JA, 7-8/70, 290-301)
At annual meeting of American Physical Society in Chicago, symposium on cosmic physics suggested stellar explosion could have precipitated condensation of dust and gas to form sun and planets. Analysis of meteorite discovered several years earlier at St. Sever-in, France, had led to suggestion by Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg that great stellar explosion had accompanied or immediately preceded formation of solar system, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Meteorite had contained calcium phosphate crystals in tiny tracks of particles ejected by radioactive atoms. Suspected source was plutonium 244—element manufactured in laboratory but not found in nature. Because plutonium 244’s mean lifetime was only 118 million yrs, any plutonium in earth rocks or meteorites, both more than 4.5 billion yrs old, would have decayed radioactively unless something occurred just before or during solar system’s formation that synthesized this substance. According to Wasserburg hypothesis, material was incorporated into meteorite where, during solar system’s infancy, it decayed possibly into neutron-rich forms, or isotopes, of xenon found in meteorite, leaving radiation tracks. (NYT, 1/30/70, 23)
Washington Post editorial commented on July 13 death of Manhattan Project head, L/G Leslie R. Groves: “The ultimate appraisal of Leslie Groves’ contribution to his country and to mankind must await a future judgment—perhaps a Judgment Day. He was a superb soldier. The talents for organization and administration, the daring and imagination he brought to his mammoth assignment were peculiarly American, reflective in a sense of the genius of America. Their imprint on the world is, in any event, indelible.” (W Post, 7/16/70, A22)
Three engine control assemblies were removed from XB-70 research aircraft on exhibition at Air Force Museum atWright-Patterson afb. Ohio, to be used for F-15 engine/inlet compatibility tests in 5-m (16-ft) wind tunnels at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn. Equipment would be on loan through June 1972. (afsc Release 333.70)
Structural failure of left wing stemming from “preexisting defect in the steel used in a pivot fitting where the wheel joins the fuselage” was cause of Dec. 22, 1969, crash of usaf F-lll, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced. USAF would inspect remaining F-llls for similar defects. (Wieghart, NYT, 1/13/ 70, 16)
Agreement to reduce jet aircraft air pollution by 1972 was reached in Washington, D.C., by Nixon Administration and representatives from 31 scheduled and charter U.S. airlines. Airlines agreed to install pollution control devices on 1000 Boeing 727 and 737 and DC-9 aircraft during regular maintenance overhauls. Devices, called burner cans, would eliminate 70%-80% of solid particles spewed into air by jets. (Curry, WPost, 1/21/70, A2)
Theory that helped to explain source of uncontrolled malignant growth and indicated short cuts to development of chemical countermeasures against cancer was described by LaRC biophysicist Clarence D. Cone, Jr., at 12th Annual Science Writers Seminar of American Cancer Society in San Antonio, Tex. Theory proposed that division of body cells was controlled precisely by pattern of ion concentrations on surface tissue of cells. Pattern was formed by electrical voltage that normally existed across cellular surfaces and varied from one part of body to another. Theory provided explanation of functional connection between two major pathological features of cancer—uncontrolled growth of cells and spread of disease in body—and implied that basic functional aberrancy producing both conditions lay in alteration of molecular structure of cell surface. Theory proposed central mechanism for control of body cell division, which, if proved valid, would provide new basis for research progress on key biomedical problems, such as human conception, birth defects, growth, aging, and cancer. (Text; NASA Release 70-43)
vtol Dynastat, helium-filled airship that could carry 100 passengers 300-800 km (200-500 mi) in 30- by 9-m (100- by 30-ft) car, was described at symposium of American Helium Society in Washington, D.C. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. scientists Dr. Robert S. Ross and Philip F. Myers said airship would be powered by four to six engines driving propellers with forward and vertical thrust. (Goodyear Profile, 5/70, 9-10; Huntsville Times, 3/29/70)
dod announced usaf contract awards: $1 800 000 supplemental agreement to mit for basic research on properties of matter in intense magnetic fields, managed by Office of Scientific Research; and $354 000 initial increment to $1 062 000 cost-reimbursement contract to Trustees of Princeton Univ. for basic research on hypersonic flow, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div. (dod Release 54-70)
afsc announced that afwtr at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and samsO’s aerospace test wings at Vandenberg and Patrick afb, Fla., would be combined to form Space and Missile Test Center (samtec) under SAM so command, (afsc Release 65.70)
dod Deputy Secretary for Public Affairs Jerry W. Friedheim said in Washington, D.C., that deployment of Minuteman III missiles had begun in North Dakota on April 18 but their MIRVs would not be installed until June. (Roberts, WPost, 5/27/70, 3)
Propeller-driven XC-142 v/stol aircraft on loan to NASA by USAF ended experiments in support of research into v/stol techniques at LaRC and was flown by NASA pilots to Air Force Museum at Dayton, Ohio. Built by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., four-engine tilt-wing aircraft had evolved from wind-tunnel models tested at LaRC and other NASA centers starting in 1956. (NASA Special Release)
Twenty-third anniversary of usaf. Official anniversary was established Sept. 18, 1947, with swearing-in of first secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington. Gen. Carl Spaatz was sworn in as first usaf Chief of Staff on Sept. 26, 1947). (Airman, 9/70, 15)
Discovery that blazing stars collided at rate of one every four months in heart of at least-one kind of galaxy was reported from evidence obtained by Stratoscope II balloon-borne optical telescope March 26-27. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Martin Schwarzchild said collisions might be source of brightness fluctuations in Seyfert galaxies —rare heavenly masses with small, dense nuclei that radiated light and radio energy and bright lines produced by hot gases in motion. Stratoscope II had observed Seyfert galaxy at range of 30 light years from earth. (Lannan, W Star, 6/2/70)
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Assessment of Space Communications Technology: NASA program of r&d in comsats and associated equipment during past decade had been “remarkably successful.” ComSatCorp also had made “significant strides.” As result, U.S. was “undisputed leader in this new technology.” State of the art was sufficiently advanced to “make important contributions to the improvement of the American domestic telecommunications system, particularly in Alaska. . .largest and most remote State of the Union.” Committee urged expansion of NASA space applications program. It should be “principle purpose of the U.S. Government.. .to bring to the American people the best, the most effective, the least expensive communications services. It is the clear responsibility of the Government to develop and implement public policies, and improve the effectiveness of its regulatory functions, so as to promote the improvement of the Nation’s telecommunications at a rate which reflects the progress of technology. To the extent that governmental indecision has delayed the efficient integration of innovation and invention, the Government must be considered to have failed in this responsibility.” (Text)
