Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., press conference that Soviet buildup of land- and sea-based missiles was “far outdistancing” estimates he had offered to Congress seven months previously. He confirmed report that U.S.S.R. was expected to match U.S. strength by deploying 41 Polaris-class missile submarines by 1973. (Beecher, ATT, 10/14/71, 5)
usaf commanders believed usaf had entered “critical period in which American strategic and tactical air power is declining” while U.S.S.R.’s “is expanding,” New York Times reported. Chief elements of problem were that usaf’s basic weapon systems, B-52 bomber and F—4 fighter-bomber, were nearing obsolescence and needed to be replaced at “high cost” by B-l and F—15; satellite-gathered intelligence indicated U.S.S.R. had established lead over U.S. in land-based icbms, was building emplacements for larger missiles, and had deployed FOBS to bring missiles on target from any direction; and developments were taking place against “background of budgetary stringency” in U.S. (Middleton, NYT, 10/31/71, 95)
Plans for establishment of International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., France, Italy, Poland, and East and West Germany were described in New York Times by Walter Sullivan: Project, “fruit of four years of private Soviet-American negotiations” had culminated in eight-nation conference in Paris. Prominent among principals had been nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Dzherman M. Gvishiani, Soviet specialist in American management techniques. {NYT, 10/14/71, 1)
MSFC announced plans to launch 914-mm (36-in) Stratoscope II balloonborne astronomical telescope from msfc in August. Objective of mission was to study Galaxies M31 and M32, Planetary Nebula (NGC 7662), Orion Nebula, and planet Saturn. Stratoscope II project management, previously directed by Princeton Univ., had been recently assigned to msfc as part of project reorganization. Seven previous launches had been from National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Scientific Balloon Flight Station at Palestine, Tex. (msfc Release 71—78)
Discovery of “first incontrovertible evidence” of existence of natural plutonium 244 by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley scientists was described by Dr. Calvin Alexander in Washington, D.C., press interview. Dr. Alexander and team had baked 15 mg of Pu 244—two thirds of world’s supply—in vacuum system at 2144.3 K (3400°F). Pu 244 had been made expressly for experiment by Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It survived experiment almost intact, having lost only “a hundred milliom atoms of mass” in form of rare gas, xenon. Those atoms had provided “fingerprint” for Pu 244 similar to fingerprint found in certain meteorites. Scientists had suspected meteorite fingerprint had been remnant of completely decayed Pu 244, but until Berkeley experiment they had had no “file” against which to check it. (Lannan, W Star, 4/15/71, A6)
Discovery of rarest nuclear particle anti-omega-minus baryon in photo of nuclear interaction was reported by physicist Dr. Gerson Goldhaber of Univ. of California at Berkeley at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Particle’s track had been found in search of more than 500 000 photos and further confirmed that baryon particles had antiparticles. Photos of particle collisions were taken in heavy-hydrogen-filled bubble chamber of particle accelerator at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (AP, NYT, 2/2/71, 19)
Tenth anniversary of Air Force Systems Command, afsc—in charge of planning, developing, and acquiring all usaf weapon and space systems and supporting technologies—administered annual contracts worth about $48 billion. Annual expenditures accounted for more than one fourth of total usaf budget, afsc was staffed by 9600 officers, 18 500 airmen, and 31000 civilians, (afsc Release 94.71; AFM, 4/71, 43)
The short and uneventful flight of Soyuz 10 suggested . . . that the Soviet Union ran into technical difficulties in its first attempt at establishing a manned workshop in earth orbit,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. “Just what the difficulties might have been is unclear, but the landing of Soyuz 10 after only two days in space, the brief time Soyuz spent docked with the Salute workshop and the apparent failure to transfer crew members ... all added up in American minds to a bungled mission.” (W Post, 4/26/71, A21)
Tass reported arrival in Moscow of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, and group of NASA experts “in connection with the forthcoming technical conference of Soviet and American experts in ensuring compatibility of means of approach and docking of spaceships and stations.” Conference would take place Nov. 29 to Dec. 7. (fbis-Sov-71-230, 11/30/71, LI)
Selection of National Science Teachers Assn., Washington, D.C., for negotiation of $39 000, 19-mo, cost-reimbursement contract for management and operation of Skylab Student Project was announced by NASA. Purpose of project was to stimulate interest in science and technology by directly involving students in space research, nsta would notify student and educational community of opportunity and method of participation, develop procedures for evaluation of proposals based on educational value, and develop certificates of participation and awards system for entrants, nsta also would develop plans for entrants whose proposal ideas had been selected by NASA and conduct Skylab Student Education Conference at Ksc in conjunction with Skylab launch, (nasa Release 71—183)
MSFC announced award of $1197 000 incentive contract to American Science and Engineering, Inc., for support services in Skylab atm project. Contract would run from Aug. 22, 1971, through June 30, 1972. (msfc Release 71-176)
Tenth anniversary of Mercury-Redstone mission that carried chimpanzee Ham up to 253-km (157-mi) altitude on suborbital flight. Ham was recovered in good health. He was now ward of National Zoo in Washington, D.C. (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A4; Natl Zoo Pio)
Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Space Theater at American MuseumHayden Planetarium was dedicated at ceremonies in New York. (Invitation )
First two DC—10 jet transport aircraft were delivered by manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp. to American Airlines and United Airlines at Long Beach, Calif. (Bedingfield, NYT, 7/30/71, 54)
Soviet computer had calculated total weight of atmosphere at 5 quadrillion, 157 trillion tons, Tass reported. News agency said calculation was “essential for research in cosmonautics, space geodesy and gravimetry.” Computer had, for first time, taken into account “all the peculiarities of the earth’s relief and the distribution of temperatures on its surface,” Tass said, (upi, San Francisco Examiner, 11/5/71)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew from San Francisco International Airport to Fairbanks, Alaska, in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft on first sector of 32 000-km (20 000-mi), month-long journey over North and South Poles and prime and 180th meridians at Equator—geographic crossroads of world. If successful, UPI said, Long would establish eight aviation records, including first flight around the world landing on all seven continents, first solo flight across Antarctica, and first solo from Antarctica to Australia. (W Star, 11/6/71, A2)
President Nixon formally changed name of Presidential Boeing 707 aircraft from Air Force One to The Spirit of ’76. Change was made at request of David J. Mahoney, Chairman of American Revolution Bicentennial Commission. Air Force Two would retain its name. (AP, W Post, 7/31/71, A2)
dod Project mast (military assistance to safety and traffic) was example of “major role” of transfer of technical knowledge from DOD laboratories to civilian scientific community in “technological revolution,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said at meeting of Domestic Action Council in Washington, D.C. Since July 1970 inception of program, military helicopters had flown 767 missions and evacuated 983 civilian patients for civilian agencies. (Text)
Shift in aec’s role from promoting atomic energy to protecting public interest in nuclear affairs was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Aec Chairman, at annual meeting of Atomic Industrial Forum and American Nuclear Society in Bal Harbour, Fla. It was aec’s responsibility to “develop new technical options and to bring those options to the point of commercial application,” not to “solve industry’s problems which may crop up in the course of commercial exploitation. That is industry’s responsibility, to be settled among industry, Congress, and the public.” aec’s role was “primarily to perform as a referee serving the public interest.” (Text)
Exhibits at new $6-million Air Force Museum near Dayton, Ohio, were described by New York Times: DC-6 Independence used by President Truman; Constellation Columbine HI and 47J Sioux helicopter used by President Eisenhower; reproduction of Wright 1909 Military Flyer; B-70, only remaining ultrasonic bomber; Douglas World Cruiser New Orleans, which flew around world in 1924; Soviet MiG-15; and relics of Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk. Museum, “first permanent repository of Air Force memorabilia,” was 244 m (800 ft) long, 91 m (300 ft) wide, and 24 m (80 ft) tall and housed 150 aircraft. It was built with funds provided by private gifts. NYT, 9/5/71, 28; nasa Hist Off)
President Nixon had asked Congress for $9.1 million to purchase new presidential backup aircraft to replace 13-yr-old Boeing 707 used as Backup aircraft for Spirit of ’76, Washington Post reported. President’s aircraft, formerly known as Air Force One, was Boeing 707-320-B delivered to usaf in 1962. (W Post, 11/19/71, B7)
Mrs. Betty J. Baldwin, arc computer programmer, had been selected one of top 10 business women of the year by American Business Women’s Assn., for progress as NASA civil service employee and interests in educational and character-building programs, arc Astrogram announced, (arc Astrogram, 11/11/71, 1)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said significance of man’s movement into space with both “automated, unmanned spacecraft and manned vehicles,” ought to be grasped by every nation and every individual. Speaking at “Report on America” dinner sponsored in Washington, D.C., by Time magazine for group of European businessmen, he added: “Man has left Earth. There is as great an awesome potential in that simple statement as there is in the fact, man appeared on Earth. Human destiny now has another door opened to it that previously was firmly locked.” Satellite investigations and space probes had advanced human knowledge about earth, moon, and planets. “Astronomers now are able to view across the entire electromagnetic spectrum to obtain information about the birth, evolution, and extinction of celestial objects previously beyond reach of the most powerful telescope. Space is, in fact, a vast laboratory in which to experiment with weightlessness, hard vacuum, solar plasmas, and extremely high cosmic ray particles. “The potential value of space technology for Earth applications alone, including long-range weather forecasting, earth resources surveys, and communications, has been estimated ... at billions of dollars annually to the world.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/71, 182)
NASA announced receipt of three proposals for design and fabrication of two experimental, transport, STOL research aircraft with propulsive lift—from McDonnell Douglas Corp., from Boeing Co. with Grumman Corp., and from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. with North American Rockwell Corp., Bell Aerospace Co. Div of Textron, Inc., and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc. Aircraft would provide data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet stol transport systems in joint nasa—dot—faa—usaf program to relieve noise and congestion at busy airports. (NASA Release 71—207)
msfc announced award of $325 000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for 12-month study of inspace propellant logistics and safety, (msfc Release 71—116)
European Space Conference President Tbeo Lefevre, Belgian Minister for Scientific Policy and Planning, told Brussels press conference that U.S. had refused at Feb. 11—12 conference in Washington, D.C., to sell U.S. launch vehicles for European comsats. Lefevre said State Dept, had told him, however, that if two thirds of Intelsat’s 72 members agreed that launch vehicles should be sold* U.S. would sell. (NYT, 2/17/71, 14; WPost, 2/17/71, A13)
Soviet Aviation Industry Minister Pavel Dementyev told Paris press conference Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 was expected to go into commercial service in late 1973 or early 1974, about same time as Anglo-French Concorde. Only one Tu-144 was operational; two other prototypes under construction were expected to fly at year’s end. Tu-144 had logged several hundred flying hours and flown at 2458 km per hr (1528 mph) at 6100 m (20 000 ft). Aleksey N. Tupolev, designer of Tu-144, said at press conference that Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby was interested in aircraft, “but it is too soon to speak about markets or negotiations with international airlines until the Tu-144 has completed its test program.” (Reuters, W Post, 5/29/71)
Full-size plywood model of B-l strategic bomber, designed as replacement for USAF B-52, was displayed for first time by North American Rockwell Corp. in Los Angeles. (W Post, 11/5/71, 3)
Two Sprint missiles successfully intercepted icbm nosecone over Pacific in latest test of Safeguard defense system. It was first time two missiles were used in Safeguard test. Target was launched from Vanden-berg afb, Calif., 6700-km (4200-mi) distance. (Reuters, C Trib, 2/23/71, 8)
After more than quarter century of dominating international aviation scene, U.S. was “well on its way to becoming, if not an also-ran, just another contender for the trophies of the world’s aviation markets,” John F. Loosbrock said in Air Force Magazine article. “For indicators, one only had to stroll the display line, watch the flying demonstrations, and eavesdrop at the chalets” at Paris Air Show. Bitterest pill was “lack of American presence in the supersonic-transport competition, while the Soviet TU—144. and the Anglo-French Concorde were impressing customers, the press, the public. . . .” Equally important was “dazzling array of commercial and military aviation products” displayed by European suppliers. For U.S. to forge ahead again in aviation and advanced technology generally it was going to require “new ways of looking at the problem, new ways of doing things. We are pricing ourselves out of the market, not only for what we hope to sell abroad, but even for what we would like to sell to ourselves.” (AF Mag, 7/7, 6)
dod spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C., that cost increase for USN F-14 fighter aircraft was about $2 billion. If tentative plans to produce more than 700 aircraft materialized, cost would increase $2.8 million per aircraft, from $11.5 million to $14.3 million. Earlier, manufacturer Grumman Aerospace Corp. had blamed cost increase on inflation and other factors contributing to poor business conditions. (Witkin, NYT, 6/3/71, 15)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. editorial board for preparation and publication of review of space biology and medicine held second meeting in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Professor Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California and Professor Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Institute of Medical Biological Problems of Soviet Ministry of Health. (nasa Release 71-16)
noaa said scientific team that studied 23 310 000-hectare (90 000-sq-mi) region east of Barbados in summer of 1969 had reached preliminary conclusion that dust blown off North African deserts into upper air ended in atmosphere over South Atlantic and influenced North American weather. Scientists, who had hoped to find atmosphere relatively free of particulate matter, had discovered instead African dust in Barbados air at levels to 5000 m (16 000 ft). (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/71, A15)
LaRC Director of Aeronautics Laurence K. Loftin assumed for one year post of Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d Grant L. Hansen. (Av Wk, 5/31/71, 23)
Stanford Univ. and MIT experiments to determine internal structure of protons and neutrons by use of 21-bev beam at Stanford’s Linear Accelerator Center were described in Scientific American by Dr. Henry W. Kendall of mit and Dr. Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky of Stanford Univ. Scientific team had smashed what they thought were basic atom particles, to find that “the way ultrahigh-energy electrons are scattered by protons and neutrons suggests that these ‘elementary’ nuclear particles have a complex internal structure consisting of pointlike entities.” New entities had been named “partons” because they seemed to be parts within parts. Scientists had concluded, “It is still too early to say whether the parton model will lead to an understanding of the nucleon’s structure or whether entirely new ideas may be required.” (Scientific American, 6/71, 61—77)
Government-industry program for development of experimental jet STOL aircraft was proposed by nasa and dot at meeting of nae Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board in Washington, D.C. Program would pool Government and industry funds in partnership to develop low-noise-level jet STOL technology. Development of prototype and operational aircraft for commercial use would be left to competitive industry decision and financing, nasa later said development of experimental aircraft was necessary to complete technology and proof-of-concept work for production of economically and environmentally acceptable stol air transport system. Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, estimated that research aircraft could be flight-tested in approximately two years from inception of cooperative program, (nasa Release 71-20; nae pio)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, was formally presented with membership in Soviet Academy of Sciences by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F.	Dobrynin in ceremony at Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. (aec Release 0-120)
Federal Government had filed $3 690 290 suit against Bechtel Corp. in Federal District Court in San Francisco, Wall Street Journal reported. Suit charged that Bechtel’s designs for space environment simulation chamber for Msc were “inadequate, improper and unsuited for the purpose intended.” Chamber had failed in 1964 NASA test, Government said. (WSJ, 11/2/71)
NASA Wallops Station participation in Cornell Univ. experiment to obtain data on importance of celestial, magnetic, topographic, and meteorological cues in guidance systems of nocturnally migrating birds was announced by NASA. Station would provide support in tracking birds with 18-m (60-ft) dish on space range antenna (spandar). Birds would be captured in nets, examined, and small magnets would be attached. They would then be released by weather balloon to continue flight under varying cloud conditions. Each bird would be tracked by radar as it made orientational decision and departed in migration. (NASA Release 71—98)
President Nixon in Caneel Bay, Virgin Islands, issued statement following successful Apolio 14 launch: “Today, we take the most amazing things almost for granted. It is difficult to imagine, but some day the discovery of the New World will seem almost inconsequential alongside the explorations of our own time. In a way we are like the people who must have stood on the dock at Palos, Spain, and watched Columbus’ ships disappear, believing they were watching the end of a great event, when they were watching the beginning. But where they watched the world being opened, and did not know it, we are watching the heavens being opened and we do know it. While those men went under the patronage of individual monarchs, our men go for the American people and, in a larger sense, for all mankind." {PD, 2/8/71, 151-2)
New U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile gap was described by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “Today the United States bomber force is less than 600, our sublaunched missiles have numbered 656 for four years, and our land-based missiles have totaled 1,054 for four years. During this time the Soviet bomber force has remained almost constant, but their submarine missile force has grown to almost 400 launchers and is expected to overtake ours in two to three years. And the Soviet land-based intercontinental force has risen to over 1,440 operational launchers—with more on the way. Thus, while the Soviets are gaining and will soon exceed us in missile weaponry at sea, we have already fallen distinctly behind them on land. “Over the same period, the actual destructive power of the U.S. forcesvhas continually decreased, while the Soviet’s destructive power has greatly increased, until the total megatonnage that the Soviets could deliver against U.S. targets is several times our own. “The only strategic area in which we are staying ahead is in the number of individual warheads, and we are doing that only by going to small-yield nmltiples. Even here, the Soviets could in time overtake us, since their missile forces have considerably greater payloads than ours.” (Text) '
General Dynamics Corp. demonstrated CL-215 Air Tanker over Anacostia River in Washington, D.C. Amphibious aircraft scooped up 5.5 cu m (1440 gal) of water from river, took off, and released water from two 2.7-cu-m (720-gal) tanks to show what it could do to forest fire. General Dynamics was interested in selling three CL-215s at $1.4 million each to U.S. Forest Service, Washington Post reported. (Barnes, W Post, 5/12/71, Bl)
Appointment of Robert E. Bower, Director of Advanced Development for Grumman Aerospace Corp., as Director for Aeronautics at Lane had been announced by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Researcher reported. Bower succeeded Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., who had become Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for R&D [see July 1]. (Langley Researcher,	1)
Two prototype x-ray devices for detecting weapons and explosives in carry-on luggage of air passengers had been successfully tested at Dulles International Airport in Virginia, faa announced. Low radiation x-ray units—Flying Spot developed by American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Bendix Ray Inspectoscope developed by Bendix Aerospace Systems Div.—sent x-ray pulse through luggage to obtain shadowgraph, which was displayed on TV screen. Devices did not affect photographic film or recording tape, (faa Release 71-162)
faa announced award of $530 125 contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., for analytical and experimental program to develop new microwave landing system (mls) for civil-military common use, to replace vhf/uhf instrument landing system (ils) developed in early 1940s. Microwave system would provide more precise electronic guidance to aircraft on approaches and landings than current system; selectable flight paths to permit greater number of aircraft operations at airports; closer spacing of parallel runways; and procedures to ease noise over surrounding communities, (faa Release 71—109)
First commercial flight of McDonnell Douglas DC—10 jet transport aircraft was flown by American Airlines between Los Angeles and Chicago. More than 80% of seats were occupied during 3 hr 18 min flight. (CR, 8/6/71, E9096-7; Yarborough, W Star, 8/18/71, DIO; aal pro)
President Nixon released statement on dedication of new USAF Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio: “The United States Air Force Museum demonstrates in a most compelling fashion the tremendous progress which American aviation has made in a remarkably brief time. It will afford a valuable opportunity for future generations of Americans to learn about the dedication and courage and skill which have made that progress possible.” At dedication ceremonies President said, “. . . the United States intends, and we resolve today, that having been first in aviation from the beginning, we will attempt to be first in aviation for the time to come. This should be our goal, and one that we can achieve.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1240-2)	.
mit—“probably the world’s greatest technological university”—had committed itself to seeking change in current U.S. attitude of hostility toward technology, Washington Post reported. In series of statements that “can be taken jointly as a new scientists’ manifesto,” MIT leaders had urged change in national attitude toward “harnessing technology while not bowing to it,” urged end to scientists disclaiming responsibility for the effects of their work, and pledged to make profound changes in their own teaching and research, mit led U.S. universities in obtaining Federal research funding, with $92 million in FY 1970, more than double that of its nearest rival, Stanford Univ., which had Received $39 million. (Cohn, W Post, 9/5/71, D2) by U.S. and Soviet Academies of Science and organized by Soviet astronomer Dr. Yosif S. Shklovsky and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl Sagan. Later Dr. Sagan and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake reported conference conclusions to NAS. Group of scientists had concluded that civilization in another solar system “a few hundred light years away” might be trying to communicate with other bodies, including earth. Man had acknowledged existence of other universes and scientific evidence had shown that amino acids —building blocks of life—could be made from materials and energy sources in space. Scientists had recommended coordinated worldwide effort to intercept messages by searching sky with powerful radiotelescopes. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/19/71, 4:8, Auerbach, W Post, 9/23/71, A4; nas pio)
International Institute for Strategic Studies was quoted as saying in London that 30 to 70 new Soviet Sukhoi Su-11 delta-wing advanced fighter aircraft had been delivered to Soviet Air Force in Egypt. Aircraft were believed to be capable of mach 2.5 speed and were armed with air-to-air missiles. (Reuters, CSM, 12/28/71, 2)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1970 was presented to b/g Robert A. Duffy (usaf), Vice Commander of samso, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for efforts bringing “dramatic improvements in the effectiveness and maneuverability of advanced re-entry systems, and in both the effectiveness and variety of penetration aids designed to compound the difficulties of an enemy in intercepting reentry systems.” (W Star, 6/29/71, A4)
Senate by vote of 49 to 48 passed and cleared for President’s approval H.R. 8432, authorizing $250 million for emergency loan guarantees to major business enterprises. Legislation ended immediate threat of bankruptcy to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and assured Lockheed adequate funds to complete construction of L-1011 TriStar jet transport aircraft, Washington Post later said. President Nixon issued statement following Senate action: “The Senate’s decision to approve a government loan to the Lockheed Corporation is in the best interests of all the American people. I greet this vote—as I greeted the vote in the House of Representatives last week—with gratitude and deep satisfaction. This action will save tens of thousands of jobs that would otherwise have been eliminated. It will have a major impact on the economy of California, and will contribute greatly to the economic strength of the country as a whole. It will help ensure that the Nation’s largest defense contractor, and its largest airframe manufacturer, will continue serving the Nation’s needs. It will also help ensure that this country will continue to play a leading role in the development of aerospace technology.” {CR, 8/2/71, S12823-63; Samuelson, W Post, 8/3/71, Al; PD, 8/9/71, 116-7)
Newspaper editorials commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 missions: New York Times: “It must be recognized that Salyut and its successors raise important new problems for international law and international relations. Back in 1960, during the celebrated case of the American U—2 plane shot down over the Urals, Soviet leaders became very indignant about a manned American vehicle flying over their country. There have been no similar protests about the manned and unmanned satellites of the space era, but uneasiness must grow as political leaders in many countries contemplate the potential military uses of large semipermanent manned space stations such as Salyut.” (.NYT, 6/9/71) Baltimore Sun: “One point the achievement demonstrates is the intensity of Russian concentration on a definite program. As repeatedly defined, and demonstrated in practice, it is a program which sees orbital endeavor as the logical next step, with deeper explorations limited for the time to automatic systems.” (B Sun, 6/9/71)
faa announced start of major program to criss-cross U.S. with area navigation airways. Four transcontinental routes would link New York City with San Francisco and Los Angeles, effective April 29. faa would announce additional 115 area navigation routes within next two months. Shorter interim area navigation routes had already been established to test and develop air traffic control and piloting techniques. Area navigation used airborne computers that permitted pilots to extrapolate signals from existing ground navaids, allowing greater choice and flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 71—33)
Economic impact of end of sst subsidy was described by Frank C. Porter in Washington Post: While move could idle 13 000 workers across U.S., “it is unlikely immediately to cause more than a ripple in the $1 trillion American economy.” Some experts had suggested that continued sst development could cost more jobs ultimately than it would create. Meanwhile, it would cost U.S. Government extra $97 million to scrap program: contract termination costs of $52 million to Boeing Co., $33 million to General Electric Co., $10 million in miscellaneous termination costs, and $2 million to close sst project office at dot. Government also would have to return $22.4 million in downpayments made by airlines. (W Post, 3/25/71, A23)
Spokesman for Army Corps of Engineers announced personnel at KSC District Office would be cut from 30 to 15, effective June 30. Change was “result of a greatly diminished workload for NASA and the Air Force in the Cape Kennedy area.” (Cocoa, Fla, Today, 5/5/71, Bl)
President Nixon addressed Nation by radio upon transmitting foreign policy report for 1970s to Congress: “Over the past two years in some fields the Soviet Union and the United States have moved ahead together. We have taken the first step toward cooperation in outer space. We have both ratified the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons. Just 2 weeks ago, we signed a treaty to prohibit nuclear weapons from the seabeds.” Most significant result of negotiations between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in past year “could be in the field of arms control.” salt had produced “most searching examination of the nature of strategic competition ever conducted between our nations.” If talks continued in cooperative vein there was “reason to hope that specific agreements will be reached to curb the arms race.” (PD, 3/1/71, 298-304) *	President Nixon transmitted to Congress second annual report on foreign policy, United, States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Building for Peace: Space was “clearest example of the necessity for international scientific cooperation and the benefits that accrue from it. The world community has already determined and agreed that space is open to all and can be made the special province of none. Space is the new frontier of man, both a physical and an intellectual frontier. ... As mutual help and cooperation were essential to life on the American frontier, so it is on the frontier of space. It is with that sense that we approach the sharing of both the burdens and the fruits of our space activity. . . . We have some 250 agreements with 74 countries covering space cooperation.” Space was “the only area of which it can be literally said that the potential for cooperation is infinite. . . . We have opened virtually all of our NASA space projects to international participation.” President said he would submit to Senate shortly ICAO treaty which “recognizes aircraft hijacking as a crime . . . and ensures that hijackers will be subject to prosecution or extradition if apprehended on the territory of contracting states.” U.S. intended “to exert every effort to ensure the widest possible international acceptance of this convention.” President’s report said it was “settled U.S. policy to encourage international cooperation in basic science.” Closely allied was national policy on technology exchange. U.S. preeminence in both fields posed question as to extent of its sharing scientific and technological knowledge. “There are obvious security implications in many technological developments, for example in the nuclear and space fields.” U.S. policy, however, “is to keep those areas as circumscribed as possible, and to take the leadership in encouraging the exchange of scientific and technological information.” (PD, 3/1/71, 305-77)
President Nixon sent message to Nikolay V. Podgorny, Chairman of Presidium of Supreme Soviet, on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: “The American people join me in expressing to you and the Soviet people our deepest sympathy on the tragic death of the three Soviet cosmonauts. The whole world followed the exploits of these courageous explorers of the unknown and shares the anguish of their tragedy. But the achievement of cosmonauts Dobrovolsky, Volkov and Patsayev remains. It will, I am sure, prove to have contributed greatly to the future of space and thus to the widening of man’s horizons.” (PD, 7/5/71,1010)
Australia’s decision to accept delivery of 24 U.S. F—111C aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, at USAF news briefing. Matter had “been under discussion” for some time, Seamans said. “I am very gratified that the decision has finally been made and we can put the aircraft in shape for them and get them over to Australia.” (Transcript) , indoor exhibits, (ksc Release 273-71)
Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., was opened to public for signing of condolence book for Soyuz 11 cosmonauts. (W Post, 7/3/71, A12)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew over South Pole in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft to become first man to make solo flight over both North and South Poles during one journey. Long, who left San Francisco Nov. 5, had flown over North Pole to Stockholm, then to London, Africa, Brazil, and Chile before crossing South Pole. (W Post, 11/23/71, B3)
Nomination of Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) for Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for outstanding service to aviation was announced by NAA. Citation was “for his continuing energetic advocacy of and lasting contribution to the development and use of aviation both as a viable national transportation system and as an essential element in maintaining a strong military posture.” Trophy would be presented in Washington, D.C., Dec. 17. (naa Release)
faa, American Airlines, and Aeronautical Radio, Inc., in October would begin three- to-six-month operational test and evaluation of automatic data link communications techniques, faa announced. American Airlines 747 aircraft equipped with data link system that would print out air traffic control clearances, terminal advisories, and other information in cockpit and automatically process pilot position and weather reports to ground would test whether techniques could reduce communications workload on pilots and controllers, (faa Release 71—152)
U.K. government and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. agreed on terms for perpetuating Rolls-Royce engine developed for Lockheed’s L-1011 TriStar jet transport after two-day meetings in Washington, D.C. Terms would be submitted to airlines that had ordered aircraft and to banks financing sales. (Witkin, NYT, 3/31/71,1)
faa announced award of $390 000 contract to Saphier, Lerner, Schindler —Environetics (Div. of Litton Industries) for proposed two-phased study of offshore jetport [see May 21] to serve metropolitan New York City, (faa Release 71-99)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, as NASA Director for Life Sciences. Appointment would become effective when successor for Dr. Berry was found. Dr. Berry would succeed Dr. James W. Humphreys, Jr., who became Secretary-Treasurer of American Board of Surgery. (nasa Ann, 9/1/71; NASA Release 71—166; Am Bd of Surgery pio)
First transatlantic picture telephone call was made successfully between U.S. and Sweden via Intelsat-IV F—2 orbiting over Atlantic. One-hour transmission was part of ceremonies in Sweden and at ComSatCorp headquarters in Washington, D.C., formally inaugurating new Nordic earth station at Tanum, Sweden, jointly owned by Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. (ComSatCorp Release 71-67)
Federation of American Scientists issued report Is There an R&D Gap? Report examined DOD charges that U.S.S.R. R&D expenditures exceeded those of U.S. and would result in Soviet assumption of technological superiority. Conclusion reached was: “This entire episode has been a classical numbers game featuring selective disclosure, questionable assumptions, exaggeratedly precise estimates, misleading language, and alarmist nonsequiter conclusionsThere was “no claim, much less any evidence” that U.S.S.R. was spending more than U.S. on military technological advances as measured by “military technology base—research, exploratory development and a fraction of advanced development.” No one had claimed to be able to measure Soviet expenditures in this category. “These expenditures would amount to a few billion at most and be most difficult to estimate. Necessary expenditures become progressively larger as one moves from research on basic technological discoveries to development of weapons. This shows the extreme difficulty in making meaningful comparisons on a financial basis of efforts to protect against technological surprise. Neither the funding nor numbers of personnel involved are a sensible measure of original technological advance. Of far greater importance is the organization and application of available intellectual and other resources.” (Senate Com on Armed Services, Hearings on FY 1972 Auth; Science, 8/29/71, 707-9)
