Award of $361 494 contract to egng Inc. Bedford (Mass.) Div. for production and testing of prototype cold fog dissipation (cfd) system was announced by Air Force Systems Command, cfd system, designed by Air Force Air Weather Service for global use, would be deployed to U.S.-operated bases in United Kingdom, Germany, Alaska, and Netherlands. CFD system used liquid-propane spray vaporized from tanks at preselected sites upwind of runway complex to disperse fog affecting aircraft at airports, (afsc Release 023.72)
F—5E international fighter aircraft was unveiled in ceremony at Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div. in Hawthorne, Calif. Aircraft, not part of Air Force inventory, would be available to U.S. allies through Military Assistance Service funding program. Aircraft was powered by J—85-21 engines and had greater maneuverability, speed, payload, and range than previous F-5s, with new fire control system that included search-and-track radar. F-5E was scheduled for delivery in 1973. (afsc Newsreview, 8/72, 1)
Membership in National Academy of Sciences ranked “second only to the Nobel Prize as recognition of achievement in American science,” Univ. of Oklahoma political scientist Dr. Don E. Kash and team said in Science article. Striking aspect of composite picture of NAS membership was “extent to which members are educated in, elected from, and employed by a relatively small number of universities.” Academicians from top 10 universities made up 54.8% of NAS membership, averaged 48 yrs at election time, and were nearly 3 yrs younger on election to NAS than those with degrees from other universities. (Kash et al., Science, 3/10/72, 1076-83)
Environmental Action, group of 31 scientists and professionals, issued statement in Washington, D.C., urging Congress to deny Administration’s request for $500 million to build demonstration model of nuclear breeder reactor to generate electricity. Group, which included Nobel Prize winners Dr. Harold C. Urey (physicist) and Dr. Linus C. Pauling (chemist), questioned safety of nuclear reactors and favored concentration of coal to generate power. (Cowan, NYT, 4/26/72, 7) April 26:	Air Force SR-71 reconnaissance jet aircraft set record for sustained speed at high altitudes in lO^-hr flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif. Aircraft, piloted by l/c Thomas B. Estes (usaf), flew 24 100 km (15 000 mi) at speeds over mach 3 and altitudes above 24 400 m (80 000 ft). Flight plan included two round trips across northern and central U.S. and complete circle of western states, equivalent to nonstop flight from San Francisco to Paris and return. (Haughland, AP, W Post, 7/17/72, A3)
Space technology had become “forcing function to bring nations together in mutual undertakings with a common purpose,” Dr. Allen E. Puckett, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics President, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space agreement “expresses our intention to cooperate in various fields of space activity, and in particular proposes a joint experimental flight of U.S. and Soviet manned spacecraft in 1975. We may debate the immediate technical values of this experiment, but the overriding consideration is the fact that we will be working together. Regardless of the technological outcome we will be communicating and collaborating, getting to know each other better, in a common enterprise. On such small beginnings, a new era of mutual understanding and cooperation might evolve.” (A&A, 9/72, 19)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), said in Washington, D.C., that he would carry his efforts to restore original name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy to courts if Congress refused to cooperate. If courts also refused, he would try to persuade Florida Gov. Reubin Askew and Florida residents to “ignore Federal name.” (upi, NYT, 10/6/72)
Delegation of Soviet scientists headed by Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh flew from Moscow to New York. Scientists would participate in general meeting of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., and visit U.S. scientific institutes. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/17/72, LI)
Expansion of environmental and resource base beyond earth was urged by North American Rockwell Corp. scientist Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke in New York Times article. Great crisis of the time was fact “man’s nature is attuned to anr infinite, indestructible world” but earth had ceased to be indestructible. Global development, therefore, “must be based on an open-world concept and include both the development of extraterrestrial resources and the wiser management of our terrestrial resources.” Extraterrestrial imperative was “indivisibility of Earth and space.” (NYT, 3/31/72)
United Auto Workers filed suit in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., in attempt to recoup part of first-year wage increase denied 30 000 aerospace workers by Federal Pay Board Jan. 13. UAW contended portion of wage increase requested represented cost-of-living agreement made in 1968. (Rowe, W Post, 2/8/72, A7) February 8:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, returned to Vehicle Assembly Building Jan. 27 for replacement of command module fuel tank damaged during testing, was rolled out to Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. Spacecraft would be mated with Saturn V booster Feb. 11 and was to begin flight readiness test Feb. 29 in preparation for April 16 launch toward moon, (ksc Release 26-72)
Soviet officials in Washington, D.C., said they would be prepared to begin next round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) in September to maintain momentum generated by May 22-26 summit talks. (Berger, NYT, 6/2/72, Al)
Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) said during campaign visit to Manned Spacecraft Center that “future American space effort should focus on unmanned exploration.” In statement released to press before his msc tour, Sen. McGovern said he favored going ahead with earth resources experiment package (erep). He accused Nixon Administration of eliminating some 500 000 aerospace jobs and 1.8 million positions in defense-related industries “without even thinking about new jobs to replace the ones destroyed.” (Knee-land, NYT, 9/8/72, 20)
NASA announced initiation of cooperative program with Air Force to establish technology base needed by USAF and industry for development of military and civil short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft. Memorandum of Understanding signed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, called for close coordination of USAF advanced, medium STOL transport (amst) program and NASA quiet, experimental stol (questol) program to ensure that “the stol technology developed will . . . serve both areas of interest without undue compromise to either.” Program would be managed by new Air Force/NASA stol Coordinating Council, cochaired by Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development Grant L. Hansen and NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, (nasa Release 72-44)
Air Force announced award of $1 353 205 firm-fixed-price contract to Space Data Corp. for production of meteorological probes and launch support equipment, (dod Release 204^-72)
Soviet Politburo member Mikhail A. Suslov, in speech before foreign affairs commissions of Supreme Soviet, endorsed formal ratification of U.S.-U.S.S.R. antiballistic missile treaty, but warned against U.S. attempts “to distort the spirit and letter of the treaty and interim agreement.” He said U.S.S.R. would “take into consideration in its policy all changes that may appear in the position of the American side.” (NYT, 8/24/72, 6)
Air Force HC-130H piloted by l/c Ed Allison established world record for nonstop, unrefueled flight by turboprop aircraft of 14 052.94 km (8732.09 mi) in flight from Ching Chuan Kang Air Base on Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111. (Airman, 7/72, 2-8)
U.S. was moving towards conversion to metric system despite opposition from some industries concerned about resultant confusion and cost, Now York Times reported. American chemical and pharmaceutical industries were now largely on metric system, as were NASA and “important parts” of weapon and aircraft industries. General Electric Co., whose products for foreign consumption were already made to metric dimensions, had come out for conversion. In “carefully timed manner,” each industry was following pace suited to its needs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/72, 4:6)
Inauguration of Traffic Control and Landing System (tracals, 404L Program) at Air Force System Command’s Electronic Systems Div. at Hanscom Field, Mass., was announced by afsc. Program would update management and control of Air Force aircraft takeoffs, en route flights, and landings in U.S. and overseas. Effort included development and acquisition of solid-state, low-cost, reliable electronic components and systems to replace outdated tube equipment in use for more than two decades, (afsc Release 112.72)
Radar-guided usaf Sprint missile launched from Kwajalein Atoll intercepted multiple-warhead missile launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base over Pacific in second successful test of antiballistic missile against multiple targets, (upi, NYT, 5/9/72, 33)
Air Force F—111 fighter bomber aircraft plunged in Choctawhatchee Bay after takeoff from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., killing both crew members. Cause of accident was being investigated. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
nasa Technology Utilization Office representatives met in San Francisco with Public Technology Inc. officials and representatives of cities to review two-year joint effort to apply new technology to selected city problems. Discussed were improved protective clothing and equipment, improved detection and locating equipment for underground piping, equipment to determine presence of illegal drugs in human blood, and improved pavement patching materials that used waste matter. Meeting also discussed civil cooperation to form mass market for goods and services produced by application of new technology. Meeting prefaced July 24—26 second annual Urban Technology Conference at which nasa, other Federal agencies, and business and industry exhibited contributions to new technology, (nasa Release 72-154)
Air Force F-15 fighter aircraft completed first supersonic flight, reaching mach 1.5 during 45-min test at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Flight test program was scheduled to end March 1, 1973, when decision on production of first 30 of 729 aircraft would be made. (SBD, 8/7/72, 188)
Benjamin 0. Davis, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs, met with aviation representatives in Washington, D.C., to discuss joint Government and industry action to combat aircraft hijacking and extortion which were threatening civil aviation. At press conference following meeting he said: “The success rate for the hijacker has been dropping sharply over the past 3years—from 85 percent in 1969 to 37 percent thus far this year.” Government would “continue to press for full compliance with aviation security relations . . . , for increased resistance to hijack demands, and for full cooperation with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].” (Text) June 8:	Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, in secret testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services, had disclosed that U.S.S.R. was flight-testing multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (mirv). Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim later confirmed that Laird had made statement. To date, mirvs had remained a U.S. monopoly. (Gwertzman, NYT, 6/9/72, 1)
U.S. Patent No. 3 677 502 was issued to Soviet aircraft designer Aleksey A. Tupolev and seven associates for Tu-144 Soviet supersonic aircraft. Tupolev had carried on Work of his father Andrey N. Tupolev on Tu—144. Earlier applications had been filed for Soviet patents and other American patents were pending on specific features of aircraft. Patent indicated that aircraft design was intended to prevent engine exhaust from contacting tail portion of fuselage. (Jones, NYT, 7/22/72, 33; Pat Off pio)
Unidentified senior analysts said in Washington, D.C., that People’s Republic of China had deployed “handful” of ballistic missiles with estimated 2400- to 4000-km (1500- to 2500-mi) range. Missiles used storable liquid propellant that permitted underground installation in concrete and steel silos. (Beecher, NYT, 2/1/72, 1)
Dept, of Defense spokesmen told press in Washington, D.C., that swingwing F-lll jet fighter-bombers had been withdrawn from combat service in North Vietnam after Sept. 28 loss of one F—111 but aircraft had since returned to action. (AP, W Post, 10/5/72, A29)
U.S. sources quoted in Washington Post said U.S.S.R. had begun building modified class of missile-firing submarines to carry fewer but longer range missiles than current Soviet undersea fleet. New submarines would each carry 12 new SSN-8 missiles with estimated range about 5600 km (3500 mi), or more than twice that of missile currently installed on “Y” class Soviet submarines. (Getler, W Post, 5/31/72, A12) During May:	Air Force Materials Laboratory (afml) was preparing experiment to determine stability of thermal-control coatings or paints and thin films of polymeric materials in space environment. Samples of materials and films would be carried in trays on discs 25 mm (1 in) in diameter on NASA Skylab mission in 1973. After exposure to space, samples would be returned to earth for evaluation of degradation. (afsc Newsreview, 5/12, 14)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh and five members of Soviet Academy began 21-day coast-to-coast tour of U.S. scientific and space installations. Academician Keldysh addressed unpublicized session of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., from which even NAS staff members were banned. NAS had withheld announcement of Keldysh visit to discourage anti-Soviet demonstrations. He had been invited to U.S. by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (W Post, 10/18/72)
Society of Air Safety Engineers presented Distinguished Service Award to Dr. Janies J. Ryan, Jr., professor emeritus of Univ. of Minnesota, for pioneering development of flight data recorder. Plaque was awarded during Society seminar in Washington, D.C. (Soc Air Safety Engineers; Av Wk, 10/23/72, 13)
Air Force grounded entire fleet of U.S.-based F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft “as a precautionary measure” until cause of June 15 and 18 F-lll crashes had been determined. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
New York Times editorial criticized Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird for insisting that U.S. press on with large defense budget increases that were requested before conclusion of U.S.-U.S.S.R. arms limitation pacts, including funds for accelerated buildup of strategic arms not covered in treaties. “If this were needed to insure Congressional approval of the Moscow agreements—the overriding need at the moment—the cost might not be too high. Rut the real aim seems to be to create ‘bargaining chips’ for the next round of negotiations to limit strategic arms. And the first round of . . . salt talks suggests that the Soviet Union will insist on matching or exceeding the additional American buildup before further agreement can be reached. Both sides already have more than ten times the number of warheads they need to deter or destroy each other. Mutual restraint now could speed up a salt ii agreement and, more important, assure much lower limits on offensive strategic forces than would be possible if both sides now press ahead to add to overkill as bargaining chips for the next negotiating round.” (NYT, 6/5/72, 30)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed future air superiority aircraft in speech before Aero Club of Washington in Washington, D.C. Air Force had not developed new fighter aircraft that could maintain air superiority in battle area in 20 yrs, while U.S.S.R. had developed “whole family of sophisticated fighters.” F—15 program should give U.S. “what we need for the air superiority mission.” For allies, U.S. had developed F-5E international fighter, “a simple design that cost about half that of our present long-range, multipurpose aircraft.” It would “play a particularly vital role in improving the self-defense capabilities of our Asian allies. ... In modernizing our forces, we have learned an important lesson in the last few years. You cannot build an aircraft with every possible new technological device and expect to buy enough of them to get the job done. . . . The unit cost of high performance aircraft has increased tenfold every 18 years.” Avionics was factor in driving up cost of new aircraft systems. F-111D included Mark II avionics system costing over $4 million. To lower unit cost of systems, Air Force was tailoring new aircraft for “somewhat narrower purposes.” Through specialization “we hope to obtain aircraft that can both survive and perform more effectively in their individual mission and ... we will be able to afford many more of these aircraft than we could obtain in the case of one super-capable, multipurpose plane.” (Text)
Aerosonic Corp. President Herbert J. Frank, testifying before Subcommittee on Priorities and Economy of Joint Economic Committee of Congress, said Navy had paid $1700 each for altimeters for 300 aircraft without competitive bidding. Almost identical instruments had cost Air Force $565 each after competitive bidding. (Witkin, NYT, 3/30/72, 12)
Soviet delegation had visited Boeing Co. second time and had revived discussions of possible U.S. certification and marketing of Soviet Yak-40 short-haul transport aircraft by Boeing, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. U.S.S.R. also had discussed Yak-40 with North American Corp. and World Airways Inc. [see Oct. 27]. (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 9)
Philadelphia Inquirer quoted Lockheed spokesman as saying last C-5 Galaxy military transport aircraft to be built under Government contract was on assembly line and was expected to be completed in mid1973.	Lockheed was selling 81 C-5s to Air Force for $4.9 billion. (.P Inq, 3/17/72, 89)	_
NASA announced that NASA Assistant General Counsel Arthur D. Holzman had been detailed to Federal City College in Washington, D.C., to develop seminar courses in government. Courses would provide minority group students with background in government management and enhance their competitive position in government service. Assignment of Holzman was made under Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970, which provided for temporary exchanges of personnel between Federal agencies and state and local governments and institutions of higher learning, (nasa Release 72-125)
New York Times said it had asked more than 20 scientists and scholars with no part in space program to assess probable place of space exploration in “broad sweep of history and in the evolution of man and man’s perception of himself and his universe.” British historian Arnold J. Toynbee and American anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead had seen space experience as “turning point in human history.” Univ. of Michigan biophysicist Dr. John R. Platt had said that “the great picture of earth taken from the moon is one of the most powerful images in the minds of men today and may be worth the cost of the whole Apollo project.” He saw photo as “a great landmark in exploration—to get away from the earth to see it whole.” Soviet poet Robert Rozhdestvensky had said: “Man has become . . . more perceptive to what worries other people. He has no possibility of hiding away . . . of escaping reality and shutting himself up in the narrow world of his own.” French anthropologist Dr. Claude Levi-Strauss had said: “I never look at TV except when there’s a moon shot, and then I am glued to my set.” Dr. Garrett Hardin, ecologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, had said it was time to pull back from further manned space exploration for several centuries. Space program “can only be called ‘spiritual’ in both the good and bad senses.” Technological spinoffs of space program “could surely have been achieved with an expenditure of much less.” Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of History and Technology, had said greatest thing about space exploration was “that we don’t know what its payoff will be. This symbolizes the American civilization. The people who settled America had no idea what the payoff would be. They settled it before they explored it.” Nobel Prize winning biologist Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi had said Apollo flights demanded that word “impossible” be struck from scientific dictionary. “They are the greatest encouragement for the human spirit.” Oak Ridge National Laboratory Director, Dr. Alvin M. Weinberg, said successes in space and nuclear energy had given people “the feeling that essentially any technological problem can be solved. This has created within the technological community and within the public at large a kind of technological euphoria.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/3/72, 1)
Major advance in research to control nuclear fusion for commercial / energy was announced by Atomic Energy Commission. Experiments using adiabatic toroidal compressor (atc) at aec’s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory had achieved, for first time, plasma density in range in which tokamak fusion reactor was expected to operate and had demonstrated new technique for heating tokamak plasma to thermonuclear temperatures. ATC was device for containing and heating plasma fuel to temperatures that would melt any other container. It was improved version of Soviet-developed tokamak containing and heating device that had been hailed internationally as promising approach to production of fusion power. Soviet results from T-3 tokamak experiment, published in 1969, had been confirmed by Princeton tokamak experiments in 1970. Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, had said new ATC results “further brighten the prospect of realizing commercial fusion power in a tokamak confinement system.” But aec had “many years of hard work ahead” to develop concept into “practical power system.” (aec Release P-404; aec pio)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) addressed aerospace workers in presidential campaign speech at Redondo Beach, Calif. He felt “American people are getting sour” on science. “They’re weary of watching billions of dollars going into what they see as exotic projects, when their basic needs and concerns are still not being met. They’re tired of hearing about ‘spin-offs.’ And they’re wondering why we can’t go after some of these problems directly instead of just hoping for beneficial effects from other projects to do the job.” (McGovern Release)
NASA and Air Force had initiated program and developed contract with Lockheed-Georgia Co. to design and install composite-reinforced center wing boxes in two usaf C-130E aircraft, NASA announced. Objective of program was to evaluate concept of selective composite reinforcement of primary aircraft structures. Concept would increase strength and stiffness of metal structures by bonding composite materials to metal. (nasa Release 72-84)
Air Force System Command successfully launched 1.4-million-cu-m (47.8million-cu-ft) research balloon, world’s largest, from Chico, Calif. Balloon, developed by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 113-kg (250-lb) payload to unofficial record altitude of 51 800 m (170 000 ft). Previous record of 49 400 m (162 000 ft) had been established in 1969 by afcrl balloon. Purpose of flight was to determine feasibility of flying large thin-film balloons and to study very-high-altitude parachute deployment characteristics, (afsc Release 121.72)
Award of $95 219 456 contract to Boeing Co. and $85 901 510 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to begin design and development of advanced, medium, short takeoff and landing transport (amst) aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, (dod Release 773—72)
Air Force announced award of $1.7-million letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for repair and modification of attack radar and inertial navigation components of Mark II avionics system of F-lll aircraft, (dod Release 697—72)
New York Times editorial praising Verms 8 achievement [see July 22] said planetary exploration would be “ideal area” for U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperation, “since it poses none of the political or human problems involved in cooperation in manned space ventures such as the docking maneuver now scheduled for 1975. Both Soviet and American planetary probes would be better if the two nations pooled information and experience on the design and construction of these vehicles. Such pooling would seem to be a natural step in the evolution of Moscow-Washington space cooperation. The sooner it is realized the more effective and less expensive both nations’ space exploratory efforts are likely to be.” (NYT, 7/26/72,34)	_
First avionics testbed aircraft for Air Force Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs)— modified Boeing 707-320 topped by 9-m (30-ft) rotodome—was rolled out at Boeing Co. facility in Renton, Wash. AWACS would detect and track aircraft at high and low altitudes over land and water and track low-altitude aircraft over extended areas, (usaf memo for correspondents)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of supersonic flight. On Oct. 14, 1947, Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew Bell Aircraft Corp. X-l experimental jet aircraft—launched from B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, Calif.—to speed of 1078 km per hr (670 mph) in first flight to break sound barrier. Aircraft, designed by Bell chief designer Robert J. Woods, had been developed under Army Air Force contract with cooperation of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) . (CR, 10/17/72, E8806-7)
Russian-born aviation pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, who invented first successful helicopter in U.S., died at age 83 in Easton, Conn., after heart attack. Born in Kiev, he had come to U.S. in 1919 with only $600. In 1922 he established Sikorsky Aero Engineering Corp. in small shed. Firm produced amphibian aircraft in 1928, four-engine clipper in 1931 with which Pan American World Airways inaugurated first commercial route to Hawaii and to Asia, and first successful helicopter, which Sikorsky flew in 1939. Firm later became Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky retired as engineering manager in 1957 but had remained consultant. His honors included National Defense Transportation Award in 1953, first Dr. Alexander Klemin Award of American Helicopter Society, and National Medal of Science. (Hailey, W Post, 10/27/72)
Assignment by President Nixon of Gen. Horace M. Wade, Chief of Staff, Supreme Hq. Allied Powers Europe, as Vice Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, (dod Release 195-72)
Two-man crew of Air Force F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft bailed out safely after explosion in aircraft during flight from Mountain Home Air Force Base, Idaho. Aircraft crashed in Nevada. Accident was being investigated. (W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
Air Force Systems Command announced award of $142 000 to North American Rockwell Corp. and $53 000 to Sperry Univac Systems Div. for study of man-machine relationships in remotely piloted vehicles (rpv) designed for air-to-ground missions. Study would define advantages and disadvantages of man’s presence in rpv concept, (afsc Release 252.72)
President Nixon met with delegation of physicians from People’s Republic of China at White House. Delegation was beginning three-week tour of U.S. as guests of National Academy of Sciences Institute of Medicine and American Medical Assn. (PD, 10/16/72, 1518)
Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial by Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences, urged support of space shuttle program because it was “natural development of the nasa mission to advance space technology,” which “takes advantage of the high competence in technical and operational management of large space-oriented systems now fully developed within NASA.” Program provided launch capability for nearly all manned and unmanned space programs, would eliminate “patchwork, disparate stable of boosters and facilities,” and was “one of only a few national programs that will continue growth in the various fields of high technology.” (A&A, 6/72, 20-1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew scored Senate critics of President Nixon’s decision to proceed with development of space shuttle in speech before Florida Jaycees state convention in Daytona Beach: “They would, in effect, bring to a virtual halt this country’s technological progress in a field which has already proved of enormous benefit to mankind and holds even greater promise for the future. Worse, they would have us abandon our hard-won leadership in an area where United States ingenuity and creativity visibly overcame the lead of our principal world competitor and proved the American free enterprise system is still Number One when the chips are down.” (Text)
Air Force was sponsoring “fly-off” of new attack aircraft prototypes at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., to determine best aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. Competition was “essential element” of Air Force A-X (attack-aircraft, experimental) program designed to produce new aircraft for supporting ground troops in battle at lowest possible cost. (Levine, WSJ, 11/27/72, 10)
Air Force Systems Command successfully completed two subsystem tests of new high-altitude supersonic target (hast) missile at its Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla. Tests over Gulf of Mexico used lightweight prototype target. First test was aerial recovery of HAST recovery test vehicle; payload test vehicle was towed by F-4 Phantom aircraft in second test, hast was highly maneuverable target missile with mach 4 speed and 10 000- to 30 000-m (35 000- to 100 000-ft) altitude. First powered missile would be delivered to adtc in December, (afsc Newsreview, 12/72, 3) November 7:	Annual Revolution Day parade in Moscow featured only muted display of military power. One of leading floats reproduced Pravda headline requesting public support for U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during year. Politburo members, led by Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev, reviewed display but only speaker was Defense Minister Andrey Grechko, who called for “peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems.” No new weapons were shown. (Seeger, LA Times, 11/8/72, 19)
Air Force F-lll swing-wing jet bomber aircraft was lost over Vietnam on first day of F-llls’ return to combat in Indochina since 1968. North Vietnam later claimed it had shot aircraft down but Dept, of Defense said it was unable to explain disappearance. (W Post, 10/3/72, A25)
New York Times science editor Walter S. Sullivan had been named one of three winners of 1972 science writing awards sponsored by American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and Westinghouse Education Foundation, New York Times reported. Sullivan had won award for third time. Award was for his series “The Einstein Papers.” Other winners were Dennis L. Meredith, science editor at Univ. of Rhode Island, and Eugene Kinkead, associate editor of New Yorker. (NYT, 12/14/72)
Discovery through infrared measurements that Titan, largest of Saturn’s six moons, had minimum temperature of 205 K (—90°F), same as atmosphere in which life originated on earth 2 billion yrs ago, was discussed by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan in interview published by Washington Post. Discovery had been made by Cornell Univ. and Univ. of Minnesota astronomers using infrared measurements. Titan was about 1.5 billion km (900 million mi) from sun and received only one percent of sunlight that earth received. “We have to ask ourselves what kind of a planet would make this atmosphere so far from sun. The only answer we have been able to come up with is something identical to our primeval earth. Possible life form on Titan would not be earthlike, “but it would be earth chauvinism to think that no form of life whatever could survive so far off in the solar system.” Dr. Sagan believed Titan was made up of chemical ice, except for small molten core of radioactive rock. Core melted ice far below surface, forcing volcanic ice to surface, where it burst into brilliant red on contact with sun’s ultraviolet light. “We see Titan as a red disc through the telescopes, which is exactly what we get in the laboratory when we react methane, hydrogen, water ice, and ammonia with ultraviolet rays.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/24/72, Al)
Designation of two new, lightweight, fighter prototype aircraft as YF-16 and YF-17 was announced by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. YF-16, powered by one Pratt & Whitney F100 turbofan engine, had swept-wing, under-fuselage inlet, single vertical tail, and forebody strakes. YF-17, powered by two General Electric YJ101 turbojet engines, had twin tail, highly-swept-wing leading-edge extensions, and underwing side fuselage inlets. Both aircraft were expected to fly in early 1974. Air Force had no commitment to production. (dod Release 763—72)
Soviet delegation headed home after meeting with officials of North American Rockwell Corp. Aviation Services Div. at Bethany, Okla. Purpose of meeting was to discuss Soviet Yak-40 commuter aircraft. NR was considering purchase of Yak-40s for U.S. distribution. (AP, W Post, 10/28/72, A7)
NASA launched four-stage Trailblazer II reentry vehicle from Wallops Station to test chemical-injection method of eliminating radio blackout during reentry. Vehicle, launched for Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 34-kg (75-lb) payload to 322-km (200-mi) altitude over Atlantic. Payload injected chemical into plasma surrounding vehicle during reentry and measured effectiveness of injection in eliminating blackout. Objective of AFCRL Trailblazer II program was to study techniques for improving transmission and reception of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. (WS Release 72-8)
