Rep. Leslie Aspin (D-Wis.) in a House statement requested the General Accounting Office to investigate a “secret agreement” between the Air Force and the Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. under which, he said, the Air Force had certified the F-15 jet fighter aircraft engine for production without ensuring that it met contract standards. As a result, Rep. Aspin said, “tens of millions of dollars in developmental costs have been passed on from Pratt & Whitney to the taxpayer.” (CR, 5/15/73, H3678)
Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy [see During October] at a Washington, D.C., dinner commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first aircraft flight, made Dec. 17, 1903. Honored guests included Prof. Willy Messer-schmidt, German aircraft designer, and 85-year-old Grover Loening who had flown with Orville Wright in 1913 and 1914. (McCardle, W Post, 12/15/73, Dl)
Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, had directed the Air Force to plan safe demonstration launches of four Minuteman II missiles without warheads from operational silos in Montana during the winter of 1974-75, the Dept, of Defense announced. In Project Giant Patriot, the missiles would enter space shortly after launch and their trajectory would carry them up to 560 km (350 mi) over portions of Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and California en route to an ocean target in the Phoenix Islands, southwest of the Hawaiian Islands. No nuclear components would be carried; a safety destruction package would be carried in place of the normal warhead. The launches were to provide important test data and demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of the Minuteman strategic deterrent force, (dod Release 615-73)
The Air Force was redesigning an F-15 jet fighter engine part for the third time, possibly creating a cost-delay in the $7.5-billion program, the Washington Evening Star and News reported. The Chief F-15 Project Engineer, l/c Frederick A. Rail, had said in an interview that the aircraft could perform satisfactorily at speeds and altitudes required for air-to-air combat and that the engine part redesign was to improve performance even further. Other sources had said the redesign had to succeed before the aircraft could perform as a fighter. (Kelly, W Star & News, 7/2/73)
Col. Bemt Balchen (usaf, Ret.), aviator and explorer who was chief pilot on Adm. Richard E. Byrd’s first South Pole flight in 1929, died in Mt. Kisco, N.Y., at age 74. From 1933 to 1935 Balchen had been chief pilot of the Ellsworth Antarctic Expedition and in 1935 to 1940 chief of inspection for Norwegian Airlines. He was President of Norwegian Airlines in 1946 when it became the parent company of Scandinavian Airlines System. In 1948 Col. Balchen was recalled to active duty in the Air Force and named commanding officer of the 10th Rescue Squadron at Fort Richardson, Alaska. (NYT, 10/19/73, 42)
U.S. patent No. 3 737 119 was granted to Princeton Univ. professor of aeronautical engineering Dr. Sin-i Cheng for a device to reduce supersonic aircraft sonic boom and improve SST flight performance. The device would create an antiboom jet with the same pressure as the flow around the aircraft and direct the jet toward the shock wave below. (Jones, NYT, 6/9/73; Who’s Who; Pat Off pio)
The small, $240 000 guidance-control computers used in the Minuteman I nuclear missile force had been made available to public organizations by the Air Force, Science reported. For a $30 delivery fee, the general-purpose computers, one meter (three feet) in diameter, were being recycled to hospitals, laboratories, and universities to begin reprogramming for peaceful uses. The computers had become available because of the deployment of the Minuteman III multiple-warhead missiles. (Wade, Science, 3/2/73, 880)
The Air Force announced the award of a $2 352 060 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for advanced development of conceptual hardware for an undesignated lightweight fighter aircraft, (dod Release 364-73)
The Air Force announced a $3 547 890 firm-fixed-price contract award to Textron, Inc., Dalmo Victor Div. The contract was for aerospace ground equipment test sets applicable to the radar warning system for the F-105G, OV-1, and F-4E aircraft, (dod Release 277-73)
The sky show “When Earth Became a Planet” opened at the American Museum-Hayden Planetarium to mark the 500th anniversary of the birth of Polish physician, economist, statesman, and astronomer Nicholas Copernicus. Copernicus, born in 1473, taught that the sun was the center of the solar system. The theory had paved the way for the work of Kepler, Galileo, Newton, and others who eventually made space age possible. (Am Mus-Hayden Planetarium Release)
Air Force Base, Fla., had been designated the Skylab launch site medical facility. (Missileer, 5/11/73, 1)
Univ. of Wisconsin psychologist Dr. David A. Grant visited the U.S.S.R. as the first U.S. scientist to participate in an exchange agreement between the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and its Soviet counterpart, All Union Znaniye [Knowledge] Society. Dr. Grant lectured in Moscow and Leningrad. (A A AS Bulletin, 6/73, 1) May 1:	The joint NASA-Navy board investigating the April 12 mid-air collision of NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft Galileo and a Navy P-3C Orion antisubmarine aircraft over Moffett Field, Calif., completed its investigation, forwarded its report to NASA and the Navy, and issued a statement: Both aircraft had been under visual flight rules (vfr) at the time of the accident; the P-3C was in the local landing pattern making touch-and-go landings and the Convair 990 was making a straight-in approach. “At initial contact with the control tower, the Convair 990 was cleared to continue for Runway 32 Right. At seven miles [11 km] the Convair 990 was again cleared to continue approach for the right runway. About three miles [5 km] out, the control tower operator cleared the Convair to land on Runway 32 Left. The Convair pilot acknowledged the new runway assignment. The control tower operator also cleared the P—3C to continue his approach to Runway 32 Left. It was the tower operator’s intention to land the Convair 990 on Runway 32 Right, but he mistakenly called the wrong runway.” There was no evidence that either pilot or the tower personnel were aware of the impending collision. (NASA Release 73-88)
The Pratt & Whitney engine designed for the Air Force F—15 Eagle fighter aircraft passed a 150-hr endurance test on the third try at West Palm Beach, Fla. The success cleared the way for approval of a production contract, (upi, NYT, 10/14/73, 7)
The last Air Force C-5A aircraft rolled off Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s assembly line. The C-5A, world’s largest subsonic jet transport, had been plagued by problems during its development phase but had since proved its effectiveness as a materiel and troop carrier. (Atlanta JC, 2/1/73, 8)	_
Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), told the press in Washington, D.C., that a hold had been ordered on the Air Force AX tactical fighter plane contract with Fairchild Industries, Inc. The Air Force had said Fairchild had won a $14-million contract to build 10 prototypes by outbidding Northrop Corp. but congressional critics had disagreed, saying Northrop could build the same aircraft more cheaply. The Air Force would conduct its own investigation. (AP, W Star & News, 2/7/73, A7)
Completion of nine test flights in the Air Force Systems Command Flight Dynamics Laboratory’s control-configured vehicle (ccv) program to produce a superstable aircraft was announced by afsc. The flights, to validate the Laboratory’s active-ride-control system design, were completed under part of a $4.1-million contract with Boeing Co. A second series of flights was expected to end in October. Tentative plans called for tests on fighter aircraft later, (afsc Release 051.73)
The Air Force Aerospace Defense Command said in Colorado Springs, Colo., that 2897 man-made objects were orbiting the earth. The U.S. had orbited 1978 and the U.S.S.R., 843. (upi, NYT, 3/24/73, 7)
Rapid detection of contaminated oxygen had been developed by researchers at the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Contaminated oxygen, which could cause serious illness or death for high-altitude pilots, previously had been detected by analysis of samples at a regional laboratory. The new portable infrared and gas chromatographic analyzers would provide reliable analysis on the spot in 15 min. (afsc Release 014.73)
The Air Force announced the award of a $39.6-million contract to the Raytheon Corp. for construction of a large, new phased-array radar station, code-named Cobra Dane, at Semya Air Force Station in the Aleutian Islands. Cobra Dane would be part of the Air Force worldwide tracking program to trace space objects. An Aerospace Defense Command spokesman said that the total cost of the installation would be about $60 million. It would be operational in 1976. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/7/73, A15)
Neilsen Engineering and Research, Inc., began testing the Ames Research Center-developed Randomdec computer-and-analysis method of application to detecting structural weakness in bridges. Under a NASA contract, monthly readings would be taken of bridges at the Highway 85 and 101 interchange in the San Francisco Bay area for one year. The experiment was jointly funded by NASA and the Federal Highway Administration. (nasa Release 73—161)
The Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft carried an 11 000-kg (24 000-lb) payload on a 6300-km (3900-mi), 3-hr 38-min flight-time journey from Toulouse, France, to the Madeira Islands and return. The distance flown equaled the distance between Washington, D.C., and Paris over which current scheduled flights took 7 hrs 42 min. (bac-Aerospatiale Release 6C/73)
The U.S. Civil Service Commission ordered the Air Force to rehire A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a financial analyst who had been fired in 1970 after he had disclosed a $2-billion cost overrun on development of the Air Force C—5A jet transport. The Air Force also was ordered to pay Fitzgerald more than $100 000 in back pay. (Ripley, NYT, 9/19/73, 1)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced the award of Air Force contracts to Fairchild Industries, Inc., and General Electric Co. to develop the A—X close air support aircraft. Fairchild Industries, Inc., would receive a $159 279 888 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to test prototype aircraft and to develop and build 10 pre-production A-10 aircraft for flight-testing. General Electric Co. would receive a $27 666 900 fixed-price-incentive firm contract to develop and deliver 32 TF-34 engines to power the A—10 aircraft, (dod Release 105—73)
Maryland State Police officials ordered troopers to search the sky for any abnormal light phenomena after receiving hundreds of reports of lights in the sky. One report came from a State Police helicopter pilot, who said he had seen a “very large” airborne vehicle with bright lights. Flight controllers at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., later said the object might have been a “special experimental aircraft testing an innovative lighting system for nasa.” (B Sun, 10/18/73, A3)
The Air Force announced award of a $1 700 000 definitive contract to United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for fabrication of an advanced gas dynamic laser for the airborne laser laboratory of the Air Force Special Weapons Center at Kirkland Air Force Base, N. Mex. (dod Release 320—73)
The Air Force had made the first major improvements in aircraft landing techniques in more than two decades with installation of solid-state instrument landing systems (ils) at six Air Force bases, the Air Force Systems Command announced. The new systems automatically transmitted signals that appeared on cockpit instruments to indicate the aircraft’s position in relation to the runway’s centerline and the pilot’s glide slope. They replaced failure-prone tube circuits and introduced longer system life, greater reliability, and easier maintenance, (afsc Release 035.73)
National Park Service officials blamed sonic booms for damage to rock formations at Death Valley National Monument where Air Force jet pilots flew low over the desert floor to claim they had flown below sea level, United Press International reported. The Air Force had agreed in 1971 to avoid monuments or parks listed by Assistant Interior Secretary Nathaniel P. Reed as “fragile environment,” but the agreement had not worked in Death Valley as fliers found the “urge to zoom near desert floor irresistible.” (upi, TV Post, 1/11/73, A2) January 12:	Oao 3 (Copernicus) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Aug. 21, 1972, from Eastern Test Range) was adjudged successful by NASA. The spacecraft had completed 2000 earth orbits and all systems had operated satisfactorily. Oao 3 had obtained high-resolution spectra of stars in the ultraviolet range and investigated composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space. (NASA prog off)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., and Trans World Airlines, Inc., announced a decision not to exercise their options to buy 13 Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. The action was expected to lead American Airlines, Inc., and Eastern Airlines, Inc., to drop their options, the Washington Post reported later. Concorde options would then stand at 30, but lack of competitive pressure from U.S. airlines was likely to cause additional cancellations. Nine firm orders for Concorde were from the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corp. and Air France. Iran Air and People’s Republic of China had signed preliminary contracts for 5 Concordes but the Post said an order for only 14 aircraft could not sustain the Concorde production run. (Greer, Nossiter, W Post, 2/1/73, Al)
Selection of Fairchild Industries, Inc., for full-scale development of the Air Force A-X specialized close air support aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. The Fairchild A—10 had been selected after competitive evaluation with the Northrop A—9 aircraft. The Air Force would negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with Fairchild for 10 preproduction aircraft. The full-production decision would be made late in 1975. (dod Release 36-73)
Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract awards for demonstrator programs for turbofan engine technology were announced by the Air Force: $6 080 000 to United Aircraft Corp. and $1 141 633 to Teledyne Industries, Inc. (dod Release 193—73)
Award of a $6 826 250 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. for advanced development of an integrated aircraft propulsion control system was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 165—73) April 6:	The U.S. and Brazil governments confirmed the Memorandum of Understanding signed by NASA and the Brazilian Institute for Space Research March 27. The agreement called for extension of a cooperative project in earth resources remote sensing, (nasa Release 73-82)
Soviet Academicians Valery I. Popkov and Valentin A. Shteinberg visited the U.S. as the first Soviet participants in an exchange agreement between the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and its Soviet counterpart, All Union Znaniye [Knowledge] Society. The first U.S. scientist had visited the U.S.S.R. under the agreement during April. {A A AS Bulletin, 6/73, 1)
m/g Vernon R. Turner, Director of Aircraft and Missiles in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), had been named Chief of Staff for the Air Force Systems Command, afsc Newsreview reported. He would succeed m/g Lew Allen, Jr., who had been assigned to the Central Intelligence Agency, (afsc Newsreview, 5/73, 2)
Associated Press quoted military sources in Brazil as saying the Brazilian Air Force had decided to buy $100-million worth of U.S. jet fighter aircraft. The order—for 48 Northrop F—5Es—was about double Brazil’s two most recent orders for arms from France, 16 Mirage Ills at $3 million each in 1970 and $2-million worth of French missiles more recently. {NYT, 5/31/73, 17)
Developing technologies in short-haul air transportation were discussed by Rep. Silvio O. Conte (R-Mass.) in a speech before the Short-Haul Air Transportation—STOL Symposium in McLean, Va.: “Steep approaching, quiet, short-runway aircraft are now appearing on the drawing boards. The 45-passenger DeHavilland DHC-7, able to operate from short runways quietly and economically, is scheduled to appear by the mid-70’s. The Air Force is going ahead with construction of two prototype jet STOL [short takeoff and landing] transports from which technical fallout is inevitable. The major airframe manufacturers are seriously studying the type of short-haul aircraft that can meet the environmental and market demands of the next decade.” NASA was developing a clean, quiet experimental engine. “Of all things necessary for a practical and acceptable short-haul aircraft to meet our future transportation needs, a quiet engine is the most crucial.” (CR, 4/19/73, E2581-2)
The Air Force Space and Missiles Organization (samso) announced it was issuing a $1 334 319 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to TRW Systems Group, trw Inc., to maintain a history of all operational testing of Minuteman missiles, (dod Release 341—73)
The Coast Guard announced it would phase out its last two air cushion vehicles (acvs) in July. A Coast Guard spokesman told the press in San Francisco that acvs had met expectations but “we’ve just run out of money to operate them and they’re too old now.” (upi, NYT, 6/7/73, 19)
The U.S.S.R. had successfully flight-tested missiles with multiple warheads that could be directed to separate targets, Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, told a Washington, D.C., press conference. One of the intercontinental missiles, the SS—18, had carried at least six hydrogen warheads in the one-megaton range. (Binder, NYT, 8/18/73, 1)
The Air Force would consider use of aerostats—tethered balloons that operated in galelike winds—to provide air defense radar surveillance of the U.S. southern perimeter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Aerostats, operating at altitude of 3000 m (10 000 ft) could cover area and be effective against low-altitude surprise attacks in Air Force project Veto. Balloons also were attracting military and civil interest as modest-cost, long-endurance airborne platforms for battlefield reconnaissance and electronic intelligence and for modest-cost, quickly deployable communications and television relay or scientific observation. (Klass, Av Wk, 1/8/73, 36, 39)
The Air Force announced award of a $59 000 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Boeing Co. for the first two 747B jet transport aircraft for the Advanced Airborne Command Post Program. If Congress appropriated funds, a total of seven 747Bs would replace EC—135 airborne command posts of the National Military Command System and Strategic Air Command. The seven would he first 747s used by Air Force, (dod Release 96-73)	‘
The United Kingdom and the U.S.S.R. were negotiating for introduction of supersonic transport services in both countries, British Airways Chairman David Nicolson told a Washington, D.C., meeting of the Aviation/ Space Writers Assn. The U.K. also would begin talks with the People’s Republic of China toward inauguration of London-Peking air service before the year’s end. (AP, P Inq, h/^s/lN)
The Department of Defense had furnished NASA photos of the crippled Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop after it was placed in orbit May 14, to help determine the status of the spacecraft, NASA told the press. Aviation Week & Space Technology later reported that Air Force tracking cameras in New Mexico had photographed the Workshop. The photos were not released publicly, (nasa pao; Av Wk, 5/21/73, 12)
A “quiet but intense” debate was developing in the Dept, of Defense over which service would “dominate America’s nuclear arsenal and win the major share of appropriations,” the New York Times reported. In “the most serious challenge of Air Force primacy since the start of the nuclear era,” the Navy was pressing for construction of 12 Trident submarines with multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (mirvs). As a weapon system the Trident would be “more mobile and less vulnerable than icbm’s [intercontinental ballistic missiles] and more lethal than bombers.” The debate had remained “in the house” to date, but few believed it could be kept from Congress and the media. “The amounts involved are too large and Congressional hostility to what is considered excessive spending too pronounced.” (Middleton, NYT, 4/10/73, 16)
Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar and Soviet Minister of Civil Aviation Boris P. Bugayev signed a protocol in Washington, D.C., to expand air service between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Pan American World Airways, Inc., and the Soviet airline Aeroflot would have accelerated operating rights from and to New York, Washington, D.C., Moscow, and Leningrad, with optional intermediate points in Europe. (PD, 7/2/73, 831-2)
Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (Ind—Va.), introduced S. 328 to limit the amount payable in advance on any contract signed by NASA, the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Coast Guard to $20 million. (CR, 1/11/73, S427)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced that the Air Force had received congressional approval to proceed with the FY 1973 production program of 30 F-15 air superiority fighter aircraft. Four test aircraft had flown 270 successful hours since July. Production of an additional 77 was planned for FY 1974, pending congressional approval, (dod Release 101-73)
President Nixon took his first ride in the new Spirit of ’76 presidential Boeing 707 jet aircraft. The aircraft, which replaced the 707 put into presidential service in 1962, had been flight-tested 100 hrs by the presidential pilot, Col. Ralph D. Albertazzi (usaf), before the President’s flight from Washington, D.C., to San Clemente, Calif, (upi, W Post, 2/9/73, 27; Boeing Co. pio)
