Jet aircraft pollution would be measured under a $1.1-million NASA contract awarded to United Air Lines, Inc., NASA announced. Under the cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, United would design, develop, test, and fly a Boeing 747—equipped to measure dust particles and gases—to determine the effects of jet exhaust on the natural environment, weather, and human health and to measure changes in the level of the ozone shielding people on the earth from solar ultraviolet radiation. Flights would be made over the continental U.S. and Hawaii in addition to international ' flights by another 747 under a subcontract with Pan American World Airways, Inc. The instruments were expected to be installed by the end of 1975. NASA would work closely with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to correlate study results, (nasa Release 74-20)
A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a financial analyst who had been fired from the Air Force after he exposed a $2-billion cost overrun in the development of the C-5A jet transport, filed a $3.5-million damage suit against Dept, of Defense and Air Force officials. The Civil Service Commission had ordered the Air Force to rehire Fitzgerald 19 Sept. 1973. (W Star-News, 26 Jan 74, A3)
A multibillion dollar competition between the U.S. and France was being waged over which country would produce the new generation of fighter aircraft for the Western European allies, the New York Times reported. To the victor would go one of the largest aircraft export sales in history, the possibility of producing 2006 or more aircraft worth between $10 billion and $15 billion. To replace their 10-yr-old, U.S.-built F-104 Star-fighter, the Europeans would like a low-cost, high-performance fighter that could meet military requirements through the 1990s. The U.S. was offering versions of the lightweight fighter—the General Dynamics Corp. YF-16 and the Northrop Corp. YF-17, now in competition for an Air Force production contract [see 9 June]—while the French were offering an improved version of the F—1 Mirage. Pentagon officials claimed both the YF-16 and YF—17 were superior to the Mirage in acceleration and maneuverability despite the more powerful engine in the French aircraft. The competition would probably be decided as much on economic and political grounds as by military considerations. The French argued that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies should “buy European” and maintain European solidarity. The U.S. emphasized standardization of weapons within NATO and the future willingness of the U.S. to maintain forces in Western Europe. Although the immediate potential customers—Belgium, The Netherlands, Norway, and Denmark—would need about 300 aircraft, American officials were envisaging even larger markets in other West European countries and the world market. (Finney, NYT, 21 July 74, 3)
The Air Force Air Weather Service began operational testing of the Airborne Weather Reconnaissance System (awrs) aircraft over the Gulf and East Coasts. The modified WC-130 aircraft—using the most advanced meteorological and atmospheric sensors to provide continuous accurate measurements of wind speed and direction, temperature, pressure, and dewpoint-humidity at flight levels—would study the structure and internal forces of hurricanes, storms, and other atmospheric phenomena. The aircraft also carried the first airborne, integrated Omega-inertial navigation system for positional accuracies of about 2 km on a 6000-km overwater mission, (afsc Release oip 116.74)
Northrop Corp.’s YF-17 lightweight tactical fighter prototype aircraft made its first flight, from Edwards Air Force Base. The mach 2 twin-engine jet remained aloft for 1 hr 5 min, reaching an altitude of 5500 m and a maximum speed of 740 km per hr. All flight objectives were met. The YF-17 joined the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16, which had made its first flight 2 Feb., in the lightweight fighter flight-test program. The two designs were being evaluated by the Air Force for possible full-scale development as the new air combat fighter, (afsc Newsreview, July 74,4)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 553 500 costplusincentivefee contract to Avco Corp. for design, development, and testing of a space reentry vehicle for the reentry vehicle nosetip test program, (dod Release 18-74)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., and Trans World Airlines, Inc., each petitioned the Civil Aeronautics Board for subsidies. Pan Am sought a $195-million-a-year mail subsidy because of a pending financial crisis following six years of losses, including an expected net loss of $65 million in 1974. In addition to a huge debt, Pan Am had been hit by foreign competition, sharp drops in traffic, overcapacity (half-empty Boeing 747 transports), and soaring costs, including a $200-million annual increase in fuel costs, twa asked a temporary subsidy to offset fuel costs, estimating 1974 international losses would be $47 million— in contrast to a 1973 profit of $19.5 million. On 2 April the Dept, of Justice and Dept, of Transportation had discouraged Pan Am and TWA discussions of pooling transatlantic operations as an economy measure, telling CAB that discussions were premature. (O’Hanlon, Fortune, Oct 74, 123-7, 212-6; cab Doc Section, Docs 26560 & 26563; W Star-News, 3 April 74, B9)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 348 414 contract to General Electric Co. for the design, development, and testing of a space reentry vehicle for the reentry vehicle nosetip test program, (dod Release 31—74)
A one-fifth scale model of a large portion of the Air Force B-l swing-wing strategic bomber had been tested in transonic and supersonic wind tunnels at the Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, afsc announced. The tests verified inputs to the computer control system that adjusted the B-l’s double inlets for an adequate air supply to the engines during flight maneuvers. Test data also would be used to optimize the inlets’ boundary-layer control, (afsc Release oip 196.73)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate Gen. George S. Brown, Air Force Chief of Staff, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff succeeding Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, who was retiring. The President would nominate Gen. David C. Jones to replace Gen. Brown as Air Force Chief of Staff. The nominations were submitted to the Senate 15 May. {PD, 20 May 74, 527, 529)
The Air Force announced the Aeronautical Systems Div. was awarding a $4 000 000 firm fixed-price contract to Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div. for the YF-17 lightweight fighter aircraft transition program. ASD was also awarding $4 000 000 to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. for the YF-16 transition program, (dod Release 368-74)
The first of two C-130 transport aircraft with experimental boron-epoxy composite reinforced wing midsections was delivered to the Air Force to begin three years of tests. The joint nasa-tjsaf flight evaluation program was to demonstrate the fatigue resistance and weight reductions possible when the metal wing structures were reinforced with a composite of boron filaments embedded in an epoxy resin. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would make periodic inspections and report to NASA and the Air Force, (nasa Release 74-290)
The Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded contracts to three companies to make configuration studies for an advanced fighter technology integration (afti) aircraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported: $750 000 to McDonnell Douglas Corp., $608 000 to Rockwell International Corp., and $597 000 to Fairchild Republic Co. The studies were the first step in designing a small, low-cost, high-technology demonstration aircraft in the initial phase of the usaf’s afti program. (Av Wk, 1 April 74,22)
Dr. Harriet G. Jenkins assumed her duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs at NASA Hq. Dr. Jenkins would assist Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, in agency-wide direction of both employee and contractor aspects of NASA equal opportunity programs. She had been an educational consultant for the Response to Educational Needs project of the Anacostia District of Washington, D.C., public schools and had served in the Berkeley, Calif., school system 20 yrs. (NASA Release 74-40)
The Air Force was making additional efforts in the application of boron and graphite composites in 1974—to take advantage of weight savings, higher performance, and lower costs—the Air Force Systems Command announced. Tests would include a full-sized composite wing for the YF-16 prototype lightweight fighter, a composite speedbrake for the F-15 air superiority fighter, and a composite outer wing for the A—7 attack fighter aircraft. The composite maneuver augmentation program called for the design, manufacture, and evaluation of an advanced composite wing on a remotely piloted test vehicle, (afsc Release oip 029.74)
Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, announced plans to consider full-scale development of an air combat fighter (acf) as an alternative to costly tactical aircraft. The best option, he said, would be to follow the Air Force lightweight fighter prototype program-—including the YF—16 and YF—17—with an acf development program. Advocates later said the acf could defend bases from fighter attack while larger aircraft such as the F-4 and F—15 carried the battle to an enemy hundreds of kilometers away, (dod Release 171-74; AP, W Post, 30 April 74, A6)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., ordered a cockpit ground-proximity warning system installed on its entire 140-aircraft fleet. The device, designed by Sundstrand Data Control, Inc., would sound a loud “Whoop! Whoop! Pull up!” and flash a red light reading “terrain” if an aircraft was heading for a mountain slope or was too low on takeoff or landing. The decision to install the equipment had been hastened by recent aircraft accidents, including the 22 April crash of a Pan Am aircraft into a Bali, Indonesia, mountaintop, -which had killed 107 persons. (Witkin, NYT, 9 May 74)
The Air Force’s first flight-test B-l strategic bomber had been successfully mated with its wings iir Palmdale, Calif., the Air Force Systems Command announced. The B-l was being developed by prime contractor Rockwell International Corp. to provide a modern supersonic strategic manned bomber to replace the aging B-52. The B-l, designed to carry twice the payload of the B-52 at three times the speed, was equipped with movable fore and aft wings to carry out a variety of missions from both normal and short runways, in addition to low-level operation at high subsonic speeds and high-altitude supersonic flight, (afsc Release OIP 001.74)
The Air Force announced award of a $75 318 000 fixed-price-incentive, firm contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for Titan III launch services at Waterton, Colo.; Yandenberg, Calif.; and Cape Canaveral, Fla. (dod Release 2-74)
Dr. Karl G. Henize, scientist-astronaut, suffered a “landing mishap” while on instrument flight plan after flying his T-38 trainer aircraft from Ellington Air Force Base to Bergstrom afb, Tex. Dr. Henize was not injured. A wheel on the T-38 collapsed and the aircraft was damaged. (JSC Release 74-50; jsc Hist Off, interview)
A new Air Force air-traffic-control radar system that could track aircraft approaching a runway in heavy rain would be put into full production, the Air Force Systems Command announced. The an/tpn-19, to be produced by Raytheon Co., consisted of an operational shelter, an airport surveillance radar to detect aircraft within 97 km and direct them to final approach entry positions, and a precision-approach radar to guide aircraft along the 32-km final approach. The all-weather, $2 617 000 sysfem could be transported anywhere in the world and be operational within two hours, (afsc Release OIP 181.73)
French, Canadian, and U.S. scientists were participating in projects to expand Univ. of Hawaii facilities on top of 5000-m Mauna Kea into one of the world’s greatest centers for celestial observations. In addition to NASA’s planned 3-m infrared telescope announced 4 Feb., Hawaii had recently concluded an agreement with the National Research Council of France and the National Research Council of Canada for a $20-million enterprise to operate a new 3.8-m telescope for general astronomical observations. The university already had three telescopes on Mauna Kea. (Durdin, NYT, 14 Feb 74, 33 ; NASA Release 74-23)
U.S. trunkline air traffic rose to unexpected heights, but industry officials were hesitant to interpret gains during the first quarter of 1974 as a positive trend for the year. United Air Lines, Inc., revenue-passenger-miles rose 13.6% in March over March 1973; Delta Air Lines, Inc., 10.1%; and Eastern Airlines, Inc., 7.4%. Local service carriers also reported near-record traffic improvements for March, with many showing load factors above the 55% level, rather than the normal monthly 44%. High fuel costs, however, were forcing the load-factor level required for airlines to break even to all-time highs. International operations were an exception to the general rise: Pan American World Airways, Inc., reported a revenue-passenger-mile decline of 6.1% in system-wide scheduled operations for March; Trans World Airlines, Inc., a 10.9% dip. (Av Wk, 14 April 74, 29-30) April 1974
The Dept, of Defense announced the Air Force was issuing a $1400000 fixed-price-incentive contract to General Electric Co. for engine refurbishment and increase in test hours for eight YJ-101 test engines planned for use in the YF—17 aircraft, (dod Release 59—74)
The YF-17 prototype lightweight fighter aircraft was rolled out at the Northrop Corp. plant in Hawthorne, Calif. The YF—17 and the YF-16 being built by General Dynamics Corp. marked the first Air Force effort to place more emphasis on hardware performance and less on paper studies by using an advance prototyping concept. The usaf would evaluate the YF—16 and YF-17 in a 12-mo flight-test program before making a commitment to production, (dod Release 131-74)
The Air Force successfully test-fired an intercontinental Minuteman I missile dropped from a C-5A transport aircraft flying 6100 m above the Pacific Ocean. The first successful air-drop firing followed drops of two inert missiles in a step toward development of an icbm with mobility in the air and on land. (Finney, NYT, 26 Oct 74; Aerospace Daily, 29 Oct 74)
Development of a two-man version of the F-5E International Fighter had been initiated by the Air Force, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Designated the F-5F and to be built by Northrop Corp., the two-seater would have the same performance and weapon capability as the single-seat F-5E but was to provide the capability of training fighter pilots in all aspects of fighter aircraft operations. The first test aircraft was expected to fly in September 1974. (afsc Release OIP 002.74)
A 12-story addition to the RCA Corp. building in Rockefeller Center in New York City would be constructed to use solar energy heat, rca announced. The $6-million addition, a management conference center, would use panels on its solid exterior surfaces to capture solar energy in the form of radiant heat, which would be stored and substituted for other forms of energy, (rca Release, 16 Jan 74)
Magnetic domain bubbles” being tested as computer memory devices could do mass memory jobs faster, cheaper, and more reliably than conventional devices and could store information for many years for long space journeys, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Dr. Millar Mier of AFSC believed the minute bubbles—densely packed in very thin, magnetic garnet material—would replace tape recorders and computer disc and drum memories in aircraft and spacecraft within a few years. The solid-state bubble bits of information were resistant to radiation and would remain stable during vehicle reentry into the atmosphere or operation in the Van Allen belts. A 10 000-bit test module delivered to the Air Force Avionics Laboratory in May was undergoing tests. (AFSC Release oip 138.74)
