National Science Foundation held in Chicago the first of 7 meetings scheduled nationwide to obtain public views on a Federal program for greater public involvement in science policy issues. Subsequent meetings would be held during Dec. in Atlanta, Dallas, Denver, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., and Boston. Oral and written statements presented at the meetings would be included in an NSF report to Congress. (SBD, 3 Dec 75, 173)
Johnson Space Center’s Roundup reported that Scott Aviation Co. would begin commercial production of a new lightweight breathing system for firefighters based on concepts and hardware developed by JSC engineers. Called the Scott Air-Pak 4.5, the new apparatus was the first major improvement in compressed-air breathing systems in more than 20 yrs. New features of the equipment included a 40% weight reduction; an improved pack frame and harness, with the unit’s weight carried on the hips rather than the shoulders; and a redesigned face mask for better vision. NASA’s part in developing the apparatus had begun in 1970 when a national meeting of municipal officials identified the need for an improved system as their highest priority, NASA’s effprt had been carried out at JSC as an engineering applications project under the Technology Utilization Program. After a design had been chosen from a number of candidates, prototype units were successfully field tested under actual firefighting conditions by the Houston, New York City, and Los Angeles fire departments. Scott Aviation was the first manufacturer to announce commercial production of an apparatus based on NASA effort. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 4)
The Air Force continued its development of the remotely piloted vehicle (RPV), the Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview reported. The Air Force awarded three 1-yr firm-fixed-price contracts for definition Studies of an advanced remotely piloted vehicle and associated elements. Rockwell International Corp. received $699 684; Boeing Aerospace Co., $646 750; and Northrop Corp., $499 614, to produce designs of an RPV for use in the 1980s. The system was expected to provide an improved cost-effective capability of carrying out electronic warfare, reconnaissance, and strike missions. The three companies would define the vehicle and its avionics, options of launch and recovery, ground-support elements, and systems maintenance to permit rapid mission turnaround. The Newsreview reported the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils, half the size of a C—5 aircraft wing, to recover RPVs returning from missions. Aero Co. would design and build for flight testing two 12- by 24-m parafoils— high-glide parachutes that, when deployed like a parachute, take on airfoil characteristics, descending at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. (AFSC Newsreview, June 75, 1) July 1975
In NASA’s 5—10 yr Global Air Sampling Program (GASP), a second instrumented Boeing 747 jumbo aircraft began sampling flights monitoring pollution in the earth’s atmosphere. GASP data on carbon dioxide, ozone, water vapor, and particles larger than 0.3 microns would help determine whether the amount of ozone was being altered, whether vapor trails from jets contributed to cloud cover, and the amount of pollution caused by aircraft. The first GASP-instrumented 747 began flights in December 1974. Four aircraft—one each from United Airlines, Pan American, Qantas Airways, and Scandinavian Airlines—would be instrumented for global sampling. (NASA Release 75— 60)
The Air Force had successfully test-flown an F—111D turbofan jet engine with all-composite third-stage fan blades 40% lighter than conventional titanium fan blades. The tests—made at Edwards Air Force Base—marked the first military flight evaluation of a rotating structural engine component made of composite materials. Objectives of the flight-test program were to determine long-term environmental effects on the material and to verify potential operation and maintenance cost benefits. Use of composites could provide a 15 to 20% weight savings in jet engines, allowing increased payloads or extended range. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 1)
Air Force Systems Command’s Aeronautical Systems Div. announced plans to begin flight evaluation of fan blades constructed of advanced composite materials. The new blades, made of an aluminum alloy matrix enforced by silicon carbide-coated boron filaments, would be flown on an F— 111 aircraft over a 2- to 3-yr period at the Air Force Flight Test Center in California. The composite blades, 40% lighter than conventional titanium blades, were expected to increase operating efficiency by reducing rotating mass, increasing tip speeds, and eliminating part-span shrouds. (AFSC Release OIP
The U.S.—represented by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense—signed a memorandum of understanding with Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway that finalized selection of the General Dynamics Corp. F —16 air combat fighter as the four countries’ replacement for the F—104G. The U.S. and the four countries entered into a co-production agreement under which the Europeans planned to produce up to 348 aircraft—at a value of $2.1 billion—for their own use. The proposal permitted aircraft manufacturers in these countries to share in the manufacture of aircraft and parts for U.S. and third world sales, which could more than offset their initial investment [see 2 June]. The Europeans would share logistics, maintenance, and training facilities in Europe. The agreement would help enable the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and allied forces to standardize their weapon systems. The U.S. Air Force had announced earlier plans to procure at least 650 F—16s, with a large number of these deployed to European bases. (AFSC Release 280—75)
The Department of Defense announced the award of a $1 500 000 costplus-incentive-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for launch services for the Atlas E and F vehicles at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (DOD Release 8—75)
Dr. Detlev W. Bronk, president emeritus of Rockefeller Univ. and former president of Johns Hopkins Univ., the Natl. Academy of Sciences, and the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science, died at the age of 78. A scientist who had been adviser to Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy, Dr. Bronk had been credited with formulating the modem theory of the science of biophysics—application of physics to the life systems of plants and animals. He had been chairman of the National Research Council from 1946 to 1950, and president of the National Science Foundation for three terms from 1950 to 1960. In 1964 he had received the Medal of Freedom, highest civilian award to be granted by a U.S. President. (B Sun, 18 Nov 75, A13; NYT, 18 Nov 75, 38M)
Limitations imposed by the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) agreements had made the development of the B-l bomber essential, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger as telling Rep. Richard Bolling in an interview. Because the U.S. would be limited in megaton strike capability and approximately 60% of U.S. megatonnage was carried by bombers, it was essential to maintain a significant and highly effective bomber force. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 2)
The Air Force System Command’s Materials Laboratory had successfully static-tested a full-scale F—15 aircraft wing constructed of advanced composite materials, AFSC announced. The wing had withstood a maximum load 45% greater than expected during actual flight, before giving way at the point where the titanium rear spur flange and upper skin were bolted together. The composite wing, 18% lighter than an allmetal wing, was made of a brown epoxy thin honeycomb sandwich material reinforced with graphite-epoxy stiffeners. The ribs were graphite-epoxy and the spurs were metal. The wing, the largest aircraft wing ever built of advanced composite materials, was 4.9 m wide at the root chord and 1.5 m wide at the tip chord, and had a 4.3-m span. The program had begun in May 1971 with an $8.2-million contract award to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for development of the wing, which was expected to reduce fuel requirements by increasing range, speed, and maneuverability. (AFSC Release OIP 021.75)
Soviet cosmonauts Valery Kubasov and Gen. Aleksey Leonov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin a 2-wk tour of the U.S. by visiting President Ford at the White House and touring the capital. The American crew of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and their wives would accompany the cosmonauts on the tour, which would also visit Chicago, Omaha, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Reno, Lake Tahoe, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Nashville, and New York City. The cosmonauts were accompanied by their wives and three of their children, as well ' as the director of cosmonaut training, Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, plus a support staff and Soviet journalists. The Apollo-Soyuz crews had completed a 2-wk tour of the Soviet Union 4 Oct. (NASA Release 75-276; SBD, 14 Oct 75, 216)
Pan American World Airways announced the industry’s first nonstop flights from New York and Los Angeles to Tokyo, beginning early in 1976. The announcement came a day after a new Boeing 747SP jetliner had made a demonstration flight New York to Tokyo in 13 hrs 33 min, fastest commercial service to Japan from the U.S. Current commercial time on that route, which required a refueling stop, was more than 17 hr. The Boeing 747SP (special performance) was 100 seats smaller than the 747-21, but had the same fuel capacity and the same four engines as the larger model. The SP had been capable of cruising faster and higher than any other commercial jetliner and had a range of 1200 km beyond that of the standard 747. (B Sun, 15 Nov 75, A9)
The Air Force’s new B —1 bomber broke the sound barrier for the first time while making its sixth flight test, from Vandenberg Air Force Base. During the 6-hr 23-min mission, the B—1 also took on fuel from a KC—135 tanker for the first time and opened its weapons-bay doors. (AP, W Star, 11 April 75, 4)
Department of Defense said the Navy had understated the long-term cost of building the new F—18 carrier aircraft by at least $1.6 billion, the Washington Star reported. The Star said the Navy had chosen the F—18 under pressure from DOD and Congress, after the Air Force selected the F—16 for its low-cost fighter instead of the fighter version of the F—18. At the time the Navy estimated the cost of each F—18 as $7.8 million, or $2.6 billion to develop and produce the first 128 F—18s; however, the Star reported, a DOD analysis found the 5-yr costs would be closer to $4.3 billion. The future of the program was under discussion. One alternative would be to raise projected Navy budget to accommodate the increased costs of the F—18. Another would be for the Navy to drop F—18 and go back to industry to design and develop a lower cost fighter that would fit into the original budget and, in the interim, to let the Navy buy fighter-bombers from McDonnell Douglas to meet its fleet-modernization needs in the early 1980s. (Finney, W Star, 17 July 75, A16) 17 July. Pioneer 10, launched 2 March 1972 and traveling out of the solar system at 43 200 km per hr, was operating normally despite a report that the spacecraft was making unexplained orientation changes [see 11 June]. The apparent changes were caused when, during a routine change in spacecraft orientation on 6 May, the spacecraft’s star sensor made an undetected shift in its lock from the star Betelgeuse to the star Sirius. This shift twisted the frame of reference for measuring direction, and for changing the direction of spin-axis pointing. As a result, onboard and ground computers had recorded a gradual northward shift of the spin axis relative to the earth’s motion around the sun. Also, when the thrusters were fired to move the spin axis with the earth’s east-west course, “southward” impulses were necessary. No loss of data had occurred, and techniques were being designed to verify star reference during intervals when the star sensor was used. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
Private industry and government agencies in the U.S. and in Europe were investing money in designs and prototypes of giant dirigibles that could carry cargo and passengers more cheaply than conventional aircraft, Newsweek reported. In May a 9-m-wide helium-filled prototype dirigible named Skyship, shaped like a flying saucer, had been flight-tested at a Royal Air Force station in England; a flight model was expected to go into commercial operation within 3 yr. Shell Oil Co. had spent more than $1 million studying the possibility of developing dirigibles to transport natural gas, Newsweek said. The U.S. Air Force was investigating dirigibles as a means of ferrying missiles from silo to silo, and the Navy was studying their ability to track submarines. A reason for the resurgence of interest in lighter-than-air craft was the energy crisis. Airships require hardly any fuel to get aloft and use very little for propulsion, and they also produce less noise and less atmospheric pollution. New designs for dirigibles included the substitution of inert helium for highly flammable hydrogen as the lifting gas, and the replacement of the familiar cigar shape with other configurations to do away with the problem of bistability near the ground. (Newsweek, 2 June 75)
An A— 7D aircraft with a DIGITAC digital flight-control system—first of its kind to be flight-tested by the Air Force—made its first flight at Air Force Flight Test Center. DIGITAC was part of a program to investigate the feasibility of installing digital flight-control systems in current and future tactical fighter aircraft. The system, featuring a pilot-selectable control mode, would increase flight-control reliability with its component self-test capability, improve combat effectiveness by permitting multimode aircrafthandling qualities, and cost less because of the system’s inherent flexibility and the general availability of its digital components. (AFSC Release OIP 057.75)
The Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported that the Air Force had awarded an estimated $17 649 042 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Aircraft Co. for the development, manufacture, and testing of a wide-body cargo aircraft fuselage segment using adhesive bonding instead of conventional riveting of the primary structures. Either the YC—14 or the YC—15, advanced medium-short-takeoff-and-landing transport prototypes, would be used as the engineering baseline against which the technology could be developed and evaluated. The contract was AFSC’s primary adhesively bonded structure (PABST) portion of the advanced metallic structures (AMS) program to improve structured integrity and durability of future aircraft while minimizing weight and costs of acquisition and maintenance. (AFSC Newsreview, May 75, 4)
The Air Force Systems Command reported that researchers at the Air Force Avionics Laboratory were testing fiber optics—thin strands of glass that transmit light—to transmit avionic signals from one point to another in an aircraft. Fiber-optics data transfer began with an electronic signal that was converted into light by a transducer; the light traveled through glass strands and was reconverted at the other end into electrical signals, with minimal loss of energy. AFSC quoted Avionics Lab researchers as saying that, unlike the usual copper wire, fiber optics were unaffected by static from nearby electrical equipment and were immune to lightning, nuclear radiation, electrical sparking, fires, and grounding problems. Because extensive lab testing was nearly complete, the next step would be a low-cost flight-test program, perhaps on a remotely piloted vehicle (RPV). The Avionics Lab also had awarded contracts to develop passive optical couplers, a fiber-optics data bus, and a wideband fiber-optics system that would handle large data rates. The proposed Air Force Advanced Development Program could put a total fiber-optics system on manned and unmanned aerospace vehicles by 1980. (AFSC Release OIP 087.75)
The National Science Foundation marked the 25th anniversary of its establishment at a dinner at the Dept, of State in Washington, D.C. Dr. Norman Hackerman, chairman of the National Science Board, presided at the dinner hosted by the 25-member board, the policy-making body of NSF. Among those present were many former board members, including the six charter members appointed by President Truman in 1950, and representatives of the scientific community, industry, and the executive and legislative branches of government. President Ford sent a message saluting NSF: “In the last quarter century the National Science Foundation has become the Nation’s principal agency for the support of basic research and education in all fields of scientific endeavor. The creation of the National Science Foundation represented a culmination of our national understanding of the role of science in our society. In the last two and a half decades, the Foundation has built a prestigious reputation for sound scientific exploration to improve the quality of life for all.” Dr. H. Guyford Stever, NSF Director, announced plans to establish an Alan T. Waterman Award for research and advanced study in the mathematical, physical, medical, biological, engineering, social, and other sciences. Dr. Waterman had been the first NSF Director. (NSF Release PR75—47)
NASA announced appointment of Gonzalo Fernandez as Assistant Associate Administrator for Center Operations, replacing Raymond A. Kline, appointed Assistant Administrator of Institutional Management. Fernandez, who came to NASA from the Air Force, would be responsible for the Offices of Administrative Data Processing Management, Information Systems, NASA Aircraft, Safety and Environmental Health, and Operating Systems. (NASA anno, 16 Sept 75)
NASA awarded a $5.5 million cost-reimbursable contract to the Univ. of . Hawaii for construction of an infrared telescope facility on the summit of Mauna Kea, an extinct volcano on Hawaii Island. The contract covered the second part of a $6-million two-phase project covering design, construction, installation, and assembly of the facility. The 3-m infrared telescope, scheduled for 1977 completion, would be the world’s largest. The Univ. of Hawaii would operate it in support of NASA’s planetary exploration programs, particularly the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn. The facility would provide a national capability of observing interstellar dust, exploding galaxies, and galactic nuclei in the middle and far infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. (NASA Release 75— 209)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had developed a new remote-sensing technique to “see” nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, permitting scientists for the first time to calculate the actual rate at which the nitrogen compounds destroy stratospheric ozone. Much of the work on the ozone cycle had been theoretical, based on computer models and laboratory tests; seasonal variations in the stratosphere at high latitudes, revealed by spectrometers on jet aircraft, had not been predicted by theory, which meant that the computer models had not provided close simulation. The new technique, using a spectrometer to measure the light spectrum and isolate that portion caused by nitrogen dioxides, would permit routine checks on daily, seasonal, and latitudinal variations in the content of the stratosphere. The method would be applied by small automated instruments run by minicomputers at NOAA stations in Alaska, Samoa, Hawaii, and the South Pole, and at the Air Force base in Greenland. (NOAA Release 75—220)
The Air Force had formally entered into an agreement with NASA on development of an experimental hypersonic research aircraft capable of mach 6 flight. The two agencies had agreed after a joint 1974— 75 study that “the combined objective and the national interest” would be best served by a joint hypersonic flight-test program. The agreement provided that the report of the joint study would be the baseline document for program development; that technology development and experimental tests would be completed in 1976 so preliminary design study could begin in FY1977; that personnel from both agencies would participate in all phases to the maximum extent practicable; and that an ad hoc steering committee would be established to prepare a project plan for use in vehicle procurement. (Memo of understanding, 10 Dec 75)
Soviet and American fraternizing at Cape Canaveral and Florida’s Disney World in recent weeks were evidence of how much the world had changed since the 1950s, a New York Times editorial said. “What was once a ferociously pursued race in space has given way to detente in space,” with the preparations for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. Skeptics, complaining that Moscow would be the “big net gainer” in the project, were correct only from a narrow intelligence point of view. They missed the main point for detente in space. Neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union had resources sufficient for fruitful human activity in space for decades ahead. “It is simply enlightened selfishness for Washington and Moscow to work together in space.” And this was only a start. What was needed even more was “broadly based cooperation in space efforts embracing the personnel and talents of all nations for the benefit of all humanity.” (NYT, 15 Feb 75. 28)
The Air Force Systems Command announced the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils half the size of a C—5 aircraft’s wing to recover remotely piloted vehicles (RPVs). RPVs were currently retrieved by recovery helicopters, a reliable but expensive system affected by weather conditions. The parafoil, part of an AF effort to find cheaper ways to land RPVs, was a high glider which, when deployed like a parachute, would take on an airfoil shape and descend at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. Under the terms of the contract Aero would design and build two 12- by 24-m parafoils for testing scheduled to begin in May. (AFSC Release OIP 81.75)
The Air Force’s prototype B— 1 strategic bomber successfully completed its second flight test at Air Force Flight Test Center. Primary objectives of the 3-hr 21-min flight included evaluation of the aircraft’s wing sweep control system, flying qualities in the initial climb, and power approach configuration. The auxiliary power unit was also evaluated and air-start tests were made. Following takeoff, the B—1 climbed to 3050 m, where its landing gear, flaps, and slats were retracted. After flying at low speeds with the wings in the full forward 15° position, the wings were swept 25°, and the aircraft climbed to 4900 m and conducted air-start tests at mach 0.7. The prototype then slowed to 463 km per hr and its speed brake was checked in a descent to traffic-pattern altitude. The B— 1 then landed safely at AFFTC. (AFSC Newsreview, March 75)
The Air Force had awarded a $28.5-million contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for design, development, and testing of a strengthened wing for the C — 5A transport airplane that the New York Times called a symbol of Pentagon “cost overruns.” Aim of the original C—5A contract with Lockheed had been to produce a transport capable of carrying a 99 700-kg payload and having a service life of 30 000 flying hours. Even before it had gone into full operational use, the C—5A wing had been shown in static ground tests to be too weak to carry the prescribed load and had developed fatigue cracks in the metal structure. The cracking had been attributed to high stress levels inherent in the design, ineffective fasteners on the wing panels, and difficulty in mating the stiff contours of the wing and joints during manufacture. The Air Force had paid $4.5 billion on delivery of 81 C—5As; it had already spent more than $198 million through June 1975 correcting deficiencies for which Lockheed was responsible under the original contract, renegotiated when Lockheed was in financial difficulty in 1971. In addition to $1.3 billion for fixing the wings, the AF planned to spend another $200 million to fix other defects. Cost of the repairs would nearly double the original AF estimate of $3.4 billion for the C—5A program. However, without the repairs, the C—5A fleet would have to be grounded beginning in 1979 when the flying-time safety limit had been reached. Because of the defects, service life had recently been re-estimated at 8750 hr and payload limit at 78 900 kg. (NYT, 15 Dec 75, 1; WSJ, 24 Dec 75, 3)
A backup Skylab Orbital Workshop and an airlock module and multiple docking adapter would be shipped by barge to Washington, D.C., for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Stripped of all equipment that could be used for future programs, the workshop would be cut into three sections for transport; two doors would be added and the floor strengthened to accommodate the flow of tourists. The museum was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (MSFC Release 75-189)
