The universe had been analyzed and found to be open, a group of astronomers told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston. The director of Cornell Univ.’s national astronomy and ionosphere center, Dr. Frank Drake, said that the most recent astronomical data indicated that in about 30 billion years the universe would have changed, and no stars would appear in a night sky, having gathered into “Island Universes”—clusters of galaxies widely separated from each other. Computer analysis of recent observations indicated that separation of galaxies into islands had not yet begun, which meant that the universe might be comparatively young. The conclusion that the universe was open had been based on factors such as expansion rate, deceleration, and density of the universe. Evidence today would support the “big bang” theory which stated that the universe had exploded in the beginning from a single solid mass, and would go on expanding. (B Sun, 19 Feb 76, A-3)
The Air Force awarded a $1 million supplement of a previous costplusincentive-fee contract to General Electric’s Aircraft Engine Group at Cincinnati, O., a labor-surplus area, for extended flight-test spare parts support for B-l aircraft engines, the Department of Defense announced. (DOD Release 213-76)
FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced award to Wilcox Electric Co., Kansas City, Mo., of a $3 720 699 contract for nine Category III instrument-landing systems that would complete a program to provide all-weather landing capability at key airports across the U.S. One Category III system would be installed at the FAA academy at Oklahoma City for training; the other eight would go to Kennedy Airport, NYC; O’Hare, Chicago; Houston Inti., Kansas City Inti., Seattle-Tacoma Inti., Los Angeles Inti., Portland Inti., and Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne County Airport. The new equipment had already been installed at Dulles Inti, near Washington, D.C., Atlanta Inti., San Francisco Inti., and Stapleton Airport at Denver, as well as at the FAA center at Atlantic City, N.J., where it had been used for test and evaluation. Category III equipment would permit landings without visual reference to the ground, under weather conditions with ceiling zero and runway visibility no less than about 200 m. Existing Category II equipment at the sites to be replaced would be moved to other airports, to be named later. (FAA Release 76-97)
DOD announced plans to sell West Germany 500 Sidewinder missiles and support equipment valued at $43 million. The announcement was one of several made by the Pentagon on foreign weapons sales, since law required that Congress must be notified and have 20 days in which to disapprove such sales. DOD also planned to provide $26 million in pilot training under a Northrop Corp. contract to upgrade the Saudi Arabian air force, through the sale of F5E jet fighters and construction of support and training facilities. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 3)
Inspection by U.S. Air Force and Japanese technicians of the MiG-25 Foxbat Soviet interceptor plane landed in Japan by a defecting pilot early in September revealed a minimum of innovation and an approach that relied on “brute force,” reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Examination of the Foxbat revealed a standard ejection seat, although the pilot had told U.S. interrogators none was carried because of a desire to hold down the weight of the steel-frame aircraft (about 14 000 kg with wings, tail surfaces, and afterburners removed). The number of cockpit instruments was about half those used in the F-4EJ built in Japan under license. None of the avionics in the MiG-25 used solid-state circuitry, relying instead on vacuum tubes; fatigue cracks in the airframe had been repaired by rough welding techniques. Despite the design deficiencies, however, the MiG-25 was “a formidable opponent,” Av Wk noted. (Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 18)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of 3 yr of test and evaluation on a production-engineered version of a laser-guided bomb kit designed for easy mounting on standard unguided bombs. AFSC noted that, during the Southeast Asia conflict, laser-guided bombs were 200 times as likely to reach the target as manually released unguided bombs, and had outscored computer-aimed bombs by 50 to 1. The USAF described the LGB as “one of the most effective technological advances” in weaponry, one LGB costing less than 12 standard unguided bombs and offering additional savings in fewer missions flown, fewer crew losses, increased storage life, and greater reliability. (OIP Release 241.76)
A new manmade fiber stronger than nylon for possible use in drogue parachutes had been tested in the 5-m transonic tunnel at the Arnold Engineering Development Center in Ohio, the Air Force announced. The material, called Kevlar, had been developed by DuPont for use in tires, and could be woven into parachute materials twice as strong as nylon with only half the weight and volume of nylon counterparts. The AEDC tests used 4 ribbon-type parachutes 2 m in diameter, tested to destruction; one was 100% nylon, another 100% Kevlar, and the remaining two were composed of different blends of the two substances. 'The tests measured dynamic loads as the chutes were deployed at about 966 km per hr at simulated altitudes from 15 to 115 km; steady-state loads were also measured at those altitudes for speeds of from 640 to 1440 km per hr. The material-evaluation tests were a novelty for the tunnel, normally used for aerodynamic studies of large-scale models or engine compatibility with flight hardware. (AF OIP 003.76)
Ruth Bates Harris, NASA’s deputy assistant administrator for community and human relations, announced that she would leave the agency effective 15 Oct. Mrs. Harris said she would return to New York “to attend to pressing personal family needs,” but would “spend an number of months continuing to work as a consultant” to NASA, in order to complete some unfinished community and human relations projects. She had been a deputy assistant administrator since Aug. 1974, the first woman to reach that position in NASA, and had earlier been the first director of NASA’s Office of Equal Employment Opportunity. Before joining NASA, Mrs. Harris had been director of human relations for the public schools in Montgomery County, Md., and had been director of the Human Relations Commission in Washington, D.C. She had received more than 50 awards and citations for her work in human relations. (NASA Release 76-170)
Long-term directions and opportunities in civil aviation—including passenger air travel by rotorcraft from small urban-center airports, or intercontinental air transportation on hypersonic craft rated environmentally acceptable—were projected in a NASA study, “Outlook for Aeronautics,” announced by the agency as the result of its study on the role it should play in research and development of aviation and the technical advances that might be needed. Relatively few major new developments could be expected through the early 1980s because of economic setbacks and environmental pressures, the agency said, but, with adequate research and technology investments, new opportunities should arise in the period 1985-2000. Demand for passenger transportation should grow from 250 million annually to about 1 billion annually by the year 2000; by the late 1980s, air traffic should exceed the capacity of the present airport system. Congestion should lead to development of short-haul aircraft using smaller airports; increasing costs would result in greater efficiency and economy with improved safety in subsonic aircraft, the report said. (NASA Release 76-78) During April: Air Force cold-weather tests of an air-cushion landing system for use on large transport aircraft were completed after 4 wk at a site in Canada. The device, which resembled an upside-down life raft installed under the fuselage, was made of rubber and nylon; it measured about 10 m long and about 4 m wide. The elastic container was filled with air from two engines mounted under the wings; air forced out through more than 6800 holes on the bottom surface created an air bearing between the landing surface and the trunk. The cushion system, successfully demonstrated in the late 1960s on a smaller single-engine aircraft, had the advantage of exerting a very small amount of pressure over the entire landing surface as contrasted to conventional landing systems. Further tests of the system would be conducted on the twin-engine short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 76, 15)
The National Transportation Safety Board reported that U.S. commercial airlines had the best safety record in 1975 since 1957, with only 42 accidents and a total of 124 deaths, 112 of those in the major air disaster of the year: the crash of an Eastern Airlines flight short of the runway at Kennedy International Airport in New York City on
Britain and France announced their decision to build no more Concorde supersonic jetliners beyond the 16 now under construction or in the air. After a meeting in London with France’s transport minister Marcel Cavaille, British industry minister Gerald Kaufman told a news conference that future projects would concentrate on less exotic subsonic aircraft that would stand a better chance of making money. The Concorde, a project begun by treaty in 1962, had already cost about $1.92 billion for research, design, and development; each plane, with support facilities, would cost about $49.6 million. Nine had been built and sold—five to British Airways, four to Air France—and, of those remaining, three would go to British Airways and two to Air France, while preliminary purchase agreements had been signed with Iran for two others. British Airways had begun supersonic commercial flights in Jan. 1976 with its Concordes between London and Bahrein; Air France had begun similar service at about the same time between Paris and Rio de Janeiro. On 24 May 1976, a trial service began from London and Paris to Dulles Inti. Airport at Washington, D.C. Banned by the New York Port Authority from landing at JFK Inti. Airport, pending results of environmental testing at Dulles, the Concorde was losing money for both its state-owned sponsors; Air France reported losses of from $30 to $32 million in the first 9 mo of Concorde operation. Potential customers for the Concorde had made it clear that they would be interested only in the Europe-to-New York City route, most lucrative of the international flights. Kaufman added that the two countries had not become disenchanted with supersonic transport even though their future plans were to build smaller planes; “the fact that you’re going for bread and butter now,” he said, “doesn’t mean that you’d be disenchanted with caviar later.” (ATT, 3 Nov 76, 61; W Post, 4 Nov 76, A-3; W Star, 3 Nov 76, A-5)
The U.S. Air Force announced production of a new material with electrical properties suitable for solid-state laser applications: anisotropic yttrium aluminate doped with neodymium (Nd:YA10:i), a substance difficult to make into high-quality single crystals. The new material would replace neodymium YAC in solid-state lasers because it loses less heat than conventional lasing materials, requires no external component to polarize the laser light, and stores more energy for electro-optical switched-laser operations. The USAF sponsored the research at a pilot plant of Lambda-Airtron Division of Litton at Morris Plains, N.J. which produced 40 rods of the new material; the longest, about 100 mm long, was valued at $4000. The high cost resulted from the cost of the raw materials and the iridium crucibles used in production, as well as the large amounts of power needed. The Air Force Materials Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., would lend the tested rods to qualified government agencies and contractors. (AFSC Release OIP 118.76)
Astronomical observations and laboratory experiments spanning 16 yr had failed to detect any signals of life in outer space, the 142nd annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told. The session in Roston heard reports on a 4-galaxy scan using the largest radiotelescope in the world—the 600-m-dia. antenna at Arecibo, P.R.—from Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. and his Cornell colleague, Dr. Frank Drake, director of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center at Arecibo. “Of the trillion stars we looked at in four galaxies,” Dr. Sagan said, “there is not a single one that at the time of our observation was devoting a major effort to communicate with us.” Another effort—a 4-yr scan by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Rank, W.Va., of 659 stars in the region of the Milky Way—had yielded negative results after analysis of 90% of the observations. However, fewer than a millionth of the stars in the Milky Way had been scanned, for very brief periods, at only a few wavelengths. Negative results did not rule out the possibility of receiving the looked-for signals some day, the meeting was told. (NYT, 21 Feb 76, 40; B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A-3; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-3)
Rockwell Inti, announced award to the Aerostructures Div. of Avco Corp. of a contract valued at more than $50 million for long lead-time production work on outer wings of the B-l bomber. Work would cover the first three operational B-ls produced for the U.S. Air Force. The Aero-structures Div. would design and fabricate tools and prepare for actual building of the outer wings. Rockwell Inti, had assembled outer wings for the first three B-l prototypes, which had already accumulated more than 350 hr of flight tests at Edwards AFB, Calif. Outer wings on each side of the B-l would constitute a shipset—one of the largest sections of the B-l—weighing more than 13 000 kg, and measuring more than 18 m long and 4.5 m wide. Fuel would be stored inside the wing structure. (Rockwell Release LA-5)
Under a 3-nation agreement announced by Britain, West Germany, and Italy, the Tornado MRCA (multi-role combat aircraft) dubbed “the spearhead of Europe’s coming offensive against the United States for equality in the skies” would go into production and would be operational by 1980. The agreement provided for construction at a total cost of $ 10 billion of 809 swing-wing “wonder weapon” planes that could fly just under the speed of sound at treetop level, and twice the speed of sound at higher altitudes; it was designed to replace 2 of the most profitable planes ever produced by U.S. makers, the Phantom used by Britain’s RAF and the F104 Starfighters used by West Germany and Italy. The Tornado carried terrain-following radar that could fly it under enemy radar, and could vary its wingspan from 8.5 to 14m. Panavia (consisting of British Aircraft Corp., Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm, and Aeritalia) would build the Tornado airframe and Turbo-Union (Rolls Royce, Motoren-und-Turbinen Union, and Fiat) would build the engine. The U.S. press noted that, for the first time, American aerospace firms would be facing a competitor as formidable as themselves. (WPost, 15 Aug 76, A-14; W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-4)
Laser beams had become the latest major tool in manufacturing aircraft, the Aerospace Industries Association announced, reporting on a year-long series of tests of the numerically controlled laser cutting-arm technique. The test objective was to define effects of a laser on physical characteristics of the parts produced, such as corrosion and fatigue. The cutting arm was coupled with a computer data bank that chose the best method of positioning parts on flat thin aluminum sheets, saving both time and money and reducing aluminum scrap by 30 to 50%. Usual methods such as blanking, routing, and sawing had been used since World War'll. The Air Force was funding a program to use thicker sheets of metal and higher power lasers in an application of new technology to aircraft manufacture, (aia Release 76-4)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 067 113 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Teledyne McCormick Selph of Hollister, Calif., for unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine, a chemical used in Titan missiles and NASA-USAF space boosters. The contracting activity was the San Antonio Logistics Center at Kelly AFB, Texas. (DOD Release 223-76)
In an address to the American Institute of Industrial Engineers, meeting in St. Louis, W.F. Rockwell, Jr., chairman of Rockwell International Corp., warned that the U.S. in its search for energy independence should not “go driving up the wrong street” but should make use of nuclear power. Claiming that solar power, nuclear fusion, or other exotic power sources were solutions for the distant future, Rockwell described nuclear energy as “the bridge that will allow us to make a smooth transition to those future energy sources” and as being “safe, clean, abundant and economical.” Rockwell noted the 6- to 10-yr period needed between the concept and the start-up of a power plant, adding that today’s Americans have roughly 36 mo to “get it all together if we’re going to have enough power in 1990.” (Rockwell Release R-20)
Aviation Week magazine reported that the State Superior Court of Ariz. had found against aeronautical chartmaker Jeppesen Sanderson, sued by insurance underwriters for failing to include on the map of the Philippines a peak near Manila—Mt. Kamunay, nearly 1050 m high—where four crewmen were killed in July 1971 when a Pan American Boeing 707 flew into the mountain. More than $5.8 million was awarded in damages for value of cargo and aircraft in a ruling called a “landmark in product liability litigation.” The suit had been brought originally by three of the four widows, whose damage awards had not been set. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 47)
The Concorde supersonic airliner, making regularly scheduled flights between London, Paris, and the Dulles airport outside Washington, D.C. since 24 May, had been lending its distinctive sonic waves to atmospheric research by Columbia Univ. monitors, the New York Times reported. Dr. William L. Donn, senior research associate at Columbia’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and his colleagues Nambath Balachan-dran and David Rind had derived surprising data on daily variations in the supposed prevailing winds in the upper atmosphere, and were anticipating new data on dispersal of atmospheric pollutants and the content of the rarefied reaches of earth’s atmosphere. The sound waves, inaudible to the human ear but detectable by sensitive microphones registering changes in air pressure, contained atmospheric information up to as far as 120-km altitude, through reflection from the thermosphere. Precise knowledge of the Concorde’s elevation and location along its flight path had aided in interpreting data on atmospheric temperatures and wind conditions depending on the exact strength and path of the sound waves, Dr. Donn said. (ATT, 17 Dec 76, A-18)
U.S. airline traffic increased more than 12% in the first half of 1976, the Air Transport Association reported; increasing numbers of passengers plus increased fares and cost-cutting would produce better profits for the airlines. Analysts said Americans were flying in unprecedented numbers because they felt the recession was over; even “ailing international carriers” like Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines were trimming their operating losses and might show some profit for the year, the Wall Street Journal reported. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 15)
The Air Force announced that its third prototype B-l bomber successfully completed its maiden flight, having left Air Force Plant 42 at Palmdale, Calif., at 3:37 pm PDT and landed at nearby Edwards AFB after a flight of 2 hr 9 min. Since its rollout 11 May, the prototype built for USAF by Rockwell International’s B-l Division had undergone fuel and propulsion-system checkout, subsystem tests, low- and high-speed taxi tests, and a complete review of flight readiness. The B-l was the first large swing-wing aircraft to complete a complex 8-mo series of structural integrity testing so early in its design life. The third B-l’s primary flight-test objective was to acquire data to verify predicted design loads in test missions at both subsonic and supersonic speeds. Highest altitude reached during the maiden flight was about 3 km, with top speed at .45 mach. Crew members were Doug Benefield of Rockwell, pilot; AF Lt. Col. Ed McDowell, copilot; and Rockwell flight-test engineer Jack Baldwin, who was riding in the B-l for the first time. (USAF release 14 June 76)
More trouble developed for the DOD’s “controversial” F— 111 and F-14A jet fighter planes, the Wall Street Journal reported, as the Air Force announced grounding of 183 General Dynamics F— Ills at Nellis AFB, Nev., and Cannon AFB, N.M. The groundings, ordered after inspections showed defects in fan blades, would continue to midmonth and would not affect F— Ills stationed elsewhere. A General Accounting Office report on the Grumman F-14A, 14 of which had crashed at a loss of $161.6 million, questioned the plane’s ability to cope with attacks by antiship missiles. The GAO said that problems with equipment and inadequate supplies of parts had reduced the readiness of the F-14A to 37.2% during 1975, and that the electronic equipment’s reliability was extremely low, some of the major systems exhibiting only 6% to 14% of the desired objective. Cost of the F-14A had risen from $18.2 million each in 1973 to $20.2 million. Designed to defend the Navy against assaults by antiship missiles, the F-14A could engage current Soviet fighter jets, said GAO, but the Navy itself feared the plane’s ability to cope with the missiles might be “marginal.” (WSJ, 9 Aug 76, 11)
NASA announced that it would simulate the drop of the main probe of its planned 1978 Pioneer Venus mission into the Venusian atmosphere, by dropping the probe from an Air Force balloon at 32 km altitude over the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The drop, scheduled for a date between 13 and 16 Dec., would be the first of two tests, a second being scheduled for early 1977. Flight events to be simulated just before the probe’s descent into the dense hot lower atmosphere of Venus—deployment of the probe parachute, separation of the heat-shield, and (after a 17-min parachute descent) separation of the parachute—would occur at an altitude of 16 km, where the temperature and density of earth’s atmosphere and the velocity of the probe would be much the same as those on Venus. The instrumented vessel would contain special equipment to monitor system performance, and movie cameras on the balloon platform as well as telescopic still and movie cameras on the ground would record the test. (NASA Release 76-192; ARC Release 76-84)
The National Aeronautic Assn., at its annual meeting in Washington, D.C., announced its selections for Elder Statesmen of Aviation for 1976. The award, established in 1954, honored outstanding Americans over the age of 60 who had made significant contributions to aeronautics. The three persons chosen were: J. Leland Atwood, 72, leader in aviation for more than 50 yr, who headed North American Rockwell (now Rockwell Inti.) until his retirement in 1970 and originated the design concept for the P-51 Mustang; Clifford W. Henderson, 81, originator of the Bendix and Thompson trophy races and the Power Puff Derby, and manager of the National Air Races 1928-1939; and Blanche Wilcox Noyes, 76, who learned to fly in 1928 and won the national closed-course race in 1929, the Miami All-American air race in 1931, and the Bendix trophy for a cross-country flight in 1936. (NAA release 9 Nov 76)
Flight tests by the Air Force had confirmed the concept called LATAR (laser-augmented target acquisition and recognition) that would permit a pilot in a high-performance single-seat fighter to fly the aircraft and operate its weaponry at the same time. The LATAR pod, mounted under the fuselage of an F-5E directly beneath the cockpit, contained a laser-target designator, a spot tracker, and an electro-optical sensor. The spot tracker was a device that finds a laser “spot” from another target designator operated from another aircraft or on the ground; initial target identification could be either visual, by radar, or by a helmet-mounted sight system that integrated sight control with movement of the pilot’s head. The flight tests were conducted at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards AFB, Calif. (OIP Release 308.75)
Physicists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, 111., discovered a new elementary particle, heaviest ever observed, the annual meeting of the American Physical Society was told. The investigators from Columbia Univ., the State Univ. of N.Y. at Stony Brook, and the Fermi lab said the “upsilon” particle raised the possibility that physics might never be able to identify any ultimate or basic building blocks of matter. The upsilon was discovered in debris of particles created by acceleration of a proton beam aimed at a beryllium target; the resulting collision produced a cluster of electron-positron pairs with a mass of 6 billion electron volts, more than 6 times that of the proton and 1.5 times that of any other particle. The report on the upsilon particle was a last-minute addition to the annual meeting’s agenda because the data were available only in the last few wk; first observed about 5 mo ago, the upsilon had been seen only 12 times so far, but was expected to require new thinking in theoretical physics. (B Sun, 6 Feb. 76, A-3; W Post, 9 Feb 76, A-3)
Cost of the Air Force B-l bomber might run more than $11 billion over original estimates because of inflation and higher prices, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), adding that total cost increases on the B-l would be around $1 billion while inflation would be responsible for another $10 billion increase. Three research contracts on the B-l had already run $129 million higher than expected, he said, and those represented only money spent for models, engines, and electronics. By the end of 1976, Congress would have to decide whether to go ahead with the bomber, intended as a replacement for the aging B-52. (LA Times, 22 Mar 76, 11C)
International golfing great Arnold Palmer was scheduled to pilot a Learjet 36 “business aircraft” from Denver, Colo., for an assault on the speed-around-the-world record that had not been surpassed for 10 yr. A Learjet 24 had circled the earth in 1966 in 65 hr 38 min 39 sec elapsed time, at an average speed of better than 563 kph (50 hr 20 min actual flying time) including 17 intermediary stops. The National Aeronautic Association had sanctioned the new attempt, designating journalist Robert Serling as official onboard observer. Two additional pilots would accompany Palmer and Serling on their 2-day flight, scheduled to cover nearly 37 000 km, under the auspices of the Aviation Space Writers Association. Nine stops were planned for the new flight: Logan Airport at Boston; LeBourget at Paris; Mehrabad Airport at Tehran, Iran; Band-anaraike International Airport at Colombo, Sri Lanka; Kemayoran Airport, Jakarta, Indonesia; Manila International Airport; Wake Island; Honolulu International Airport; and Arapahoe County Airport, Denver. Besides NAA sponsorship, the flight was sanctioned by the American Revolution Bicentennial Association and the Aviation Historical Foundation. (NAA newsletter, May 1976, 1)
Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) charged that the U.S. Navy planned to spend $187.6 million to repair F-14 Tomcat jet-fighter engines that it planned to replace at an additional cost of up to $1.9 billion. “. . . The Navy hopes to pull a double whammy on the taxpayers by replacing the repaired engine with a brand new one,” Aspin said. The Navy conceded that replacing engines in the jet fighters would cost $1.6 to $1.9 billion, but claimed the planned repairs to current engines would cost only $86 million. The Navy said it wanted new engines for installation beginning in 1981. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) A New York Times story 30 July said that a breakfast meeting with Secy. Reed for a group of Senate aides had been paid for by the Air Force Association, a private group with 155 000 members—largely retired Air Force personnel—and chartered as a veterans organization not required to register as a lobbyist. The Air Force Legislative Liaison Office, which arranged the breakfast, seemed to have been “concerned that it might be engaged in a form of lobbying of doubtful legality,” said the NYT, pointing out that a 1948 law “specifically provides that no funds appropriated by Congress can be used by a Government agency directly or indirectly ‘to influence in any manner’ the vote of a member of Congress.” (NYT magazine, 25 July 76, 7; W Post, 26 July 76, A-13; C Trib, 29 July 76,10; NYT, 30 July 76, A6; Av Wk, 26 July 76, 23)
The U.S. Air Force announced it would begin flight tests of a new system called latar (laser-augmented target acquisition/recognition), developed by Northrop Corp. to give pilots of single-seat aircraft enhanced air-to-surface and air-to-air attack capability. The latar pod, mounted in the gun bay of the USAF F-4E, would contain long-range high-resolution electro-optical equipment for target imaging, laser designation, and acquisition and tracking; its field-of-view would be limited only by the fuselage and the externally carried munitions on the aircraft. The system would allow a pilot to acquire a target visually, using either a helmet-mounted sight system or a telescopic radar, with the optical turret following his line of sight; the view seen by the latar would appear on a helmet-mounted display built by Minneapolis Honeywell. The system would be suitable for use in all types of aircraft, including helicopters. (OIP Release 203.76)
The Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, reported that a long-winged U-2 aircraft on loan to NASA had successfully completed tests in the “icy grip” of the main chamber at McKinley Climatic Laboratory during which it underwent exposure to temperatures as low as —57°C. The laboratory, operated by the USAF Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin AFB, Fla., conducted the tests at NASA’s request to isolate flight-control malfunctions occurring in the cold temperatures of high altitude. The U-2, a single-seat single-engine jet designed to operate at altitudes above 21 km, had been used by NASA as an earth-resources survey tool, making observations in astronomy, high-altitude atmospheric physics, and geophysics in addition to supporting general earth-resources programs. (AFSC Newsreview, July 76, 6)
Meetings in Ardashat, Armenia, between Soviet and American scientists on space biology and manned flight safety had concluded, announced the Yerevan domestic radio news service. The meeting heard reports on results of the Apollo-Soyuz joint space mission, and proposed subjects for discussion at another meeting to be held in the U.S. in 1977. The government of the Armenian Republic gave a reception to honor the participants. (FBIS, Yerevan in Armenian, 29 Sept 76)
A Pentagon group charged with making decisions on weapons programs—the Defense Systems Acquisition Committee—held its first meeting to consider production of the controversial B-l bomber and scheduled another meeting for 6 Jan. 1977 to decide on consolidation of cruise missile programs backed separately by the Air Force and the Navy. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld had stated—apparently with approval from the transition team of the incoming Carter administration—that he was responsible until 20 Jan. for making weapons decisions that came up for scheduled consideration; however, he had also told subordinates that DOD should exercise restraint in passing on programs that the incoming administration might review or change. President-elect Carter had questioned the necessity for a B-I bomber program. The controversy over cruise missiles arose from Air Force advocacy of an air-launched missile that could be used only with a B-l or B—52 bomber; this restraint offered the verification possibility, acceptable to the USSR, of controlling the number of cruise missiles by counting the bombers carrying them. However, the Navy had advocated its Tomahawk missile which could be launched from a submarine torpedo tube as well as from a surface ship or a bombing plane. The Navy’s preference would thwart verification of future arms-limitation agreements, since all attack submarines as well as surface ships and bombers could be potential platforms for launching the Navy missile. The Carter transition team was concerned, said the New York Times, that the Navy might be trying to lock in the new administration with a pre-inauguration decision that would complicate future negotiations with the USSR. Both the Navy and the Air Force programs were started after a 1972 agreement with the USSR that placed a 5-yr limitation on strategic ballistic missiles; the $ 15 million design studies had grown into $300 million development programs, and had reached the point where a decision was needed on proceeding into costly engineering development. Observers pointed to the Army’s plan to award contracts in the next week or so on its $7 million programs for troop-carrier and attack helicopters as a decision that would make it difficult for the incoming administration to re-examine its predecessor’s policy. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 23)
NASA announced award to Owen Enterprises, Inc., of Wilmington, Calif., of an exclusive patent license for production of a solar-energy concentrator invented by JPL’s Dr. Katsunori Shimada that focuses the sun’s rays from almost any angle without the need for a tracking mechanism. The concentrator—a special arrangement of multifaceted Fresnel lenses— magnifies solar energy tenfold, heating a fluid in channels beneath the lenses, which is released through a thermostat when the proper temperature is attained. A series of the devices could be set up, depending on the specific energy requirements of a structure. Suitable for residential, commercial, or industrial applications, the concentrator had proved much more efficient than other solar-collector units on the market. Owen Enterprises, Inc., the licensee, is an American Indian-owned firm that planned to assemble the device at facilities on the Rincon Indian Reservation near Escondido, Calif. The firm would invest $200 000 to develop the concentrator for the market, and pay 1% royalty to the U.S. Treasury on its gross sales. (NASA Release 76-209)
Tass reported a new development in U.S.-Soviet scientific and technical cooperation in a joint oceanographic experiment called Polymode to study vortex formations in the ocean. Professor Alan Robinson of Harvard University, heading a delegation of U.S. oceanographers toa plenary meeting of the Polymode organizing committee, said the mission would help crack the secrets of the ocean and place its resources at the service of mankind. Scientists had theorized that ocean vortexes, like cyclones in the atmosphere, had substantial influence on weather all over the globe. Work on Polymode would begin in mid-1977, with the northern area of research in the North Atlantic, 1000 km west of the Azores, and the southern area 200 to 300 km north of the Antilles. (FBIS, Tass in English, 29 Apr 76)
The Dept, of Defense announced its first successful powered Bight test of a bomber-launched cruise missile, prototype of a weapon the USSR had sought to curb in strategic arms talks. The Boeing-made missile, basically a pilotless jet drone resembling a small plane with airbreathing engines, could carry nuclear warheads at low altitudes to evade detection by enemy radar. The successful test, in which the robot-like craft was launched from a B-5 2 at an altitude of about 3 km and flew for 11 min. over the White Sands range, was viewed as a step in final development of a highly strategic weapon for the U.S. Control of cruise missiles—both air- and submarine-launched types—had been a major issue in negotiations with the USSR. The Air Force missile just tested would be an aid to bomber penetration of enemy defenses, whereas the Navy’s cruise missile would be a tactical type for use against enemy ships rather than a strategic type aimed at land targets. The first test scheduled for 26 Feb. had been canceled because of problems with the B-52’s airconditioning unit. Later tests would try out the programmed guidance system. (WPost, 6 Mar 76, A-12; WStar, 6 Mar 76, A-2; B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A— 1; NYT, 6 Mar 76, 18)
