MSFC reported that Mack Vinson of its personnel office had been one of only 25 people, and the only one from Alabama, selected for a 2-wk study tour in March 1978 of the Peoples Republic of China. The group, a delegation from the American Society for Public Administration, would view firsthand the ways in which PRC officials solved public policy and administrative issues. Other objectives would be to set up a 2-way interchange of administrative ideas and techniques, obtain information for use in university courses, and broaden understanding of China and its people. Vinson said the tour was a matter of personal interest and would be made at his own expense. He had been a member of ASPA since 1965 and was president of its northern Alabama section in 1975-76. {Marshall Star, Dec 21/77, 2)
LaRC announced that the Charles W. Swain family of Tallahassee, Fla., would move into the Tech House Aug. 15 for a yr-long demonstration of NASA designed systems in and around the house to save energy and water and make the home more secure. They would pay a prorated rent and all utilities during their stay. Dr. Swain, a humanities professor at Fla. State Univ., would work with LaRC personnel in career counseling and employee relations. Mrs. Swain, a registered nurse, hoped to continue in her profession while living at LaRC. Their two children would attend local high schools. LaRC had chosen the Swains from a list provided by the American Council on Education, a nonprofit organization sponsoring university professors for lyr assignments to the federal government. (LaRC Release 77-37)
Timothy Leary, once described by the media as “high priest of LSD,” visited Washington, D.C., on behalf of his latest enthusiasm, space migration, according to a story in the Washington Star. Leary, at his first press conference in 7yr, described “a raging epidemic of hope in this country” and said it was time to find a new frontier. He wanted his support taken seriously, and cited the studies by Gerard K. O’Neill of Princeton Univ. and those of the L-5 Society. “Soon people will find it cheaper to build a new world than to fight over an old one,” he added. When would space migration become a reality? “Ten years after people stop laughing about it,” Leary replied. (W Star, Jan 25/77, D-3)
NASA reported that Kenneth Souza of ARC and Dr. Eugene Benton of the Univ. of San Francisco had returned to the U.S. from Moscow Sept. 2 with the biological samples carried on the USSR biosat Cosmos 936 [see Aug. 30]. This mission was the first to subject laboratory rats to artificial gravity in the'weightlessness of space. NASA would send the samples (tissue from the rats and live fruit flies, processed ! and packed in dry ice at the mobile landing site in Siberia) with radiation records to U.S. laboratories at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Univ. of Wash., Seattle; Univ. of San Francisco; Univ. of Southern Calif.; and ARC, for analysis. (NASA Release 77-182)
KSC’s Spaceport News reported on Center efforts to recover launch-vehicle and payload wreckage from the “unprecedented” back-to-back explosions of a Delta and an Atlas Centaur carrying an OTS and an Intelsat spacecraft. In “the most comprehensive and painstaking recovery in the Space Center’s history,” land, sea, and air crews searched every foot of the 50mi2 impact area. Two Patrick AFB helicopters and a private chopper worked to spot scattered wreckage from the air; the USAF crew made 19 flights in 2wk, with a total of 88hr in the air, covering a 12mi2 area and locating about 95% of the wreckage recovered. Ground crews in armored personnel carriers and sea crews in Navy and private craft then took over to retrieve and identify each piece, check it for live ordnance, and catalog its recovery location. USAF ordnance disposal personnel often had to penetrate thick, snake-infested vegetation to reach Delta and Atlas Centaur fragments. Personnel from Port Everglades and the Navy’s harbor-clearance unit using an Air Force landing craft-utility (LCU) boat retrieved the Delta’s solid-fuel motor #1 from the water as prime suspect in the OTS launch failure. The teams worked from early morning to dusk, even over weekends, and recovery work for the Delta was still under way. Hundreds of persons helped on the recovery, from directors to office clerks. Personnel from KSC had the aid of representatives from McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, Patrick AFB, and Pan American Airways operations in the extensive ground search. To reward the combined efforts, KSC would present a group achievement award to the Delta 134/Atlas Centaur 43 recovery team at an awards ceremony Nov. 22. (Spaceport News, Nov 11/77, 4)
First appraisals .of a Soviet MiG-25 aircraft flown by a Soviet pilot to Japan on Sept. 6, 1976, had been revised, according to U.S. Air Force specialists quoted by the NY Times. Further analysis had revealed that the aircfaft did not lag behind the advanced technology of U.S aircraft, as previously stated, but contained some surprises. After 7wk of study, officials reported the MiG-25’s radar to be more powerful and less vulnerable to enemy jamming than U.S. radars, although operated on vacuum-tube technology. The Soviet aircraft’s radar also lacked the “look-down” capability of U.S. aircraft, so that Soviet MiG-25’s could not detect low-flying enemy aircraft that blended in with the earth’s surface. Similarly, Air Force specialists described the MiG-25’s Tumansky jet engines as 15yrs outmoded: the flight computer—called impressive even though it too was based on vacuum-tube technology—required extra space, maintenance, and cooling mechanisms. The USSR apparently was reluctant to entrust its pilots with total control of their aircraft, which explained the “very sophisticated data base” which could not only handle fire control and sensor systems but could also return the craft to any of four predesignated landing fields. “The biggest advantage,” said one U.S. Air Force officer, “is that we allow, we train, our men to think, to adapt. This does not occur in many cases with the Soviet air force.” Designed in 1960 to combat the U.S. B-70 bomber, which never went into production, the MiG-25 had been altered later for use against the highflying Lockheed SR-71 reconnaissance plane. (NYT, Jan 26/77, A-ll)
The Natl. Space Club announced that the guest speaker at its Aug. luncheon would be Col. W. J. Mellors, head of the Washington, D.C. office of the European Space Agency (ESA) since 1973. Col. Mellors had begun his career with the British army in 1942 and had become commander of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in the Middle East by 1965. After joining ESA in 1970, he worked until 1973 with ESTEC, the technology center in the Netherlands. ESA had united the programs of its predecessor organizations, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Organization for Development and Construction of Space-Vehicle Launchers (ELDO); its members nations were Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. (NSC bulletin Aug 17/77)
The U.S Air Force Systems Command announced plans to experiment with dispersal of cloudcover by sowing minute amounts of silver iodide into supercooled clouds over a sparsely populated area of Michigan, using two small civilian aircraft, one to dispense the chemical and the second to photograph effects of the treatment. North American Weather Consultants of Goleta, Calif., contractor to the AF Geophysics Laboratory, would conduct the experiments to disperse cloudcover that could interfere with military or civilian flight operations. The experiments, aimed at clearing specific areas of cloud during landings, would occur only on days that were overcast with little or no precipitation, said Bruce A. Kunkel, project scientist for AFGL. Clouds sought for the tests would be supercooled (consisting of water drops remaining liquid though below freezing temperature) so that they would form ice crystals when treated with the chemical and would fall from the sky, clearing up to a few square miles for up to an hour. Some snow might reach the ground, but most should evaporate after falling from the cloud, and the amount of silver iodide needed would be extremely small notwithstanding its visually dramatic effect. (OIP Release 004.77)
Rockwell Intl.’s B-l Division announced award of contracts for more than $3 million to two Phoenix, Ariz., firms—Sperry Rand Flight Systems Division and AiResearch Manufacturing Co. —for work on the new USAF B-l strategic bomber. The B-l Division was system contractor to the Air Force for the program, which received DOD production approval on Dec. 2, 1976. Sperry would receive a $1 840 500 contract to build a gyrostabilization subsystem and a vertical situation display for a B-l prototype that would enter flight testing in 1979; AiResearch would receive a $1 218 102 contract to produce a secondary power subsystem for the same prototype. The gyrostabilization subsystem would provide the B-l crew with the aircraft’s course heading and flight angle with relation to the horizon; the secondary power subsystem would provide extra power for engine start and operation of support systems on the B-l. (Rockwell Release LA-1)
MSFC employees Alfred G. Orillion, Advanced Projects Office, and James E. Downey, III, deputy director for program develapment, received special awards for the Alabama section of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the AIAA honors banquet in Washington, D.C., Jan 13. The awards were for a 1975 space industrialization symposium at MSFC of which Downey was general chairman; Orillion was chairman of AIAA’s Alabama section. (MSFC Release 77-9)
In a W. Post column, science writer Daniel S. Greenberg commented on the “leaky embargo system that is supposed to deny the Soviets western technology of strategic value.” The principal feature of a new DOD plan drawn up for State and Commerce Dept, approval before presentation next spring to the Coordinating Committee of Nations (“NATO minus Iceland, plus Japan”) on restricting strategic export to Communist bloc nations was that “it isn’t confined to hardware,” Greenberg noted. The new embargo scheme, he said, was aimdd at technological know-how; its enforcement would admittedly encompass “the entire span of advanced American technology. . . . Hardware can be stopped at the loading dock, but know-how, being intangible or confined to paper, calls for different barricades.” The truth about the embargo, Greenberg charged, was that “virtually no one is interested in it except certain military and industrial elements in the U.S. Furthermore, most of what we won’t sell is easily available from sales hungry producers elsewhere. And, finally, there is ample evidence that ... the Soviets, despite their many technological shortcomings, can home produce whatever they deem necessary.” The proposed embargo, Greenberg concluded, might retard the Soviets a bit, but the presence of DOD “gumshoes in the American scientific and technological enterprise is a stiff price to pay” for that delay. (WPost, July 12/77, A19)
The Dept, of Commerce reported that a Boeing 747 in regular passenger service for Pan American World Airways had been doing double duty as a flying laboratory for 2 government agencies, NASA and NOAA, carrying an electronic package collecting data from the plane’s instruments to show that ordinary planes could get weather information in flight and relay it to the ground. This yr, five more packages would be put on planes of international carriers. The prototype package, weighing about 18kg and the size of an electric typewriter, used about 200w power and transmitted at 401.7MHz. LeRC had built the package under technical management from GSFC to tap into the inertial-navigation systems of widebodied jets like the 747 and DC-10 series, recording data on air temperature, wind direction and speed, and aircraft location and altitude. The package converted the data to a format transmitted hourly to the ground through NOAA’s Goes 1. The idea was to enable planes flying over areas where such information was sparse or unobtainable to collect and transmit the data as a help to aircraft operations as well as to weather prediction and analysis. NOAA had begun negotiations with foreign weather services and international airlines to put the packages on their aircraft, especially those flying over equatorial regions. (NOAA Release 77-91)
A new estimate of the cost of building three more Shuttle or-biters might run as high as $600 million apiece, Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post. NASA had told Congress 3mo ago that the remaining Shuttles would cost $550 million apiece; the increase had resulted from the rising price of aluminum and titanium, the two key metals in Shuttle construction. NASA had bought the materials for two vehicles 3yr ago when prices were lower but had held off buying for the last three. Only one of the five Shuttles presently proposed had been completed, at a cost of about $500 million. A second being assembled at the Rockwell Inti, plant in Palmdale, Calif., would cost just over $500 million. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC (the Shuttle-management center), said that NASA expected “by the end of this month a new proposal from Rockwell for the last three spacecraft. ... I don’t know how much Rockwell’s going to suggest but they’re for sure going to cost more than the last estimate we got.” NASA had hoped Congress would approve starting construction of the third Shuttle before the end of 1977. This vehicle was to be sent to Vandenberg AFB in March 1982 for Pentagon use. The fate of the last two Shuttles was not certain, since GAO had told Congress to delay further action on them. NASA and the USAF had expressed concern that delay would mean not only the shutdown around the country of contractor and subcontractor work forces that would be both difficult and costly to reestablish, but also further and more rapid escalation of prices: OToole quoted a NASA estimate that a 2yr delay would boost to about $1 billion the price of each Shuttle affected. (WPost, June 11/77, A-2)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command reported it had worked out a way to suppress noise of jet-aircraft engines during maintenance operations on the ground, as a means of reducing hearing loss in maintenance personnel and noise impact on the community. Fifty-eight Air Force bases worldwide had received the suppressor units, consisting of primary and secondary air intakes and enclosures, augmenter tube, exhaust muffler, and support structure to house controls and water pumps. After backing an aircraft into the secondary enclosure, workers would enclose the air intakes at the front in the primary-intake mufflers; the secondary enclosure, covering the aft fuselage and engine exhaust, would include openings to be sealed against the fuselage and stabilizers to keep noise inside. Inside the augmenter tube, secondary cooling air would mix with the exhaust, and spray bars in the tube would spray water at 800gal per min during afterburner operation. (OIP Release 284.76)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported that Pan American Airways would mark the 50th anniversary of its first flight Oct. 28 by attempting a world-record round-the-world, over-the-poles flight in less than 48hr with a Boeing 747 jumbo jet. Carrying an official observer to certify record performance, the 747 would leave San Francisco, fly over the North Pole to London, then to Cape Town, South Africa, over the South Pole to Auckland, New Zealand, and back to San Francisco, a distance of 26 642 statute mi. A Boeing 707 had flown the polar route in 1965 in a record 62hr 27min 35sec. In May 1976 Pan Am’s 747 had set an east-west record, a bicentennial flight covering 23,137mi over a New York-Delhi-Tokyo-New York route in 46hr 50sec. That flight had carried 98 passengers, many of whom would be aboard the polar flight in Oct. Pan Am’s first flight had taken place Oct. 28, 1927, when a Fokker F-7 trimotor lifted off a dirt runway at Key West, Fla., for an hr-long flight over 90 miles of ocean to Havana, Cuba. (NAA newsletter Sept 77)
The Dept, of Defense announced plans to begin full-scale development of cruise missiles made by Boeing Co. and General Dynamics Corp., with the first to be available in 1979, the Wall St. Journal reported. Cruise missiles (small low-flying pilotless jet planes designed to evade enemy radar) could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads and could be launched from ships, planes, or trucks, or submerged submarines. Boeing and General Dynamics had each developed a cruise missile: Boeing the Air Force version, and General Dynamics, the Navy version called the Tomahawk, designed for launch from submarines and surface vessels. Although the two versions used different airframes, they used the same engines, guidance systems, and warheads. After reviewing both versions, the DOD decided to continue both, and established a joint program office under the direction of Navy Capt. Walter Locke, whose orders required maximum cooperation with the Air Force. In addition to its “short” cruise missile, 1083cm long with a range of 1127km, the Air Force supported development of a stretch version 1470cm long with a range of 2254km for more distant targets. The DOD also expressed support for advanced technology to refine missile accuracy and for a supersonic version to exceed present speed of 885kph. It had asked Congress for $402.7 million for the programs in FY 1978, up from $198.7 million in 1977. (WSJ, Jan 19/77, 38)
