KSC announced award of a $3.5 million contract to Federal Systems Division, Honeywell Information Systems, for delivery of a central data subsystem for Shuttle launch processing, consisting of two large scale computers sharing a common memory that would store test procedures, a master-program library, pre- and post-test data analyses, and other types of data to support Shuttle checkout, countdown, and launch. KSC had procured the subsystem for Vandenberg AFB for a second Shuttle launch and processing facility. (KSC Release 3-78)
Scientists in NASA’s Viking project this spring would award grants totaling $5000 to support undergraduate research projects in planetology or astronomy, NASA announced. The money had been part of the annual Newcomb Cleveland Award presented Feb. 15 by the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) to 150 Viking scientists, authors of scientific papers that had appeared in 3 special Viking issues of Science magazine. This had been the first Cleveland Award to a group. The grants, ranging from $500 to $2000, would fund a student’s (or group of students’) ideas or would supplement student work in progress, selected on the basis of originality and feasibility. (LaRC Release 78-7; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 3)
The Marshall Star reported that 6 American and 2 British scientists would compete for the 2 experimenter seats on the second flight of the Shuttle-borne Spacelab experiments in 1981. The experimenters, called payload specialists, would be employed by the payload sponsor and would differ from NASA’s pilots and mission specialists in being selected and trained for a specific mission. Four selected from the group of 8 would train to operate the mission’s 13 scientific investigations; NASA would choose 2 of the 4 to fly on the 7- to 12-day mission. The investigators working group (IWG), scientists representing 13 experiment teams for the U.S. and the United Kingdom charged by NASA with directing Spacelab scientific investigations, had selected the candidates for payload specialist. MSFC would manage the training programs for all 4 payload specialists. The Spacelab 2 finalists would be the second group of candidates for flight assignments; 10 Spacelab 1 payload-specialist finalists had been selected in Dec. 1977 to compete for 2 flight positions. Finalists for the Spacelab 2 payload-specialist positions were Loren Acton, Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; John-David Bartoe, Naval Research Laboratory; John Harvey, Kitt Peak National Observatory; Bruce Patchett, Astrophysics Research Division of Appleton Laboratory; N. Paul Patterson, Ball Brothers Research Corporation; Dianne Prinz, NRL; George Simon, Sacramento Peak Observatory; and Keith Strong, Mullard Space Science Laboratory. (Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 4)
The Carter administration, calling for national commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first powered flight, had designated DOT lead agency to coordinate programs and materials, the National Aeronautic Association reported. The task force for the 75th anniversary, which had held its first meeting at DOT in Jan., would be a clearinghouse to avoid duplication, facilitate innovation, and develop ideas suitable for agencies a^d private organizations. Peter Clapper, FAA assistant administrator for public affairs, noted that the American people had taken for granted the tremendous advances in aviation over the last 75yr and that the anniversary offered an opportunity to bring these advances to public attention. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 1)
LaRC announced that Dr. Peter Calder, project director for the Olympus 593 engine at Rolls Royce Ltd., Bristol, England, would be guest speaker at a center colloquium July 31 on “Engine Options for Supersonic Cruise Aircraft.” Calder would discuss the Olympus 593 twin-spool turbojet engine produced by Rolls Royce in Britain and SNECMA in France, which had powered the Concorde supersonic jet transport. He would describe development of the engine and its inlet, and discuss possible modifications to improve propulsion system operating efficiency and environmental acceptability. Concorde supersonic passenger service from Paris and London to South America and the Middle East had been under way for 2.5yr and to North America for 2yr, initially to Washington, D.C., and then to New York. (LaRC Release 78-38; Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2)
Disagreement about the age of the newly discovered rings around Uranus was expressed at the Nov. 9 meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Pasadena, Calif., the Pasadena Star-News reported. Discovered by astronomer Jim Elliot of Cornell Univ. in March 1977, the rings had sparked many scientific theories. Elliot originally had observed five rings; subsequent observations had disclosed four additional rings. Uranus’s rings did not spread into broad bands circling the planet like those of Saturn, but were narrow and confined to tight belts. Attracting most attention was the fifth ring, Epsilon, which was thicker and wider than the other rings, although its width varied from 20 to 100km. The inner edge of the Epsilon ring did not move around the planet at a rate different from that of the outer edge, contrary to what might have been expected. Dr. Richard Goldreich of CalTech theorized that the Epsilon ring was bound together by its own gravity, which, in turn, meant it had substantial mass (possibly as much as 25grams per cm3, extremely dense by ring standards), causing him to conclude the rings around Uranus were very old. However, Judd Boynton, director of Geophysics Labs and Research in Berkeley, who had predicted that rings would be found around Uranus, had concluded the rings were of relatively recent origin, perhaps as young as 10 million yr. (JPL newsclips, Nov 10/78)
Modification and flight of U.S. Air Force jet cargo/tanker aircraft delivered to DFRC would allow NASA to research the possibility of significant fuel savings, NASA announced. Winglets (2.7m [9ft]-long airfoil sections attached to the wingtips of a KC-135 aircraft) could improve performance in cruise flight by approximately 8%, for an annual fuel saving of 11.9 million liters (45 million gal) based on 1975 use rates for KC-135 aircraft. Other NASA studies had indicated that use of the winglet could benefit existing medium-weight civil-transport aircraft. LaRC had developed the winglet concept in its wind tunnels. Winglets, made of aluminum 0.6m (2ft) wide at the tip and 1.8m (6ft) wide at the base, could weigh almost 68kg (1501b). The Boeing Co. would install them on outer wing panels under an Air Force contract estimated at $3 million. Varying the incidence and cant angle of the winglets between flights would demonstrate their effectiveness at various positions. After installation of recorders, the KC-135 would make the first flights in a joint NASA-USAF program scheduled after winglet installation in early 1979. Comparison of data would demonstrate winglet effectiveness. (NASA Release 78-25)
FBIS carried from Tass a Pravda report that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were concluding the program of scientific explorations in their 4.5mo orbital flight and preparing for return to earth, by reactivating the transport ship Soyuz31 and closing down Salyut 6. The mission had produced new information for biologists, medical personnel; glaciologists, volcanologists, oceanologists, and firemen. One example was the previously unknown regularity of glacial movement in Latin American mountains; the cosmonauts also had observed seven forest fires in Australia. Visiting crews had already returned major portions of experimental results to earth. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 29/78)
George Mueller, NASA’s associate administrator for manned spaceflight 1963-1969, now chairman and president of Systems Development Corp., was named president-elect of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, AvWk reported. He would serve on the AIAA board of directors during 1978 and be inaugurated as president in 1979. {AvWk, Mar 27/78, 11)
NASA announced appointment of Kenneth Chapman as associate administrator for external relations, effective Jan. 8. Chapman had been acting in the position since its creation Nov. 8, 1977, and had been assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs since joining NASA April 1, 1977. Chapman would be senior policy official responsible for integrating NASA activities in public, legislative, university, community, interagency, and international affairs. Chapman had come to NASA from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He retired from the Air Force in 1975 after a 29-yr career. (NASA Release 78-4)
KSC had begun preparation for launching Shuttle Orbiter 102 in Oct., Spaceport News reported. Construction of new facilities and modifications to existing ones were proceeding on schedule. The orbiter-landing facility and orbiter-processing facility had been the only new facilities built at KSC to support Shuttle operations. Other preparations included modifications of existing facilities originally designed and built to support Apollo/Satum operations. KSC would transform hanger AF at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station into a solid-fuel rocket-booster recovery and disassembly facility. {Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1)
NASA announced that JPL, acting for the Dept, of Energy, had awarded study contracts to Acurex, Inc., Mountain View, Calif.; Boeing Engineering & Construction Co., Seattle, Wash.; and General Electric Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., to develop a solar-energy concentrator for generating electric power. The contracts, each valued at about $240 000, would cover the first part of a two-phase program to develop a low-cost point-focusing solar concentrator. The concentrator would direct mirror-reflected sunlight to a heat absorber and heat-driven engine turning a generator to produce electricity to supplement electrical power for small communities and rural areas. The solar concentrator to be developed under the contracts would include the optics (mirrors) and the mechanism that allowed the concentrator to track the sun. Heat absorbers and engine generators would be developed under separate contracts. Prime objective of the contracts would be to obtain the best thermal performance at the least cost per concentrator. As many as six would be tested and evaluated at JPL’s Solar Thermal Test Site at Edwards, Calif. JPL would manage the study for DOE’s Small Power Systems Program under an interagency agreement with NASA. (NASA Release 78-161)
The National Aeronautic Association announced the 1977 Collier trophy winners: U.S. Air Force Gen. Robert J. Dixon, and the Tactical Air Command headed by him since 1973. The NAA had awarded the Collier trophy annually for U.S. achievement in aeronautics and astronautics during the preceding yr; the selection committee had made the award for development and implementation in 1977 of the Red Flag combat-simulation flight-training program. Red Flag, designed to enhance combat readiness of U.S. air crews, had been regarded as a significant contribution to national defense. Encounters in Red Flag, consisting of missions against simulated surface-to-air missiles, had been the most realistic undertaken in peacetime aerial-combat training. Gen. Dixon had established the program in 1977, conducting ten 4-wk exercises at Nellis Air Force Base, Nev.; more than 8200 air crews had trained during 1977, with 10 000 ground troops participating. (NAA newsletter Apr 7/78)
NASA announced award of a $5 million contract to Vought Corporation, Dallas, Tex., for 5 Scout launch vehicles and associated hardware, such as separation systems and heat shields. Vought had been the Scout project’s prime contractor since 1959. The first Scout, designed to place a 130-lb payload into a 300-nautical-mi circular earth orbit, had been launched in 1960. The new Scout could launch a 4041b payload from Wallops Island, Va.; Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.; or San Marco offshore at Kenya, Africa, into that orbit. The latest configuration of Scout vehicles was known as Phase 8; phases 1 through 7 had produced 107 vehicles, 96 of which had been launched. (NASA Release 78-20)
The Langley Researcher reported that, under a program sponsored jointly by NASA and the American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE), a team of 19 university professors and two legal interns had spent the summer at LaRC on a study, An Integrated Air-Cargo Transport System. The team had reviewed forecasts of the air-cargo industry and had recommended changes in aircraft, air-freight terminals, air-transportation networks, and government regulation, to best serve national needs between 1990-2000. Recommendations had included designing a new medium-range aircraft for cargo service and a long-range aircraft that constituted an improved or derivative version of today’s craft; arrangements for all aircraft and major freight terminals to handle 20ft intermodal containers; continuation of air-cargo industry deregulation for at least the immediate future; and permission for airlines to own interstate trucking companies. Dr. Griffith McRee of Old Dominion Univ. had directed the study. (Langley Researcher, Aug 25/78, 4)
ESA announced that the full-scale propellant mockup of the European launcher Ariane (47m high, maximum diameter 3.8m) had left the integration site near Paris for its launch base at Kourou in French Guiana on the South American coast. Two Seine barges had transported three pressurized containers (one for each stage) to Le Havre, where they were loaded on a freighter bound for Cayenne. Tests of the mockup would begin in Aug. when the launcher would be erected on the pad for the first time. ESA had planned 3mo of tests to check general conditions for launcher assembly and vehicle compatibility with ground facilities, as well as fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) would handle, transport, assembly, and test operations. Aerospatiale, the system integrator, would evaluate dynamic and thermal behavior of the launcher under ambient climatic conditions in tests simulating vibrations like those at liftoff. ESA had planned four qualification launches between June 1979 and Oct. 1980 (ESA Release June 16/78)
In 1977 JPL scientists Donn Lynn and Jean Lorre had agreed to apply image-processing techniques to photographs of the Shroud of Turin, but had not expected their results to be published in newspapers and magazines around the world, JPL Universe reported. Their “mild curiosity” about the relic had introduced them to other American scientists who proposed using a variety of sophisticated tests to determine how the shroud had been imprinted. The result was a trip planned for Oct. that would take Lynn and Lorre to Turin, where church authorities would allow the American science team an unprecedented 24hr examination of the shroud itself.	■ Coinciding with a public exhibition and international conference about the shroud, the tests would entail infrared and ultraviolet photography as well as conventional black-and-white pictures. Other team members would make radiographic and x-ray fluorescence examinations, all to investigate the mechanical formation of the “negative” image on the cloth. The shroud had been stitched to a protective cloth backing, but the team would use a flexible optical instrument to examine the reverse side of the fragile fabric. Major business corporations, including photographic and electronic-equipment companies such as Polaroid, Kodak, and the Brooks Institute of Photography had agreed to lend or donate facilities and equipment for the tests. Lynn and Lorre expected to provide a quick-look report of their findings soon after the Turin exhibition. (JPL Universe, July 21/78, 1)
NASA announced it had appointed Terence Finn director of legislative affairs. Finn had served since Dec. 1974 as senior analyst for energy, science, and space on the staff of the Senate budget committee, where he had been responsible for the budgets of NASA, National Space Foundation, and DOE. He was teaching a graduate course, Congress and Budget, at Catholic Univ., and also had taught at American Univ. and the Dept, of Agriculture Graduate School. Finn was a member of the American Political Science Association and a life member of the American Aviation Historical Society. (NASA Release 78-131)
NASA announced it would hold a symposium Jan. 16 and 17 in Washington, D.C., on the proper role NASA should be prepared to fulfill during the early to mid-1980s. The symposium would host 20 nationally-known authorities in fields including federal research policy, economics, education, science, aircraft development, and space applications. The symposium was a part of its current assessment of its institutional base. (NASA Release 78-5)
NASA reported procurements during FY78 totalled $3660 million, 3.6% more than during FY77. Approximately 81% of the net dollar value was placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 5% with or through other government agencies; 90% of the dollar value of the latter resulted in contracts with industry. About 53% of funds placed by NASA under JPL contracts resulted in subcontracts or purchases with business firms. In short, about 90% of NASA procurement was contracted to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 72% were competitive procurements (either through formal advertising or negotiation) and 28% were noncompetitive. Small business firms had received $282 million (10%) of NASA’s direct awards, indicating that most agency awards to business firms were large continuing R&D contracts for major systems or items of hardware generally beyond the capability of small business firms on a prime-contract basis. However, of the $633 million in new contracts worth $10 000 or more awarded to business firms during 1978, small business received $137 million (22%); in addition to direct awards, small business received substantial subcontract awards from 75 of the NASA prime contractors participating in its small business subcontracting program. Total direct awards plus known subcontract awards to small business aggregated $513 million, 17% of NASA’s total (direct plus indirect) awards to business firms. Included in awards to small business firms were $75,852 million awarded to minority business enterprises: $14,064 million in direct awards, $32,151 million under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, and known subcontract awards of $29,637 million. In 1978, 49 states and Washington, D.C., participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over. These larger awards went to 2068 business firms in 46 states and D.C., and to 341 universities and nonprofit organizations in 47 states and D.C. Labor-surplus areas in 40 states had received 53% of the awards. (NASA ann proc rpt FY78)
NASA announced plans for 25 launches in 1978 and support of 3 Atlas-F space launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The 1978 missions would be almost equally divided between those directly benefiting people (for communications and geodetic, environmental, navigation, meteorological, and earth-resources studies) and those primarily for scientific and exploratory research. Fifteen launches would be for paying customers, including the European Space Agency (ESA), ComSatCorp, the U.S. Navy, Japan, NOAA, the United Kingdom, and Canada. Cape Canaveral had been scheduled for 10 Delta launches and all the Atlas-Centaur launches; one Delta would be launched from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg AFB. (Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1; Goddard News, Jan/Feb 78, 1; AvWk, Jan 9/78, 48)
NASA’s annual procurement report for FY77 said that agency procurements had totaled $3532 million, a 10.2% increase over FY76. Approximately 80% of the net dollar value had been placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 6% with or through other government agencies. Of procurements placed by NASA with other government agencies, 90% had resulted in contracts with industry; about 48% of funds under JPL contracts had been for subcontracts with or purchases from business firms. Thus, about 90% of NASA’s procurement dollars had gone directly or indirectly to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 73% were competitive procurements. Small business firms had received $255 million (only 9%) of these direct awards, since most of them were for large continuing R&D contracts for major systems and items of hardware, generally beyond the prime contractor capability of a small business. However, small business had received $119 million (22%) of the $522 million in new contracts worth $10 000 and more with business firms. Small business had also received $496 million (18%) of subcontract awards from 87 of NASA’s prime contractors, including $59,382 million awarded to minority small business enterprises. During 1977, 48 states and- Washington, D.C., had participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over, 83% of which were placed in labor-surplus areas located in 41 states. Of NASA’s prime contractors, 86% reported their larger subcontract awards had gone to 1684 different subcontractors in 45 states and Washington, D.C. (NASA pro-cur rpt FY77)
NASA announced it had selected Pan American World Airways, Inc., Aerospace Services Division, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for support services to facility operations at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss. Estimated cost over the first 3yr of the cost-plus-award-fee contract would be $32 million, with two 1-yr unpriced options. The contractor would operate and maintain NSTL real and installed property; manage supplies and equipment; and provide institutional, construction, and installation services. (NASA Release 78-94)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert Frosch, had accepted for NASA a document commemorating the anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s solo trans-Atlantic flight from New York to Paris in the “Spirit of St. Louis” on May 20, 1927. Copies of the framed Flight Philatelic Document, containing a series of American and French Lindbergh stamps and cancellations tracing the history of the aviator’s achievement, had been presented to 25 persons and organizations in the U.S. and France. Friends of the Nassau County Museum, Long Island, N.Y., had produced the tribute and selected the recipients, including President Jimmy Carter, French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, and museums and agencies linked to aviation. Each of the documents bore seven American and French Lindbergh stamps with key cancellations, and each document was autographed by President Carter, President d’Estaing, Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac, U.S. Postmaster General Benjamin Bailer, French Postal Secretary Norbert Segard, and Mrs. Lindbergh. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
