The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that a NASA-USAF pilotless research vehicle called HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) made its first flight at the Edwards Air Force Base test center. Purpose of the HiMAT program was to improve maneuverability of U.S. fighter craft at transonic speeds (700-780 mph) and in air-to-air combat. No other remotely piloted vehicle or aircraft had the design features used on HiMAT, which would be incorporated into future USAF vehicles if successful: winglets (airfoils at the end of each wing) and unique close-coupled canards (small winglike surfaces located close to the main wings) to reduce air drag, and aeroelastic tailoring that originated in the early 1970s using the directional properties of graphite composites in the wings and canards (representing about 25% of HiMAT’s total weight) to control deformations under aerodynamic loads. The first flight was to test vehicle aerodynamics during separation from the carrier and during approach and landing. Taken to an altitude of 45,000 feet under the right wing of a B-52, HiMAT flew for 22 minutes under control of a NASA research pilot on the ground before landing on skids at a dry lakebed. HiMAT was built by Rockwell International’s North American Aircraft Division under contract to DFRC, using concepts from the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79,
The Washington Star reported on a NASA Pioneer Venus briefing at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., which revealed that Venus (far from being the dull and featureless object it appeared, covered by heavy cloud layers) had spectacular terrain and a unique atmospheric circulation system. Pioneer Venus 1 had been sending back radar and other information since it arrived at Venus in December 1978; Pioneer Venus 2 had arrived shortly thereafter, separating into five probes to study the atmosphere, four of which reached the “smoldering 900° F surface.” Dr. Harold Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey reported that radar scans of Venus had shown a mountain estimated at 27,000 feet, far higher than Earth’s 29,028-foot Mt. Everest. Dr. Alvin Seiff of ARC said that Venus’s atmospheric circulation was different from any known elsewhere: Earth’s surface absorbed sunlight, and the resulting heat in combination with Earth’s rotation made the atmosphere flow west to east. However, the atmosphere of Venus absorbed the sunlight 30 to 35 miles above the surface, and heat variations in the atmospheric layers apparently drove one another with their motion. (W Star May 29/79, A-2)
The Washington Star said that three jet planes in four days had lost large parts while in flight: on September 15, a Boeing 707 passenger jet operated by American Airlines on a flight from Detroit to San Francisco had dropped a wing flap into San Francisco Bay; on September 17, a DC-9 passenger jet of Air Canada, 60 miles north of Boston’s Logan International Airport en route to Nova Scotia, had dropped is tailcone into the Atlantic Ocean from 25,000 feet up. An American Airlines Boeing cargo jet had scattered 200-pound chunks of its left wing over Chicago September 18 before landing safely at O’Hare airport. No one had reported injuries from falling debris. (W Star Sept 19/79, A-9)
The Washington Star reported that DOD would begin next week a long-awaited fly-off to see who would get a $2 billion contract to produce air-launched cruise missiles. The U.S. Air Force said that the missile was “desperately needed” to fill a gap in the U.S. weapons system created by President Carter’s decision to scrap the B-l bomber. Launched from a B-52 flying off the coast of California, the missiles would fly to a target southwest of Salt Lake City, Utah. W Star, July 13/79, A-4)
NASA announced it would test a modified U.S. Air Force jet July 20 at DFRC to see if winglets (9-foot airfoil sections) attached to wingtips of a KC-135 could improve performance and save fuel. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, LaRC’s inventor-engineer, had had the idea of using normal drag from a wingtip vortex as lift to improve performance. NASA would vary the winglets’ cant angle and incidence between test flights to measure effects of different positions; DFRC had already flown the plane without winglets to obtain baseline measurements for comparison. (NASA Release 79-94; DFRC Release 27-79)
The Washington Post reported that the Air Force had taken an “unusual step” December 4 in formally defending the Pratt & Whitney F100 engine powering the F-15 and F-16 fighter planes. Robert J. Hermann, assistant PRECEDING page blank not filmed INTFNTIONM-tY 91 secretary for research, said the U.S. Air Force had no plans to use another engine because of F100 problems. Conceding that F100 engine durability was “less than anticipated,” Hermann said F-15 engine-related safety was better than that of any Air Force fighter after comparable service. On November 21, the head of the USAF Systems Command told the Senate Armed Services Committee that “as many as 43” F-15s and F-16s would be without engines by next summer because of F100 production delays and other problems; at Congress’s insistence, the Pentagon had financed limited work on General Electric’s F101X engine as a possible alternative. Pratt & Whitney and General Electric were competing “hotly” for flight-engine contracts, the Washington Post said, and Pratt & Whitney had announced plans to spend $10 million on expansion of its jet production capabilities. (WPost, Dec 5/79, D9)
NASA reported that researchers from JPL and the U.S. Geological Survey had carried out measurements using radio noise from distant quasars that indicated rapid increase in southern California’s width. Dr. Arthur E. Niell of JPL’s astronomical radio-interferometric Earth-survey team reported an increase of 20.3 centimeters (8 inches) over 7 months between JPL and NASA’s Goldstone deep-space station about 193 kilometers (120 miles) away. At the American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco, Nieil and J.C. Savage of the U.S. Geologic;il Survey described making simultaneous recordings at the two radiotelescopes of radio noise from quasars and comparing the signals’ time of arrival using extremely precise clocks. Changes in distance between the telescopies could be measured with accuracies of 5 centimeters (2 inches) or less, and could be important to the Survey’s earthquake prediction mission. (NASA Release 79-166)
The DOD launched two spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Titan 3D, with no word on mission or orbital elements. A later report in Aviation Week & Space Technology'said that the 10:30 a.m. local time launch put a Lockheed-built high-resolution film-return satellite in an orbit with 244-kilometer apogee, 177-kilometer perigee, and 96.4° inclination, to supplement a KH-11 high-resolution recon vehicle that had been operating in space since June 1978, furnishing data by digital transmission rather than film returned to Earth in reentry capsules. The digital system allowed much longer life for this type of spacecraft, whose usefulness did not depend on depletion of its film pod. “As is often the case with film-return spacecraft,” said Aviation Week & Space Technology, the March 16 launch had included a piggyback payload, probably a ferret mission, put in orbit with 625-kilometer apogee, 623-kilometer perigee, and 95.7° inclination. (WTR cover Mar 16/79; AvWk, Apr 9/79, 18)
Rockwell International said that its Autonetics Strategic Systems Division would develop an airborne imaging-sensor autoprocessor under a $1 million contract with the U.S. Air Force Avionics Laboratory covering design, fabrication, and testing. The device would automate functions such as target recognition and cueing for sensors such as the forward-looking infrared sensor (FLIR) used in tactical fighters for air-to-ground combat. (Rockwell Release ESG 19)
The Washington Star reported that three U.S.-built Singapore air force jets had disappeared simultaneously at noon December 19 during a training flight from Clark Air Force Base near Manila, Philippines, toward a bombing range 20 miles away. Maurice Baker, Singapore ambassador to the Philippines, said “the astonishing thing is that they all disappeared at the same time without a trace.” The planes were on the same route flown by four Philippine air force planes when they mysteriously disappeared more than 5 years ago. (W Star, Dec 21/79, A-7)
Effective this date, Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans Mark announced that the U.S. Air Force would realign its space and missile systems research, development, and acquisition elements, establishing two new organizations in the AFSC: Ballistic Missile Office (BMO) and Space Service Division (SSD). The SSD would assume space-related activities for which SAMSO (the U.S. Air Force space and missile systems organization) had been responsible, realigning operations on the east and west coasts: the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) would be formed at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., and the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif. These centers would report through a Vandenberg unit not yet named. ESMC would include the present Eastern Test Range (ETR), the 6,555th aerospace test group, and 6,550th air base wing. WSMC would include the Western Test Range (WTR) and the 6,595th aerospace test wing. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79, 1)
DOD launched a “classified payload” at 9:38 a.m. local time from Cape Canaveral on a Titan 3C into a geosynchronous orbit with 36,261-kilometer apogee, 35,802-kilometer perigee, 1,448.6-minute period, and 2.0° inclination. The U.S. Air Force had no comment on press speculation about the launch. The New York Times said “such satellites are used to monitor Russian and Chinese launches [and to warn] American officials if a missile is launched from a submarine at sea.” Aviation Week & Space Technology said that the payload had “orbital characteristics of previously launched early warning satellites.” (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13; NY Times, June 11/79, B-6; W Post, June 11/79, A-9; Today, June 11/79, 1A, 8A; AvWk, June 18/79, 13)
The NAA announced that Sam B. Williams, president of Williams Research Corporation of Walled Lake, Mich., would receive the Collier Trophy, the oldest U.S. aviation award. Williams had designed and developed the world’s smallest high-efficiency fanjet engine, a low-cost lightweight means to realization of the cruise missile. The Williams engine measured 12 x 37 inches, weighed 145 pounds, and produced more than 600 pounds of thrust; it had qualified for both Air Force and Navy cruise missiles. The NAA had presented the trophy annually since 1911 for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in the United States, demonstrated by actual use in the preceding year. (NAA Release Apr 3/79)
“Once again,” wrote editor Robert Hotz in Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine, “the American public is far ahead of its political leadership” in grasping the significance of NASA’s program of planetary exploration. NASA Headquarters was “astounded by the vast amount of unsolicited public reaction to the Viking and Voyager missions,” in the form of 17,000	letters it received in the first weeks after the Mars pictures reached Earth; the “Voyager flybys of Jupiter.. .have aroused similar public interest.” In Europe and Japan, interest in U.S. planetary exploration was even stronger; media coverage there “far surpasses domestic interest.” Hotz criticized the “penny-wise, pound-foolish policy” that would force NASA to use a single spacecraft for future planetary missions, not the dual-spacecraft approach used through Voyager. “Some day,” he added, “the high price for this folly will be paid in spectacular ‘low cost’ failures.” {AvWk, July 23/79, 9)
The U.S. Air Force launched a DOD surveillance spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 11:30 a.m. PDT on a Titan 3B-Agena into an orbit with 323-kilometer apogee, 126-kilometer perigee, 89-minute period, and 96.4° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but press reports said that the launch was probably a low-resolution search-and-find mission; this type of system would remain in orbit about 2.5 months. (NASA wkly SSR, May 24-30; D/SD, May 31/79, 149; AvWk, June 11/79, 23)
