ARC announced plans to flight test the parachute system for the Galileo Jupiter-atmosphere probe, third and last test of the system at the Naval Weapons Center test range at China Lake, Calif. Previous tests revealed the need for improvements, which had been made on the chutes to be tested. On completion of the test program, the design would be ready for delivery. Early in 1982 a U.S. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory balloon would carry a fully equipped probe to 100,000-foot altitude over the White Sands missile range and release it in a drop like the Jupiter descent, including parachute and hardware staging. When launched by a Shuttle and released from its carrier at the planet in September 1987, the parachute would slow descent of the probe in the turbulent atmosphere, using its six instruments to measure chemical elements and compounds, weather patterns, and pressures. (ARC Release 80-81)
ARC reported that its Earth-resources survey aircraft (U-2) was helping the U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and California Department of Forestry fight fires by providing real-time infrared imaging of smoke-obscured landscapes. The images, used for the first time October 2 during a fire at Kings Canyon National Park in the Sierra Nevada where thick smoke blocked aerial viewing, gave the size, shape, direction of burn, and hot spots of the fire. Crews had to hike four hours each way to get to some areas. Steep terrain would endanger firefighters and equ ipment if the fire perimeter was unknown. Flying at 21-kilometer altitude (about 65,000 feet), the plane used a Daedalus multispectral scanner with a Fairchild charge-coupled linear-array scanner to send infrared (IR) images directly to ARC, which transferred the hard copy of processed information immediately to U.S. Geological Survey maps of the area. Within 10 minutes, fire control headquarters would receive a telecopy for use in deploying manpower and equipment. The U-2 could photograph a fire for up to 5 hours and transmit anywhere within 500 kilometers (300 miles) of ARC, located near San Francisco, covering virtually all forested lands in California. (ARC Release 80-90)
Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post that the controversial B-l bomber, “like the wondrous Phoenix of Egyptian mythology, seems about to rise from the ashes” 3 years after the President “shot it down in flames”: the House Armed Services Committee had voted $600 million for B-l research and procurement. The committee had asked Rockwell International, “which still hopes to build the big bird,” to prepare a brochure comparing the B-l with the FB-111 preferred by the U.S. Air Force to carry cruise missiles. The Post said an internal Air Force report prepared for Rep. Robert Carr (D-Mich.) indicated that Rockwell had “drastically” oversold B-l capabilities. The brochure “grossly understated the range of the FB-111” by almost 900 nautical miles, comparing it on a low-level mission with a B-l flying at a higher, fuel-saving altitude, the U.S. Air Force noted. Rockwell also “fudged on the delivery dates it promised in the brochure” by three to four months in one case, almost a year in another. The U.S. Air Force report said that there were “many other areas that are inaccurate.” (W Post, May 21/80, B-16)
NASA said that JPL would arrange for media coverage of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter over a 47-hour period on or about November 11-13, relaying live television to television stations, science centers, and planetariums across the United States. The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., also planned to change its regular closing time from 5:00 to 8:30 p.m. during the encounter to handle the expected crowds and had scheduled special programs around the encounter. (NASA Release 80-164)
The Washington Post reported that Ihe House Armed Services Committee had voted $50 million to expand production of Fairchild Industries, A-10 plane from a one-seat to a two-seat configuration. The aircraft was originally designed to accommodate two cockpits. Fairchild said DOD would save $10.5 million a year in fuel costs because it would not need a second plane to follow the first in training flights. Besides the added seat, the new model had the capability of flying in bad whether and at night. The company tested the two-seater for five months in 1979 and turned over the prototype to Eglin Air Force Base for testing; the U.S. Air Force had completed its tests and was assessing results. (W Post, Mar 27/80, B-l)
NASA announced award of a $70,072 million contract to McDonnell Douglas for Delta expendable launch vehicle services. The company would continue for 2 years the launch services work it had done for the past 18 years, including mission-peculiar vehicle changes, checkout, and launch. KSC would supervise the work at ESMC and Vandenberg Air Force Base for GSFC, which had overall Delta management responsibility. (NASA Release
Aviation leaders from across the United States attended a banquet at the Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C., to honor Dr. Paul B. MacCready, designer of the Gossamer Condor and Gossamer Albatross, who won the Robert J. Collier trophy for the first human powered flight across the 22-milewide English Channel. Master of ceremonies was NBC news correspondent Peter Hackes, a fellow enthusiast of sail planing. The audience saw the film of the Channel flight and applauded the touchdown of the Albatross on the beach at Cap Gris Nez, France. MacCready accepted the trophy for himself and for the “engine” of the Albatross, cyclist Bryan Allen, who was unable to attend. MacCready reported that NASA was negotiating to use his backup aircraft Gossamer Albatross II in tests aimed at design and operation of a remotely powered vehicle at 100,000 feet altitude. The Albatross’s extremely light weight “exaggerates the apparent mass effects in stability and control, and also the effect of turbulence on wing efficiency.” “These are areas heretofore unexamined and deal with phenomena never before encountered,” he added. (NAA newsletter May/June 80; NAA Release May 19/80)
In the first transcontinental balloon trip, a father-son team landed the 75-foot-tall helium-filled Kitty Hawk on Canada’s Gaspe peninsula at 7:27 EDT after a May 8 liftoff in San Francisco, Calif. Maxie Anderson, 48, and his son Kris, 23, of Albuquerque, N.M., had planned to land in Kitty Hawk, N.C., but were blown by brisk winds toward Maine and Canada. They had met with bad weather beginning with strong winds, rain, and snowstorms over Wyoming. Despite their failure to land at Kitty Hawk, the team set distance records: a previous balloon record was set last year by a 2,002-mile flight that ended in a snowstorm in Ohio. The Andersons on May 11 had gone 2,417 miles. In August 1978 Maxie Anderson and two companions had crossed the Atlantic in 137 hours in the balloon Double Eagle II from Presque Isle, Maine, to Paris. The Washington Star said in a May 21 editorial: “Mr. Anderson says he has no plans for further record-breaking trips, but refuse to believe it. There’s the Pacific Ocean just waiting to yield to helium and human dexterity.” During a visit to North Carolina the week after the flight, Anderson was inducted into the Man Will Never Fly society, a group with the motto “Birds Fly; Men Drink.” The society’s Dr. Ed North said it had awarded Anderson and his son memberships without knowing whether they were drinkers. “They missed their landing site by over a thousand miles,” North said, “so I just assumed that they were.” (W Star, May 12/80, A-l; May 20/80, A-2; May 21/80, A-12)
LaRC staff working this summer at NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory at Norman, Okla., guided a modified F-106B jet fighter plane through severe southwest thunderstorms to show that lightning could strike not just once but two or even three times in the same pilace. Most lightning study had been at ground level; LaRC was studying its effect on planes in flight. The F-106, holder of a world single-engine speed record set in the 1950s, was still used by the Air Force and could fly up to 50,000 feet (15,250 meters); most flights would be around 15,000 feet (4,500 meters), the altitude where lightning was most statistically likely to strike. LaRC used an F-106B on loan from DFRC, considered top choice for the mission because of its thick wing skins and its larger-than-average bay with room for much experimental equipment. All F-106B work was on storm hazards, divided into those that did or did not involve lightning (those unrelated to lightning were turbulence, wind shear, and storm-hazards correlation). Hazards from storms were factors in aircraft operations and design. Through the summer, WFC instruments would map thunderstorms and the exact location of the F-106B in them, to compare with pilot and instrument observations. (NASA Release 80-130; LaRC Release 80-56)
