In an accompanying statement, Frosch reviewed the situation of the inertial upper stage (IUS) to be used on the Shuttle for launching spacecraft into outer space from Shuttle orbit. Within resources offered by the 1981 and 1982 budgets, the best alternative seemed to be modifying the Centaur instead of proceeding with a three-stage IUS, in order to have “that very powerful combination available for first launches in 1985. No other alternative upper stage is available on a reasonable schedule or with comparable costs. Therefore, NASA will expand discussions with the Air Force on the best means for providing upper stages. . .[and continue with] the two-stage IUS, which both we and the Air Force are counting on.” (NASA Release 81-14)
NASA’s Atmosphere Explorer 5 reentered Earth’s atmosphere after 31,268 orbits and more than 5'A years of service. Launched from KSC November 20, 1975, the 720-kilogram (1,587-pourd) AE-5 carried 15 highly specialized instruments to gather data on Earth’s near-space environment. It was the first spacecraft using on-board propulsion to make large orbit changes and to use a central computer to make all data acquired immediately accessible to members of investigator teams at terminals in their own facilities. The last signal from AE-5 came over Hawaii, and no signal was received when it was due over Ascension Island. Trajectory of the descent was across the Pacific, Central America, and toward the Atlantic; the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) confirmed reentry into the atmosphere over the Caribbean east of Nicaragua at 9:57 a.m. EE'T. (NASA Release 81-86)
NASA said that it had picked Jack R. Lousma and C. Gordon Fullerton as commander and pilot for the third flight of Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The backup crew would be Thomas K. Mattingly II and Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. Lousma, a colonel in the U.S. Marine Corps, was mission pilot on Skylab 3, logging more than 1,427 hours in space as he and his crew accomplished 150% of their assigned goals. Fullerton, a colonel in the U.S. Air Force, piloted the Shuttle Enterprise on its first, third, and fifth flights in the approach-and-landing tests in 1977. The third Columbia flight, a seven-day and three hour mission of 116 orbits set for March 1982, would carry a payload (OSS-1) developed by NASA’s Office of Space Scinece and would further test the remote manipulator arm for inserting future payloads into space. (NASA Release 81-187)
The NASA centers which were directed in April to merge reported the steps being taken to complete the action, approved by the agency’s new administrator, James M. Beggs. As of October 1, DFRC, Edwards, Calif., would become a directorate of ARC, Mountain View, Calif., reporting to ARC director C.A. Syvertson; it would retain its name and its “essential identity” but would function as an operational element of ARC. Aeronautical research at the two locations would be integrated and staff functions for the two centers would be combined. Several ARC projects, such as the quiet short-harid research aircraft (QSRA) and the tilt-rotor research aircraft would be moved to DFRC over the 30-month consolidation period. WFC in Virginia would become an operating clement of GSFC at Greenbelt, Md., responsible for suborbital projects and operations. WFC’s applied sciences directorate would be a new instrument-systems division of GSFC’s applications directorate. GSFC’s management operations directorate would absorb WFC’s technical support and administrative directorates, except for electronic and mechanical shops. (NASA Release 81-107; WFC Release
