Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands and Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, the Spacelab payload specialists representing the European Space Agency (ESA), had arrived at MSFC to complete training for the first Spacelab flight set for September 1983, a seven-day joint U.S.-ESA mission to carry out 70 investigations in five different disciplines. Of the four payload specialists in training, one American and one European would actually go into space; the other two would provide ground support to those in orbit. (MSFC Release 82-11)
NASA announced the selection of American Airlines to negotiate a contract for a new helicopter-simulation system to be installed at ARC, funded by the U.S. Army and used by both agencies. The $16 million system, designed to duplicate cockpit configurations and flight handling of helicopters, would aid in rotorcraft design and allow simulation of experiments, flight tests, and evaluation of improvements in basic helicopter technology. Pilots and engineers could simulate sight, sound, and motion of helicopter flight, using the system either stationary or in the vertical-motion simulator. (NASA Release 82-52; ARC Release 82-13)
NASA announced a week-long series of Shuttle checks to verify readiness for launch. Prime and backup crew members would fly a mock liftoff, return to launch site, and descend from orbit to a simulated landing on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The first 99 hours would be checkout of individual orbiter systems (electrical distribution, environmental control, instrumentation, flight control, and propulsion), the external tank (power, instrumentation, range safety, and tumble-valve systems), and solid-fuel rocket boosters (hydraulic, electrical, instrumentation, and range-safety systems) as well as critical electrical and mechanical connections between Shuttle elements. The second part of the tests would simulate portions of the mission, the launch, a return-to-launch-site abort with the orbiter’s system in control, and descent from orbit. (NASA Release 82-19)
