In May an armament division F-16 from the U.S. Air Force's 3246th Test Wing fired an advanced, medium range air-to-air missile (AMRAAM) over White Sands Missile Range in the first guided launch of its full-scale development program, the Air Force System Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Armament division officials said the successful flight verified AMRAAM's interface with the F-16's avionics system and the performance of its active radar guidance capabilities. AMRAAM is an all-weather, all-aspect radar missile designed to replace the AIM-7 radar missile. AMRAAM is smaller, lighter, and faster than AIM-7 and had an active radar seeker that would permit air crews to "launch and leave" or to execute simultaneous multiple-target attacks during a single intercept. Pilots could launch AMRAAM from beyond visual range, because it received target information from the launch aircraft's avionics systems. After launch, the aircraft could pass target information to the missile, or the missile could use its own inertial reference unit and microcomputer to guide inertially toward the target. During the terminal phase, the missile's active seeker would take over and guide the missile to the target. The Air Force and Navy had a contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for full-scale development of AMRAAM, with Raytheon Co. designated as "follower" contractor to introduce competition during the production phase. The previous December an AMRAAM separation/control test vehicle flew a preprogrammed course to evaluate the missile's autopilot, control system, aerodynamic characteristics, and safe separation from the aircraft. The Air Force planned over the next three years more launches from several aircraft including the F-14, F—15, F-16, and F—18. Plans also called for combat aircraft of the United Kingdom and Federal Republic of Germany to carry AMRAAM. (AFSC Newsreview, June 28/85, 4)
NASA announced finalists in its Teacher in Space Project would arrive in Washington, D.C., beginning June 22 to attend a national conference sponsored by NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) as part of the selection process in the program. Through June 27 the 114 elementary and secondary school teachers would hear from NASA officials and other experts in space science and exploration, including discussions about their responsibilities if chosen to fly aboard the Space Shuttle, and participate in workshops sponsored by NASA's educational affairs division to provide a hands-on learning experience about NASA and its programs. During the week, a national selection panel would interview the finalists. On June 25 the teachers would attend a reception on Capitol Hill with members of Congress and on June 26 meet with President Reagan. (NASA Release 85-92)
NASA announced it has named effective November 3 Lewis Rinker deputy inspector general, Office of Inspector General (OIG). In that position, Rinker would assist the inspector general in the direction and management of nationwide OIG programs. Since joining NASA in October 1980, Rinker served in various management positions, the most recent of which was assistant inspector general for technical services and also served as the acting deputy inspector general. Before his NASA work, Rinker served in managerial positions with the U.S. General Accounting Office and was an industrial engineer and procurement analyst with the Air Force Systems Command. Rinker received his B.S. degree in engineering from Johns Hopkins University and was doing graduate work at George Washington University. He was a senior member of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers and a member of the Association of Government Accountants and the Association of Federal Investigators. (NASA anno., Nov 5/85)
As part of its FY 87 defense budget planning, the Department of Defense (DOD) approved a competition between the Northrop F-20 Ti-gershark and the General Dynamics F—16 Falcon as a fighter interceptor aircraft for the air defense fleet, Defense Daily reported. However, DOD had not decided how many prototype aircraft it would purchase for the competition. Although a FY 86 defense authorization bill specified a competition between the two aircraft, some members of the U.S. House wanted to direct the Air Force to set a minimum number of F—16 and F-20 fighters that it would procure in FY 86 and then institute the competition. The possibility of a competition had set off a price war between Northrup and General Dynamics, with General Dynamics proposing a specially configured F-16C to compete in cost and effectiveness with the F-20. (D/D, Sept 5/86, 12)
As part of the continuing Lewis Advanced Turboprop Project (ATP), supported by some 50 contracts and 15 grants, two advanced propeller propulsion systems recently underwent testing, the Lewis News reported. Lewis Research Center's (LeRC) Advanced Turboprop Project Office was directing development of the new highly loaded, multi-bladed propellers for use at speeds up to Mach 0.85 and at altitudes compatible with commercial air support system requirements. Advanced turboprop engines offered the potential of 15 to 30% savings in aircraft fuel burned relative to advanced turbofan engines (50 to 60% savings over the current turbofan fleet). Investigators were developing both single- and counter-rotation propeller systems. Researchers at Wright Patterson Air Force Base were testing in a static propeller test rig the first Large-Scale Advanced Propfan (LAP), designed and built by Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. under a NASA/ LeRC contract. Testing of the nine-foot diameter propfan, powered by an electric drive motor in the rig test, began in late August. At approximately the same time, the General Electric Co. began static proof-of-concept tests of its Unducted Fan (UDF) demonstrator engine at the GE Peebles, Ohio, test site. LeRC partially funded development of this advanced counter-rotating pusher propellers propulsion system. After completing a series of ground tests, both advanced propeller propulsion systems would undergo flight tests starting in mid-to-late 1986. The propfan would be tested in a wing-mount installation on a modified Gulf-stream II testbed aircraft under a NASA-contracted program with Lockheed; the UDF would be tested as an aft-mounted pusher on a Boeing 727 as part of a GE/Boeing cooperative program. The propfan of the LAP program was an example of the application of single-rotation tractor propulsion technology, whereas the UDF was a unique example of counter-rotation pusher propulsion technology. The UDF was unique in that its propellers were directly driven by the multi-stage power turbine without the need for gearbox speed reduction. Normal procedure in propeller installations was to drive the propeller through a reduction gearbox so that both the propeller and its driving turbine operated at close to their optimum speeds for peak efficiency. The APT effort was also addressing more conventional counter-rotation propfan configurations, as well as associated gearbox designs. (LeRc News, Oct 4/85, 1)
expose wild and lab research gypsy moth eggs and engorged female American dog ticks to weightlessness (GSFC/U.S. Department of Agriculture); and
Under a 1985 memorandum of agreement, the Eglin Air Force Base's armament division was leading a joint U.S., British, and West German project to determine how a non-nuclear, long-range standoff missile should be developed, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. General Dynamics and Boeing Aerospace Co., which had 15-month contracts to study the possibilities, was working with subcontractors from the other two countries. The countries could use the conventional, low-altitude subsonic missile, launched from air or ground, primarily against airfields. The immediate goal of the project was to design the system, develop a procurement program and schedule, and identify technological transfers among the three countries. The point of the agreement was to save money and eliminate duplication of effort in development of a needed weapon system. One country would build the system, but the others would support the effort. While the U.S. completed the procurement package, England provided most of the threat information needed to design the missile. West Germany was taking an active part in all project phases. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 23/85, 3) NASA and Department of Defense
A Northrop F-20 Tigershark crashed today while practicing its routine for the Paris Air Show during a stopover at Goose Bay, Labrador, Aerospace Daily reported. The pilot, whose name was withheld pending notification of next of kin, was fatally injured. A Northrup spokesman said an investigation was underway to determine the cause of the crash and that the company "would expect the cooperation of the Air Force in the investigation since they are the executive agency for the F-20." The only other F-20 was at Edwards Air Force Base, California, and would remain there to continue the flight demonstration program "because of the high interest in the F-20 program in this country," the spokesman continued. The first F-20 had crashed the previous October during a demonstration flight at Suwon Air Base near Seoul, South Korea, killing Northrop chief test pilot Darrell Cornell. Northrop reported at the time that the crash was "pilot induced" and the "the aircraft and all its systems functioned properly." The fourth Tigershark was on the assembly line. An attempt earlier in the month to provide funding for the Northrop F-20 failed, Defense Daily reported, when an amendment by Rep. James Courter (R-N.J.) to substitute 30 Northrop F-20s for 24 General Dynamics F-16s in FY 86, brought up in a closed door markup by the House Armed Services procurement and military nuclear systems subcommittee, failed by a note of 8-4. An amendment by the panel's chairman, Rep. Samuel Stratton (D-NY), calling for competition between the F-20 and the F-16 in the FY 87 budget, prevailed. The Stratton amendment specified that the Secretary of the Air Force, in the development of the tactical aircraft fighter program for the Five-Year Defense Plan beginning in FY 87, "shall establish a competition for procurement of tactical fighter aircraft to meet the requirements of the Air Force above a minimum number of F-16 and F-20 aircraft that the Secretary determines appropriate for meeting the requirements of the active and reserve components. Such competition shall be among all suitable aircraft, including the F-16 and F-20 aircraft." A report drafted for the subcommittee stated that the F-16 and F-20 "are both roughly comparable aircraft. Both have new and modern radar and avionics systems, both have excellent performance as air-to-air combat fighters, and both have highly accurate air-to-ground bombing systems." The report did note that the F-16 had the advantage in range and payload capabilities, while the F-20 has "a significant advantage" in reliability and maintainability factors that affect the combat readiness and operating costs." (A/D, May 15/85, 1; D/D, May 2/85, 9)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division successfully flight-tested a low-cost, state-of-the-art autopilot on an unmanned research vehicle, the Air Force Systems Command's Newsreview reported. The division adapted commercially available microprocessor chips in the $50,000, in-house autopilot program to develop flight control-systems technology that would lead to cost reductions in tactical missiles. Researchers made five flight tests of the autopilot since October 1983 on an XBQM-106 unmanned vehicle during which the autopilot provided control augmentation, translating user inputs into vehicle actions. Current guidance and stabilization packages in missiles and other aerospace systems were costly because they used expensive data processing microchips that had excessive amounts of computational processing capability but no built-in control functions, thus requiring additional electronic interface components to perform the "control" function tasks. The microprocessor chip, in contrast, had sufficient built-in computational and control functions to permit 60% fewer interfacing components and should be appropriate to numerous tactical weapons systems, both surface and air-launched. The next step in the program would require replacing the wire-wrapped or brassboard model of the autopilot with a refined system on a printed circuit board, which would undergo at least 2 additional flights before the end of FY 85. (AFSC Newsreview, Jan 23/85, 8)
A Federal grand jury in St. Louis subpoenaed 11 McDonnell Douglas employees and certain company records as part of its investigation of alleged overcharges on F—15 contracts with the Air Force, Defense Daily reported. The Defense Contract Audit Agency alleged that the company furnished inaccurate cost and pricing data to justify $28 million in probable inflation in the cost of manufacturing major pieces of the F-15's equipment. McDonnell spokesman Gerald Meyer said the subpoenas apparently related to an investigation of pricing elements in FY 80 and 81 F—15 contracts, although McDonnell did not know the full scope of the investigation. Meyer said McDonnell had "no reason to believe there was any unlawful conduct" on its part and that it would cooperate with the Justice Department and other government agencies participating in the investigation. He added that McDonnell felt the serving of the subpoenas "was inappropriate and unnecessary because it was not preceded by more ordinary channels of communications. All they had to do was ask." (D/D, Sept 26/85, 130) NASA and U.S. Air Force
The U.S. Air Force rolled out the C-5B today, the first B model of the free world's largest military cargo aircraft, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Although it looked like a C-5A, the new C-5B had many improved features including state-of-the-art materials and avionics. It also had the new wings, which would boost the service life of the aircraft to 30,000 flight hours, that the Air Force was retrofitting to the A model. The Air Force planned to buy 50 C-5Bs, nearly doubling its capability to airlift non-stop anywhere in the world large equipment such as the Army's 74-ton mobile scissors bridge, Abrams M-1 tanks, and helicopters. When the purchase of the C-5Bs was completed, the Air Force would be about 18 million-ton-miles per day short of its goal of 66-million-tons per day of out-sized airlift capability, the minimum capability recommended in a 1981 Congressionally mandated mobility study. The Air Force planned to make up the difference by acquiring the C-17. Four improved General Electric TF-39 engines, rated at 41,000 lb. of thrust each, powered the C-5B. The aircraft seated 75, and its seats were 30% lighter than the A model's, decreasing total aircraft weight by 725 lb and cutting fuel consumption by an estimated $13 million pver the life of the C-5B fleet. The C-5B's 24 main landing gear wheels had carbon brake assemblies with multiple discs. More than 400 lb. lighter per aircraft, the new brakes doubled the life of the A model's beryllium system and should bring about an estimated 20-year savings of $20 million. In October 1982 the Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division had awarded a $50-million preliminary C-5B production contract to Lockheed-Georgia. Plans called for early September flight testing of the first production aircraft at Dobbins AFB, Georgia. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs for $7,817 billion. (AFSC Newsreview, July 29/85, 1)
In an internal memorandum Assistant Defense Secretary James Wade Jr. asked the Air Force why F—15 and F—16 fighter jets were getting more— rather than less—expensive to build as time went on, the Washington Times reported. The cost of an aircraft normally decreased over the years because the high initial costs of design, engineering, and getting an assembly line into operation were no longer charged. The memo said the price of the F—15—calculated in 1970 dollars—rose from $5.5 million to $7.4 million a plane in 1985. In current dollars, an F—15 cost 26.3 million. The price of an F-16, in 1975 dollars, rose from $3.9 million in 1980 to $4.8 million in 1984. In current dollars, the plane cost $14 million. McDonnell Douglas Corp. had been making F-15s since 1970; General Dynamics Corp. started building F-16s in 1975. A Pentagon spokesman said the Air Force was working on a response. However, Pentagon documents provided to Sen. Charles Grassley (R-lowa) showed construction hours for both aircraft were well above engineering predictions. A single F—15 was supposed to take 22,978 manhours to build; during the first quarter of 1984, McDonnell Douglas needed 37,193 manhours to complete a plane, the documents reported. An F-16 was supposed to take 837,300 manhours to build; in the first quarter of 1984, General Dynamics took 1.4 million manhours to build a plane. (W Times, July 8/85, IOC)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division's 4950th Test Wing unveiled a generic testbed, the airborne digital avionics test system (ADATS), for flight testing newly developed aircraft avionics systems, the Air Force System Command's Newsreview reported. The wing's flight test engineering division developed the test pallet in a continuing effort to enhance its mission capabilities at reduced costs. Air Force personnel could easily load and unload the test pallet from C-141 and C-130 aircraft and would use it to flight test aircraft components that used a Mil-Std-1553B data bus (a format for transferring digitized information to and from various systems and sensors in an aircraft). The avionics test system pallet provided or simulated all electronic signals the test item received from the aircraft in which it was designed to fly. To accomplish this the pallet had navigation, air data, and time-measuring systems. A mission computer on the pallet controlled the test item and the ADATS's functions. Flight-test engineers instructed the ADATS through a computer console during each test. Before ADATS, test wing electronic technicians typically built a dedicated test pallet for each test item. With ADATS, only software needed changing. Future planned upgrades for ADATS included a global positioning system for better navigation accuracy, a radar altimeter, and Doppler velocity sensor. Other planned improvements should permit ADATS to satisfy most digital avionics flight-test requirements through the year 2005. (AFSC Newsreview, May 312/85, 4)
measure the dynamics of a vibrating beam in the zero-gravity environment (U.S. Air Force Academy);
The U.S. Air Force awarded Martin Marietta Corp. an $87-million contract to begin production of the Low-Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared System for Night (LANTRIN), the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The award enabled Martin Marietta to buy specialized factory equipment to produce the first two of 700 navigation pods for LANTRIN, which consisted of navigation and targeting pods mounted on tactical aircraft and a head-up display in the cockpit. The Air Force scheduled production of the targeting pod for spring 1986. Production of the entire system, which would give tactical pilots a day/ night under weather navigation and weapon-delivery capability, would cost $3.16 billion for the 700 systems for use on F-15E, F-16, and A-10 aircraft. The remaining 698 systems would come under fiscal year options on the contract over the next eight years. The only system of its kind, LANTRIN had a terrain-following radar that scanned the horizon while keeping the pilot at a safe altitude, even in poor visibility. The navigation pod turned night into day by distinguishing the difference in temperature of the terrain below. The result was a daylight scene that appeared on the head-up display mounted in front of the pilot. The combination of infrared and radar allowed the pilot to fly safely at a few hundred feet above ground. The targeting pod also contained a laser designator for delivery of laser guided weapons and an automatic handoff capability to allow acquisition and delivery of Maverick missiles against tactical targets. (AFSC Newsreview, May 17/85, 7)
NASA announced an award of a $400,000 contract to North American Aircraft Operations of Rockwell Internatl. Corp. for preliminary design of a pivoting wing for a supersonic aircraft. The contract covered Phase B of a joint NASA/Navy program to design, develop, and flight test an aeroelastically tailored, pivoting-oblique wing for transonic and supersonic flight evaluation. It was part of a four-phase procurement program to modify the NASA Ames-Dryden F-8 fly-by-wire research aircraft to a supersonic oblique-wing configuration. For takeoff and landing, the pivoting wing was set in the conventional aircraft flight position. For faster flight speeds, the wing pivoted so that one side was swept forward and the other side swept aft, forming an oblique angle with the aircraft's fuselage. In the oblique wing configuration, an aircraft in high-speed flight encountered less air resistance. The contract covered preliminary design of the oblique wing, its pivot assembly, and flight control program for the F-8's computers. The company would also define the aircraft's flight envelope and assess the operational capabilities of oblique wings for potential naval applications. A follow-on contract phase would provide detailed design, fabrication, ground testing, and flight support for a 12-month flight test program of approximately 40 flights. (NASA Release 85-152)
The EC-18B advanced-range instrumentation aircraft (ARIA), the first of four former 707 commercial aircraft modified by Aeronautical Systems Division's (ASD) 4950th Test Wing, rolled out on January 4, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. To augment ARI Amission capabilities, ASD had purchased the Boeing 707-320 aircraft from American Airlines in 1982 as replacements for four of the seven Boeing EC-135s in the current ARIA fleet. The aircraft would provide worldwide missile- and space-testing support by serving as airborne tracking stations over land where geographical constraints limited ground-tracking stations and over broad ocean areas where no tracking stations existed. The EC-18B's ARIA fleet improvements included more room for mission equipment, increased fuel capacity, and more fuel-efficient engines. Modification of the 707s had offered major cost savings over purchase of new aircraft; program costs for the four aircraft were $25 million—$6 million for aircraft purchase and $19 million for ARIA conversion. At the time of purchase, Boeing officials had estimated new aircraft would cost $25 million each, not including ARIA-conversion costs. The most obvious external modification was the large bulbous nose—a 9 ft. radome housing the world's largest airborne-steerable antenna, a 7 ft. dish for telemetry reception. The nose also housed a smaller weather antenna. Other additions included a smaller radome for communications on the aircraft top and wingtip-probe antennas for high-frequency radio transmission and reception. ASD also outfitted the aircraft with a navigation station, mission-critical cockpit avionics, a modified electrical system, and an improved environmental-control system. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb 8/85, 6)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, in testimony before the Senate science, technology, and space subcommittee, said that projected cost overruns for the Centaur G and G Prime vehicles-development programs could run as high as $50 to $60 million, but that the agency did not think the problems would affect Galileo and Ulysses mission launches planned for the 2nd half of 1986, Aerospace Daily reported. Another NASA official testifying earlier had estimated the overrun at $30 to $40 million. The discrepancy in estimates apparently stemmed from an agreement between NASA and the Air Force calling for a 50-50 sharing of Centaur G program-design and -development costs. The Air Force, however, had set a $150 million ceiling on basic Centaur-development costs, which had not yet been reached. If the overrun surpassed the ceiling, NASA would have to absorb the costs. (A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
The C-5's new B model made its first flight today from Dobbins Air Force Base, Georgia, climbing to 15,000 feet and cruising at 300 knots—an appropriate altitude and speed to determine airworthiness, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Airborne for slightly more than three hours, the Galaxy began 55 hrs of production flight testing designed to evaluate its improved features. Evaluation would be shorter than usual for a newly designed aircraft because the C-5B only carried state-of-the-art features added to the already proven C-5A. Col. Thomas Stover, acting C-5B director in Aeronautical System's Division (ASD) Deputy for Airlift and Trainer Systems, called the first flight a "key event . . . ushering in a significant improvement to our strategic airlift capability." The nine-member crew alternately shut down and restarted each of the airlifter's four General Electric TF39-1C engines, which restarted without a hitch. Production flight evaluation would include airborne testing of an improved onboard computer called MASAR II, the malfunction detection analysis and recording computer. Pilots would also evaluate the improved automatic flight control and landing gear actuation systems. In October 1982 ASD awarded Lockheed Georgia a $50-million preliminary contract to begin C-5B production, and the first aircraft rolled out July 12, 1985. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs, at total cost of $7,817 billion. Military Airlift Command expected to receive its first B model by December, with delivery of the 50th expected near mid-1989. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1)
During a ceremony today at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, the Department of Defense (DOD) activated its first unified space command, SPACECOM, to oversee all military programs in space, the NY Times reported. SPACECOM would oversee and control all Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps defensive space activities, which consisted of systems devoted to intelligence-gathering, watching for an attack, and facilitating communications and navigation, and would operate separately from the civilian programs run by NASA. However, it was the potential role that the new command might play as headquarters for any space-based defense against enemy missiles that drew most attention, despite official assertions that any such assignment would lie far in the future. Although the U.S. was committed to the early stage of research for a missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative, Gen. John Vessey Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said after the ceremony that the command's purpose was an extension of the armed services' current strategy of deterrence, and he sought to allay concern that it would be a first step toward war in space. "There are several things the command will not become," he said. "It is not a force built to escalate the arms race. It is not a force built to achieve dominance for the United States. The command will make its contribution to that fundamental element of United States strategy, the prevention of war." Rep. Ken Kramer (R-Colo.), who strongly favored development of a missile defense system, said that the Space Command opened a new period in the lives of nations. Noting that he could "speak a little more freely" than the military officials, Kramer said, "I call it the post-nuclear era, in which the people of this nation and potentially all nations will no longer live in this shadow of potential nuclear destruction and nuclear holocaust." Kramer had fought hard to have the military's space functions united and based in his district and said Colorado had become the "military space capital of the free world." DOD named Gen. Robert Herres, who headed the North American Aerospace Defense Command and the United States Air Force Space Command, to command the new organization. Herres attempted to dampen speculation about SPACECOM's role in strategic defense development. "There is a lot of uncertainty about how that research is going to turn out. That's why we call it research," he said. "I could speculate about what our role might be, but those decisions will depend on how the research turns out. (NVT, Sept 24/85, A28)
The Smithsonian Institution announced that "Celestial Images: Astronomical Charts, 1500-1900," a special exhibition of 39 rare depictions of star patterns and planetary systems, would open May 16 at its National Museum of American History. The exhibition, intended to illustrate a unity of science and art from the Renaissance to the 1900s, would include two woodcuts, the first printed star charts with coordinates and scales from which positions of stars could be plotted, from the workshop of Renaissance artist and mathematician Albrecht Durer (1471-1528). The museum would also display from Lahore, India, a 17th-century Islamic celestial globe made of brass and inlaid with silver stars; the only extant copy of engraved paper gores (1599) for the first celestial globe by Willem Janszoon Blaeu (1571-1638), the first to incorporate the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe's unexcelled positions for 1,000 stars; and a 17th-century celestial atlas by Andreas Cellarius. In addition to reflecting artistic styles and conventions of their periods, the works represented differing points of scientific and philosophical debate. Charts that accurately fixed many constellations and thousands of stars also depicted Ptolemy's view of the earth as the center of the universe. Constellations rendered as mythological figures in one work might appear as Biblical figures in another. However, as a result of astronomer's access to stronger and technically improved instruments, the works showed increasing accuracy over the 400 years covered in the exhibition. (Smithsonian Institution Release, May 8/85)
The U.S. Air Force Space Technology Center's Kirtland Contracting Center awarded Aerojet Electro Systems a $17-million contract and Hughes Aircraft a $21-million contract for work on the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Under the contracts the companies would develop and build a space surveillance sensor called "the precursor above the horizon sensor," which would look across space using several frequency bands in the long-wave infrared spectrum to track the trajectory of intercontinental ballistic missiles or space systems. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 11/85, 3)
