A number of American space scientists expressed disappointment because no U.S. spacecraft would fly by Halley's Comet as it swings by Earth for the first time since 1910 and for the thirtieth time since 240 B.C. The scientists ascribed U.S. failure to have a mission to the comet to a "combination of over expectations, missed signals, poor planning, a streak of bad luck, and politics and infighting in the science community." In the meantime, the European Space Agency's spacecraft iotto, the Soviet Union's twin Vega spacecraft, and two Japanese0*spacecraft would each probe Halley's Comet. Particularly galling to American space scientists was the knowledge that none of these spacecraft could carry out their mission without U.S. help, as each was guided by U.S. Deep Space Network to reach the comet. The most sophisticated mission would be by the spacecraft Giotto. After a 60,000 voyage through Halley's "dusty tail," it would pass "within 300 miles of the coma, which with the nucleus forms the comet's head." The twin Soviet spacecraft were launched in
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a plan for a new orbiter that diverted $2.9 billion in defense funds for a reserve to be used by NASA. The proposal asked the Navy to reduce production of the F/A18 fighter and delay construction of a Trident submarine, the Air Force to delay construction of the C17 transport plane, the Army to buy fewer M1 tanks, and defense contractors to shoulder the burden of the cost of tools in its manufacturing. Although the plan called for NASA to oversee construction, the Air Force would launch and operate the new Shuttle. (W Post, Sep 11/86; Sep 12/86; WSJ, Sep 11/86; LA Times, Sep 17/86)
Two papers delivered by Dr. Allan Harris and Dr. Eugene Shoemaker to the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore dealt with the possibilities and consequences of a comet, asteroid, or large meteoroid striking the Earth. Chances of the first two bodies striking us in the next 100 years, the paper determined, were only 1 in 1000. An encounter with the third, however, would be more likely (this occurs about once every two decades) and'"0*although the meteoroid would explode in the atmosphere, less advanced nations might mistake the explosion for a nuclear attack. Asteroids and comets are still monitored, notwithstanding the low odds of a collision. Asteroids lend themselves to search methods because they follow an Earthlike orbit, but the latter have an elliptical orbit difficult to track. Also presented to the Baltimore meeting were the results of the findings of a joint U.S./Brazilian atmospheric study conducted in July and August 1985 by NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Analysis of the study concluded that gases from the rain forests in the Amazon Basin in Brazil set off a chain of chemical reactions that eventually impact global air quality and the Earth's radiation budget. Trace gases in the troposphere resulting from biological activity in forest soil and vegetation were measured with instruments aboard NASA's Electra aircraft. (NASA Release 8663; 8664)
NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics planned a symposium on Quality and Productivity for December. The event would focus on strategies for revitalizing organizations and provide a forum for discussing issues involved in increasing national quality and productivity. The symposium would bring together over 900 key executives from industry, government, and academia. (NASA anno)
Martin Marietta announced plans to enter the private launching business with its Titan class rockets. The Titan was the largest of all U.S. expendable rockets, and spokesman Jack Boyd said that he hoped to market the launch for dual payloads. The corporation had previously submitted a formal request to the Air Force for use of its launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Aug 20/86; LA Times, Aug 20/86)
An official from the Pentagon warned members of Congress that a oneyear delay in the Shuttle launches would create a backlog of 10 military missions and a 2year delay would raise that number to 21. He and others viewed this a "national emergency." The Air Force Undersecretary further pointed out a need for a replacement Shuttle and 10 additional expendable launch vehicles. Congressional committees, however, had not yet decided how the cost, if approved, would be shared by the Air Force and NASA. (B Sun, Mar 27/86; W Times, Mar 27/86)
