NASA announced the solicitation of proposals for the Technology Reinvestment Project, a $471 million federal interagency effort to develop and deploy dual-use technologies and at the same time give a competitive advantage to American companies. (NASA Release 93-85)
NASA released four new images gathered by the Cosmic Background Explorer. The images, which were released at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, showed infrared sources such as dust within the Solar System, stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, and dust and stars in other galaxies. The images were created from Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) data. (NASA Release 92-256)
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Lockheed was leading a six-member industry team in an effort to develop an unsolicited National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) proposal for the Air Force. The team was to recommend scrapping the NASP in favor of a much lighter hypersonic research vehicle called NORA, for National Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA's $5 billion price tag was far less than the $10-15 billion slated for the NASP. (AvWk, Mar 8/93)
The New York Times reported that a radio telescope spread across 5,000 miles had been finished.  The new telescope, called the Very long Baseline Array (V.L.B.A.), has 10 antennas scattered across United States territory from the central Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean. All 10 antennas are very well synchronized as a single telescope of gigantic size, an arrangement that gives the V.I.B.A. far sharper vision than that of any other telescope. The telescope's revolving power is such that an observer in New York City would be able to read a newspaper in San Francisco. The V.I.B.A. was to be used to probe the depths of time and space. (NY Times, Aug 17/93)
NASA announced that it was adapting an existing, cutting-edge x-ray system to improve inspections of aging aircraft while saving American industries money. The x-ray system, which combines TV-like scanning by x-ray beams with digital data acquisition, was originally intended for medical, dental, and other industrial purposes.  NASA was to adapt the system to inspect aircraft wings, turbines, and propeller blades for corrosion, cracks, and disbonding.  The system was developed by the Digiray Corporation. (NASA Release 93-137)
The New York Times reported that at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Dr. Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of California at Santa Cruz had described the Milky Way as practicing "galactic cannibalism." Lin explained that the gravitational force of matter in the vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy was causing the Milky Way to consume the stars and gases of its nearest galactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud 160,000 light-years away. (NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/1993; USA Today, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; P Inq, June 8/93)
A conference committee of the Senate and House eliminated $12.3 million earmarked for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. Angry astronomers began seeking private funds to continue their work, which had been underway for barely a year. (SF Chron, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 7/93; San Francisco Examiner, Oct 4/93)
The media reported that NASA and the astronomical community had differing views on an orbiting billboard that would beam a moon-sized message back to Earth. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond said that the "space billboard" was in line with the space agency's aims, that is, to encourage commercial development of space. A quite different view was expressed by Carl Sagan, a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called the project an "abomination" and said that it was "the thin edge of a wedge which may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy...."  An American Astronomical Society spokesman said the billboard would hamper Earth-based astronomy, add to the growing pollution of the night sky by light, and even infringe on everyone's enjoyment of nature's sunsets." (RTw, May 17/93)
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that NASA was renewing its interest in aeronautics.  In 1992, aeronautics accounted for about 8 percent of NASA's $14.3 billion budget; if the agency got the funding it had requested, NASA planned to spend $8.6 billion on aeronautics from 1994 though 1998--an increase of 50 percent. (San Francisco Chronicle, Aug 11, 1993; LA Times, Aug 25/93)
The Washington Times reported that a conference of scientists and policy makers had discussed the question of what to do with the "junk science" that makes its way into public policy. The conference, which was held in the Washington, DC area, was sponsored by the International Institute of George Mason University and the Science and Environmental Policy Project. (W Times, May 25/93)
Harris B. Hull, 83, a retired Air Force brigadier general and former special assistant to the administrator of NASA, died January 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington after a heart attack. General Hull was assigned to NASA in 1963. After retiring from the Air Force in 1964, he remained with NASA until retiring in 1986. (W Post, Feb, 1/93; NY Times, Feb 2/93)
NASA announced that scientist Dr. Robert Watson would receive the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) on February 15.
Robert M. Rados, 73, a retired NASA meteorologist, died of cardiac arrest February 3 at Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.
America's technological leaders were scheduled to meet  in Anaheim, California, from December 7-9 1993, to explore innovative ideas that could be used to solve engineering problems, create new products and industry opportunities, and facilitate the transfer of government-sponsored technologies to American industry. TECHNOLOGY 2003, the fourth annual national technology transfer conference and exposition, was sponsored by NASA, "NASA Tech Briefs" magazine, and the Technology Utilization Foundation. (NASA Release 93-212)
The government-backed computer chip consortium Sematech announced Thursday that it had produced chips with electrical devices just 0.35 microns wide using American production equipment. The announcement indicated that the American chip industry was coming back on track technically. The state-of-the-art in chip production was 0.6 microns; however, Japanese companies recently began demonstrating their ability to produce 0.35 chips. Achieving 0.35 micron capabilities by the end of 1992 was one of Sematech's goals at its founding in l987. (LA Times, Jan 22/93)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.) reported that a powerful new x-ray camera had been shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova. The scientists reported that the camera was providing very detailed information about the cosmic explosion. The M.I.T. camera was one of several Japanese and American instruments put into orbit aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February 20. (NY Times, Apr 13/93)
A modified troop and cargo plane described as a "flying laboratory" crashed and burned after taking off from Dobbins Air Force Base in suburban Atlanta. The seven people aboard, all Lockheed employees, were killed. The plane, a modified troop and cargo plane, was used by Lockheed for testing new technologies.
NASA announced that recent discoveries from the agency's Extreme Ultravioilet Explorer (EUVE) would be presented at the National Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, University of California at Berkeley on June 7 and 8.
NASA's exhibit at the Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-in Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin on July  29-August 6, was scheduled to focus on general aviation technology. The exhibit was to explain how NASA was addressing the challenges of aircraft in every speed regime. It also planned to stress how NASA's "customers," that is, the government, industry, universities, and, ultimately, the American taxpayer, benefitted from the agency's advances in aeronautics.  (NASA Release 93-128)
Researchers writing in the current issue of the journal Nature announced that they had detected a guitar-shaped nebula attached to the fastest known star in the galaxy; the star is at the tip of the neck of the "guitar." The speed of the star, a pulsar, which scientists calculated travelled at least 500 miles per second through the Milky Way galaxy, created a "bow-shock" wave in the rarified gas of outerspace. The shock wave heated the gas it encountered and made it give off energy, now appearing as the outline of the star's wake. The wake was detectable only with the world's most powerful telescope, according to Cornell University astronomer James M. Cordes. (W Post, Mar 15/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
Speaking to a meeting of the American Astronautical Society, Representative Alan Mollohan warned that unless NASA could prove it contributed to U.S. economic competitiveness, politicians would view it as a "Cold War anachronism." According to an article in Space News, Mollohan's comments reflected the view of both the White House and members of Congress. The message: change or become irrelevant. (Space News, March 15-21)
