NASA announced that together with the American Geophysical Union it was honoring pioneer space scientist James A. Van Allen on his 80th birthday. Dr. Van Allen, Professor Emeritus at the University of Iowa, over a 50-year period studied planetary magnetospheres and cosmic rays. He discovered the belt of radiation around the Earth that bears his name. (NASA Release 94-81; Fla Today, May 25/94)
Two American scientists, Clark Chapman and David Morrison, wrote in Nature magazine that society might want to decide whether to pay for a sky survey to track comets and asteroids that could crash into the Earth with catastrophic results, so that governments could use nuclear arms to smash or divert them. NASA proposed a Spaceguard Survey to map all asteroids large enough to cause global catastrophe. It would cost $50 million to set up and $10 million in annual operating costs. (Reuters, Jan 5/94)
An interview was published with retired Princeton physicist Freeman Dayson in which he strongly criticized NASA. He advocated that NASA be dismantled like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and inefficent. Instead, science should be done by individuals following their own curiosity and creativity. (CSM, Dec 7/94)
Although Congress killed NASA's search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) program, the subject survived as Project Phoenix. The SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, indicated existing contributions of $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the project. NASA renamed the project High Resolution Microwave Survey to reflect the technology's ability to screen out Earth-based radio interference while listening for cosmic signals on millions of channels at once. (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb 15/94)
NASA announced that the fifth annual technology conference and exposition, Technology 2004, would be held November 8-10 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-184)
University of Maryland radio astronomers indicated they had spotted water clouds near the center of a galaxy called Markarian 1, which is about 200 million light years away in the constellation Pisces. The finding was reported at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Astronomical Society. At that meeting, Johns Hopkins University astronomers reported several days previously having "very strong" evidence of a black hole at the center of the Andromeda galaxy. (B Sun, Jun 2/94; P Inq, Jun 3/94; W Post, Jun 3/94; USA Today, Jun 3/94; NY Times, Jun 3/94)
