At the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the American Astronomical Society, astronomers working with NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) spacecraft announced the discovery of the fastest vibrations ever recorded in a star system. The vibrations occur when massive neutron stars begin to die out, expelling the outer layers of their solid crusts and creating powerful x-rays. The astronomers working with the RXTE recorded x-rays flickering at up to 1,130 times per second. Scientists were unsure why this process occurred. According to NASA, “the possibility that the RXTE has detected actual waves in neutron stars or a very fast rotation period of one such star is of great scientific interest.”(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Discovers Fastest Stellar Vibrations Yet,” news release 96-81, 30 April 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Instrument Detects Fastest Vibrations Yet Seen in Universe,” 30 April 1996.)
In its annual contest, Popular Science magazine honored NASA’s experimental flight-control system as one of the best technological developments of 1996. NASA had installed the system, developed for the use of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, in a remotely piloted aircraft called LoFLYTE (Low Observable Flight Test Experiment). On board the aircraft, the system used techniques involving neural networks to “learn” to fly, actually acquiring flight skills by mimicking the actions of the pilot controlling the plane from the ground. Neural networks are systems that learn skills by doing them. Scientists hoped the technology might eventually have an impact on commercial and military aviation.(NASA, “Aircraft Flight-Control System Wins ‘Best of What’s New’,” news release 96-233, 12 November 1996. 155 David Colker, “Pilotless Test Plane Blown Up After It Veers Off Course,” Los Angeles Times, 13 November 1996; Jim Skeen, “Pilotless Aircraft Crashes at Edwards,” Antelope Valley News (Palmdale, CA), 13 November 1996.)
Astronomer and Pulitzer Prize winner Carl Sagan died after a long fight against a bone marrow disease; he was 62 years old. Since 1971, Sagan had directed Cornell University’s Laboratory for Planetary Atmospheres and Surfaces, where he forged his reputation as an expert in exobiology. Sagan helped plan the Mariner, Viking, and Voyager missions, receiving NASA’s Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement in 1972. Sagan also helped popularize modern science with his widely viewed television series Cosmos. Sagan described the television series as an endeavor “to show that science is a delight and to end people’s artificial alienation from it.” Sagan’s The Dragons of Eden (1977) won the Pulitzer Prize. Throughout his work, Sagan had also argued for the possibility of extraterrestrial life.(Cornell University, “Carl Sagan, Cornell Astronomer, Dies Today (Dec. 20) in Seattle,” news release, 20 December 1996; United Press International, “Astronomer Carl Sagan Has Died,” 20 December 1996.)
NASA launched its Fast Auroral Snapshot (FAST) Explorer from a test range near Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Engineers had designed the FAST vehicle to travel about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers) above Earth, measuring energetic particles, and magnetic and electric fields, at high altitudes where auroras form, to explore the “physical processes that produce aurora borealis and aurora australis.” NASA’s Small Explorer Project, tasked with providing frequent and low-cost research missions for astrophysics investigations, had carried out the FAST mission as the second in a series of five missions.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “FAST Status Report #1: Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release, 21 August 1996; Bruce Smith, “Fast Launched Successfully,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 71.)
NASA marked the 50-year anniversary of the Bell X-1 aircraft’s first flight, which took place at the site of Edwards Air Force Base, home of NASA’s DFRC. According to Jay Miller, the author of The X-Planes: X-1 to X-33, the X-1 had given flight researchers and engineers their first full- scale tool to study transonic aerodynamics. The Bell Aircraft Corporation, the U.S. Army Air Forces (predecessor of the U.S. Air Force), and NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, had collaborated to get the first test plane off the ground. The X-1 test not only provided aeronautical data, but also pioneered the test methods later adopted by DFRC flight researchers.
NASA and the U.S. Air Force unveiled to the public an “intelligent” aircraft, using a computerized system to “learn as it flies.” Researchers had engineered the hypersonic aircraft to take inventory of flight maneuvers performed while operating under remote control, eventually using its acquired knowledge to develop the capability to fly itself. According to the flight researchers, the aircraft’s control system would create a continually altering set of “control laws,” to optimize flight performance. After the aircraft had perfected its system, it could assist pilots in performing such tasks as landing partially damaged planes. The intelligent aircraft could also enable flight at speeds and altitudes that human pilots could hardly ever achieve, while still maintaining adequate control of an aircraft.(NASA, “Intelligent Test Aircraft Unveiled in Wisconsin Today,” news release 96-154, 2 August 1996.)
