NASA announced that an intense wave of gamma rays, emanating from a magnetar 20,000 light- years away from Earth, had struck Earth’s atmosphere on 27 August. Stanford University professor Umran Inan remarked that the occurrence, which had a measurable effect on Earth, was extremely rare, since the event occurred outside the solar system. The radiation wave was “so powerful that it blasted sensitive detectors to maximum or off scale on at least seven scientific spacecraft in Earth-orbit and around the solar system.”(NASA, “Tremendous Gamma-Ray Flare Blasts Earth,” news release 98-172, 29 September 1998.)
James K. Yungel, a NASA scientist studying Earth remote sensing, discussed a joint project underway at Monterey Peninsula Airport, involving NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The researchers had parked at the airport a Twin Otter airplane, with a scanning laser system and a global-positioning-satellite receiver, to make precise measurements of the West Coast, mapping the changes El Niño had caused along the coastline. The goal of the survey was to create “the most highly detailed map yet of the West Coast,” increasing scientists’ ability to predict erosion over the next decade.(Michael McCabe, “NASA Mapping West Coast in Wake of El Niño: Most Rigorous Survey Ever Should Help Predict Erosion,” San Francisco Chronicle, 17 April 1998.)
NASA announced the arrest of “the suspected leader of a group of computer hackers who broke into the network of a NASA laboratory.” Law enforcement agents accused twenty-year-old Calldan Levi Coffman of Carson, Washington, suspected leader of a group called ViRii, of infiltrating the networks of various corporations, universities, and other government agencies, in addition to breaching the security of computer systems at NASA’s JPL last June. NASA’s Computer Crimes Division had worked with other government agencies, including the U.S. Naval Intelligence Service, the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the FBI, to uncover a link between Coffman’s group and Israeli hacker Ehud Tenenbaum, known as The Analyzer. Law enforcement officials suspected Tenenbaum of organizing a confederation of hacker groups, including his own group and Coffman’s group.(Associated Press, “NASA Hacker,” 18 March 1998; Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’,” 20 March 1998.)
The Organization of American Historians presented the 1998 Richard W. Leopold Prize to Andrew J. Butrica for his book, To See the Unseen: A History of Planetary Radar Astronomy. The organization awarded the biennial Richard W. Leopold Prize “for the best book written by an historian connected with federal, state, or municipal government in the areas of foreign policy, military affairs, the historical activities of the federal government, or biography in one of these areas.” Butrica’s book, a comprehensive history of planetary radar astronomy, was a publication of the NASA History Series produced by the NASA Headquarters History Division’s Office of Policy and Plans.(NASA, “NASA History Wins Prestigious Prize,” news release 98-53, 3 April 1998.)
