U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) announced the findings of a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) investigation into NASA’s computer security. Thompson had requested the study, which found that government specialists were able to penetrate several mission-critical systems and could have stolen, modified, or destroyed system software and data. GAO had found that 135 of the 155 mission-critical systems reviewed did not meet all of NASA’s requirements for risk assessment. Specifically, NASA had not conducted an Agency-wide review of information-technology security since 1991; 60 percent of reviewed systems had not been independently audited for security or weaknesses; NASA had no security training program; and NASA field centers did not report security incidents to a central location. GAO had also found that NASA had no policy for determining what type of information its staff could post on public Web sites, rendering it vulnerable to Internet attacks. NASA also had no policy for protecting mission-critical systems from well-known Internet threats.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Thompson Says NASA Must Tighten Computer Security,” government news release, 20 May 1999; U.S. General Accounting Office, “Information Security: Many NASA Mission-Critical Systems Face Serious Risks” (report no. GAO/AIMD-99-47, Washington, DC, May 1999), http://www.gao.gov /archive/1999/ai99047.pdf (accessed 7 February 2008).)
SPACEHAB Inc., the first company to “commercially develop, own, and operate habitable modules that provide laboratory facilities and logistics re-supply aboard NASA’s Space Shuttles,” and leading global provider of commercial payload-processing services, participated in a Brazilian industry conference. Brazsat, a Brazilian commercial space company, hosted the Third Commercial Space Workshop, in Rio de Janeiro on 23 and 24 August. North American, South American, and European industry and government leaders attended the workshop, where SPACEHAB’s Chief Executive Officer Shelley A. Harrison delivered one of two keynote addresses. Participants at the workshop, which had the theme “Commercial Space Technologies and its Benefits in the New Millenium,” presented “state-of-the-art space technologies, research spin-offs and applications in areas of microgravity research, remote sensing, telecommunications satellites, distance learning, telemedicine and other disciplines” of human spaceflight.(SPACEHAB Inc., “SPACEHAB Participates in Key Brazilian Industry Conference: SPACEHAB CEO Addresses Industry Officials on Essential Space Initiatives,” news release, 31 August 1999, http://www.spacehab. com/news/1999/99_08_31.htm (accessed 3 March 2008).)
Space.com, an Internet site devoted to covering the news and science of space, appointed Sally K. Ride as its President. Lou Dobbs had begun Space.com in July 1999, after resigning as president of CNN’s Financial News. Ride, the first American woman in space, had worked closely with Dobbs as he launched the site. The position was her “first foray into the cyberspace after a long career in space research, policy, and education.(Andrea Orr for Reuters, “Space.com Names Space Woman as Company President,” 21 September 1999.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that it had postponed indefinitely Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck’s departure from his command of the 45th Space Wing, with responsibility for all military and commercial launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Air Force spokesperson did not state the reasons for the change. Starbuck was to report on 3 June as Director of the Expeditionary Forces Management Team at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. His replacement, Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton, a former Space Shuttle Commander, was to report on 3 June to Patrick Air Force Base, to replace Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing.(Robyn Suriano, “Starbuck Staying Put at Helm of 45th Space Wing,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 May 1999. 711 NASA, “Nobel Prize Winner To Lead NASA Astrobiology Institute,” news release 99-61, 18 May 1999; Warren E. Leary, “Search for Life Beyond Earth Gets a Leader,” New York Times, 19 May 1999.)
Vladimir Petrovsky, a member of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, condemned the United States’ 2 October testing of its proposed missile defense system, noting that testing could “aggravate relations not only between the United States and the Asian-Pacific region, but also between Japan⎯a U.S. ally in the development of the system⎯and other countries.” Russia had refused to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which would have permitted the United States to develop a full-fledged missile defense system. Preventing either country from developing missile defense systems, the Cold War–era treaty acted as a deterrent by keeping both the Soviet Union and the United States vulnerable to attack. Officials in Washington, DC, stated that DOD was testing a missile defense system intended to destroy lone missiles launched by rogue states or terrorists, not a system meant to protect against a multi-missile attack from a major nuclear power.(Associated Press, “Missile Test.”)
NASA announced the discovery of a “mysterious class of ‘middleweight’ black holes.” Two teams of astronomers studying x-ray light at NASA and Carnegie Mellon University had independently found evidence of this new class of black hole. Astronomers did not know what process had formed the newly discovered black holes, 100 to 10,000 times as massive as the Sun and located in spiral-shaped galaxies throughout the universe. Before this discovery, astronomers had known of only two types of black holes: 1) stellar black holes, formed from the “remains of dead stars several times heavier than the Sun” and compressed to a “diameter of a few miles or less”; and 2) supermassive black holes, which have masses equal to 1 million to 1 billion Suns and likely formed in the “early universe from giant gas clouds or from the collapse of clusters of immense numbers of stars.” Edward H. Colbert and Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had observed hints of the black holes while studying x-rays from 39 nearby galaxies. Andrew Ptak and Richard Griffiths of Carnegie Mellon University had studied x-ray light in galaxy M82, which was not one of the set of galaxies that the Goddard team had studied. Both teams had identified unique x-ray light indicative of a class of black holes that was neither stellar nor supermassive.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover ‘Middleweight’ Black Holes,” news release 99-51, 13 April 1999.)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross released a report estimating that NASA had “spent [US]$3 million in ‘excessive costs’” on its Houston-to-Moscow air-charter program. The investigators criticized the program, saying it was more expensive than commercial travel. An investigation had revealed that the flights, which typically used Boeing 727s seating 143 travelers, sometimes carried as few as nine people. The charter flights originated in Houston and usually stopped in Huntsville, Alabama, and Washington, DC, before continuing on to Moscow. A few weeks before the release of the report, NASA’s Office of Space Flight had rejected a recommendation from the Inspector General to terminate the service, arguing that the program “provided ‘tangible and intangible’ benefits to workers on the International Space Station [ISS].” NASA had developed the program as a cost-saving measure and as an alternative to contracting with the U.S. Department of Defense to transport employees involved with the multibillion- dollar space station program. The Inspector General found that the chartered flights averaged around 50 people; NASA had estimated a 90-passenger threshold for the program to realize savings. In response to the demand of U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) that NASA “halt this waste immediately,” Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would terminate the program “as soon as practical.”
