NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced that they had agreed with a study team’s recommendation that NASA and the Air Force continue to assess the construction of a joint reusable launch vehicle (RLV) demonstrator. After spending 120 days examining the two organizations’ shared requirements and their technologies to access space, the team’s most critical recommendation had been that NASA and the Air Force should cooperate in assessing the construction of an RLV demonstrator for their joint operations. In addition, the study team had recommended that engineers eventually develop the demonstrator into a crew-operated vehicle for NASA and a cargo vehicle for the Air Force. NASA and the Air Force also agreed that experienced Air Force personnel should continue to work with NASA in joint study efforts, to refine their concepts of operations, requirements, and figures of merit, and to design reference missions.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Forge Ahead with Reusable Launch Technology,” news release 02-87, 21 May 2002.)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s leading professional society in the field, elected Charles Elachi, Director of NASA’s JPL, as a fellow in the society. In his research concerning geological analysis of Earth, Elachi had developed 45 flight missions and instruments, including radar remote-sensing techniques used to study Venus.(NASA JPL, “JPL Director Honored by Leading Aeronautic Institute,” news release, 25 February 2002. 60)
George W. S. Abbey, Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator and former Director of NASA’s JSC, announced his retirement from NASA effective 3 January 2003. Abbey had begun his career at JSC in 1964 as a U.S. Air Force officer. He had served as Director of JSC and had become a high-level manager for the ISS project. In 2001 he had left the post because of the soaring costs of the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Statement by General Jefferson D. Howell Jr. on the Retirement of Former JSC Director George W. S. Abbey,” news release J02-111, 7 November 2002; Houston Chronicle, “Longtime NASA Official Retires,” 8 November 2002.)
