The U.S. Air Force Space Command announced its planned elimination of 1,125 positions over the next seven years, as part of a service-wide, post-September 11 initiative to reduce staffing levels. The move would free it to “pour more resources into the Air Force’s ‘highest priority missions’,” such as special operations and intelligence. The plan called for the elimination of 314 civilian and 442 military positions by October 2004, at both senior and lower levels. U.S. Air Force Major Sean McKenna, a Space Command spokesperson, commented that the reductions did not indicate that the Air Force had assigned lower priority to space.(Jeremy Singer, “Air Force Space Command To Cut Staff,” Space News, 13 March 2003.)
NASA announced that 12 new teams would join the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), a research consortium studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life on Earth and in the universe. The new teams, with members from the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC; Indiana University in Bloomington; Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts; SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California; and NASA’s ARC and GSFC would join the four lead teams that NASA had selected in 2001. The five-year awards, with annual funding levels of US$1 million, would commence in the autumn of 2003 when the agreements with the NAI’s 11 founding teams had concluded. Six of the new teams were among the founding member teams.
NASA announced that it had positively identified the remains of all seven members of STS-107 at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and that officials in Angelina County, Texas, had signed the death certificates. Eileen Hawley, spokesperson for NASA’s JSC in Houston, said that officials had released the crew members’ remains to their families for private memorial services. NASA had already returned the remains of Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon to Israel, where burial services had taken place on 11 February.(NASA JSC, “Columbia Astronaut Remains Identified,” news release H03-070, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2003/h03-070.html (accessed 14 August 2008); Associated Press, “Remains of All Shuttle Astronauts Identified,” 14 February 2003.)
The U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing transferred operation of Launch Complex 47 at Cape Canaveral Air Station to the Florida Space Authority (FSA) by means of a licensing agreement under the Commercial Space Transportation Act. J. Gregory Pavlovich, Commander of the 45th Space Wing, stated that the transfer of operations was a positive development, remarking that, although the Air Force had previously scheduled the launchpad for deactivation, licensing it to the FSA would enable Launch Complex 47 to remain available for educational use for years into the future. Under the agreement, Brevard Community College could offer as many as 200 educational launch opportunities over the following five years, allowing for hands-on technical education that would help motivate students to join the aerospace workforce.(Jim Banke, “Florida Space Authority Will Run Cape Launch Pad for Education,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/fsa_cx47_031107.html (accessed 17 March 2009).)
