In a newly released survey, U.S. federal government employees ranked NASA as the best place to work in the federal government. The Office of Personnel Management had collected the data during a 2002 survey of federal employees, and the nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service and American University’s Institute for the Study of Public Policy Implementation had produced the rankings. According to the survey, in eight out of 10 categories related to employment satisfaction, federal employees had ranked NASA first―federal employees had ranked NASA as the best place to work for women, for racial minorities, and for individuals under 40 years of age.(Stephen Barr, “NASA Soars to Top of Satisfaction Ratings Among Various Workers,” Washington Post, 16 April 2004.)
The GAO published an assessment of the efforts of the DOD and the military services to develop personnel for space-related national security matters and to integrate those personnel into their forces. In the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2004 (Pub.L.No. 108-136), the U.S. Congress had required the DOD to create a strategy to develop and integrate personnel who were capable of operating space-based systems and of developing space-related concepts, doctrine, and technology. In addition, Congress had required GAO to assess those efforts. In its report, GAO stated that the DOD did not have a plan to implement its strategy for developing and integrating space personnel. GAO also found that the military services varied in the extent to which they had implemented plans to develop and manage their space personnel. The report included recommendations to address these issues.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Defense Space Activities: Additional Actions Needed to Implement Human Capital Strategy and Develop Space Personnel” (report no. GAO-04-097, Washington, DC, 11 August 2004).)
Commercial airlines Air France and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced that they would merge, creating the world’s largest airline, in terms of revenue. Under the terms of the merger, the two companies would trade stock shares, with KLM shareholders tendering almost 42 million sharesnearly 90 percent of the company’s capital. Air France would issue approximately 46 million new shares to KLM shareholders, reducing the French government’s interest in the airline from 54 percent to less than 45 percent of total shares. The combined annual revenue of the two companies would be nearly US$23 billion, eclipsing the US$17.4 billion annual revenue of American Airlines, which had previously received the highest revenue of any airline.(Los Angeles Times, “Air Frances Completes Deal with KLM Royal Dutch,” 5 May 2004.)
