years of U.S. civil aeronautics research and technology should provide a foundation for achieving six strategic objectives, including improved safety and reliability and increased capacity, efficiency and performance. The report provided a list of 51 high-priority aeronautics research and technology challenges for NASA. To achieve the goals outlined in the report, the committee recommended that NASA cooperate more with public and private organizations, to share facilities and tools for key projects, and with other federal agencies that support aeronautics research, such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).(National Academies Office of News and Public Information, “U.S. Should Strengthen Foundation for Future of Air Transportation,” press release, 5 June 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx? RecordID=11664 (accessed 15 September 2010); see also National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), http://www.nap.edu/ catalog/11664 (accessed 16 September 2010).)
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued its report, “NASA’s Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements.” The report concluded that, although Deep Space Network (DSN) “is able to meet most of the requirements of its current workload, serious questions exist as to whether it will be able to keep up with both near-term and future demands.” The report also found that “system infrastructure, which has been marked by extensive deferred maintenance, is aging and is likely to become increasingly fragile and subject to breakdown at a time when demand is anticipated to increase.” Managed by NASA’s JPL, DSN comprised communications antennas measuring up to 70 meters (229.6 feet), located in California, Australia, and Spain. Established in 1959, DSN supported an average of 35 to 40 deep space missions each year. However, the number of new deep space missions continued to increase, and existing “legacy” missions, such as Voyager missions, had remained in operation longer than initially planned. Therefore, NASA projected that, by 2020, DSN would have to support twice as many missions as currently. In a written response to GAO’s report, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that, although “no mission had been unable to meet its mission requirements due to a lack of capability in the DSN, NASA shared GAO’s concerns about the future capacity and capabilities of the system.” She also noted that NASA had initiated a study to review the management structure for all of NASA’s space communications activities.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA’s Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements” (report no. GAO-06-445, Washington, DC, 27 April 2006), 2, 22, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06445.pdf (accessed 24 June 2010); Brian Berger, “GAO Warns Deep Space Network Ill-Equipped To Meet Future Demands,” Space News, 23 May 2006.)
NASA’s Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, Lisa J. Porter, announced a comprehensive restructuring of NASA’s aeronautics research programs. Speaking at an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference, Porter stated, “NASA is returning to long-term investment in cutting-edge fundamental research in traditional aeronautics disciplines. We are investing in research for the long term in areas that are appropriate to NASA’s unique capabilities and meeting our charter of addressing national needs and benefiting the public good.” The four major programs restructured were fundamental aeronautics, aviation safety, airspace systems, and the aeronautics test program. Research in fundamental aeronautics was concentrated in four areas: hypersonics, supersonics, subsonic fixed wing, and subsonic rotary wing. The goal for research in fundamental aeronautics would be to produce knowledge, data, and capabilities for both civilian and military applications, and design tools to benefit a broad range of air vehicles. Research in the aviation safety program would address four areas: aircraft aging and durability, integrated vehicle health management, and integrated resilient aircraft control. The primary research responsibility of the airspace system program would be the development of concepts, capabilities, and technologies for high-capacity, efficient, and safe airspace and airport systems. The aeronautics test program would focus on the strategic use, operations, and maintenance of NASA’s wind-tunnel and air-breathing propulsion test facilities at Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC).(NASA, “NASA Restructures Aeronautics Research,” news release 06-008, 12 January 2006, http://www.m\nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06008_ARMD_Restructuring.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Lisa J. Porter, “Reshaping NASA’s Aeronautics Program” (conference presentation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reno, Nevada, 12 January 2006).)
GAO released a report recommending that the U.S. Congress and the FAA reconsider the FAA’s roles and responsibilities regarding the burgeoning commercial space tourism industry. In 2004 Congress had made the FAA responsible for regulations to ensure the safety of space tourists. However, Congress had also limited the FAA’s ability to regulate crew and passenger safety until 2012, so that safety regulations would not stifle the budding space tourism industry. The GAO report noted that, although the FAA had performed well in its efforts to ensure that the space tourism industry followed safe procedures, the industry’s rapid growth required the FAA to take a greater role than anticipated in creating safety regulations to for the period before 2012. The report suggested that, to accomplish its goal, the FAA would need additional funds and personnel, including staff with sufficient expertise to evaluate complex launch technologies. Furthermore, the report recommended that Congress reconsider the FAA’s dual role in both regulating and promoting the industry, warning that this dual role presented a potential conflict of interest. The FAA and the Department of Transportation agreed with the report’s findings and recommendations.(Mike Toner, “FAA Put on Guard for Space Tourism,” Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 30 October 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Space Launches: FAA Needs Continued Planning and Monitoring To Oversee the Safety of the Emerging Space Tourism Industry” (report no. GAO-07-16, Washington, DC, 20 October 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0716.pdf (accessed 20 April 2010).)
