NASA’s Kepler astronomy probe, named for Johannes Kepler, who had published the laws of planetary motion in 1609, successfully launched into space from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, aboard a United Launch Alliance Delta 2, at 10:49 p.m. (EST). Kepler’s mission was to identify the first Earth-size planets orbiting stars at distances that would permit water to pool on the planet’s surface. Scientists had designed the craft to search for brightness variations in more than 100,000 stars in the Cygnus-Lyra region. Astronomers study brightness variations because, when a planet passes in front of a star, the star’s light appears to dim, enabling them to determine the diameter of the transiting object. The Kepler mission would use a photometer to monitor the same star field over approximately three-and-a-half years, allowing multiple observations of transits of exoplanets in orbits of as long as one year. Ideally, the Kepler probe would observe an object at least three times to confirm the measurement of its orbital period. Mission scientists placed the 1,052-kilogram (2,319-pound) craft in a 372.5-day solar orbit to help the probe maintain a stable pointing attitude.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Rockets to Space in Search of Other Earths,” news release 09-052, 7 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-052_Kepler_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665, 1 April 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx665.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Joel Achenbach, “Kepler Lifts Off, on Age-Old Quest: Space Telescope Seeks To Find Other Earths on 31⁄2- Year Mission,” Washington Post, 9 March 2009.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced the designation of three university and industry partners to serve as national hypersonic science centers. The centers’ task would be to promote research in air-breathing propulsion, materials and structures, and boundary-layer control for aircraft able to travel at Mach 5. NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission in Washington, DC, and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s Office of Scientific Research in Arlington, Virginia, had selected the partners from more than 60 contenders. The University of Virginia in Charlottesville would host the National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion and would lead a team specializing in air-breathing propulsion research; Texas A&M University in College Station would be the National Center for Hypersonic Laminar-Turbulent Transition and would specialize in boundary layer−control research; and Teledyne Scientific and Imaging LLC in Thousand Oaks, California, would host the National Hypersonic Science Center for Hypersonic Materials and Structures. James L. Pittman, Principal Investigator for the Hypersonics Project of NASA’s Fundamental Aeronautics Program at NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, remarked that NASA’s joint investment with the Air Force of US$30 million over five years would “support basic science and applied research that improves our understanding of hypersonic flight.” Pittman stated that the establishment of the centers signaled a major commitment to advancing foundational hypersonic research and to training the next generation of hypersonic researchers.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Designate National Hypersonic Science Centers,” news release 09-050, 5 March 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of four proposals to study the risks of space radiation for humans living in space. NASA selected the proposals of New York University School of Medicine, the University of Texas Medical Branch in Houston, Loma Linda University in California, and Georgetown University in Washington, DC. The four institutions would become NASA Specialized Centers of Research. With the establishment of this program, NASA would invest US$28.4 million in the four institutions over a five-year period. At the centers, researchers would study carcinogenesis and the risks of spaceflight to the central nervous system, helping them to begin to develop effective radiation countermeasures for space travelers.(NASA, “NASA Selects Four Proposals To Study Space Radiation Risks,” news release 09-126, 2 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-126_Radiation_Risk_Proposals.html (accessed 22 July 2011). 82 Associated Press, “Delayed Spacewalk Ends Successfully,” 8 June 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Spacewalkers Prime Space Station for New Docking Port,” Space.com, 5 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6799-spacewalkers-prime- space-station-docking-port.html (accessed 3 August 2011).)
