Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, speaking before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, said that although science had become a determining factor in national and international events, its effectiveness was hampered because educated men did not understand science. Yet, he said, science was truly a part of the humanities; “Who in our times can make an adequate criticism of life without knowledge of the ideals, the methods, the dynamics of science?”
Northrop T-38 (Talon) jet flown 842.6 miles per hour to claimed world speed record for women, by Jacqueline Cochran at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif.
Workshop: Telemetry in Europe” at National Telemetering Conference in Chicago brought seven European representatives together with American scientists in working out unofficial preliminary standardization planning on bands, means, and frequencies.
Gold-plated capsule of Discoverer XXXV recovered after 18 orbits in midair over Fern Island by C-130 aircraft, Capt. James F. McCullough, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. It was the 10th recovery from orbit in the Discoverer series and the 1st recovery observed from the ground.
Marine helicopter crews conducted extensive tests to perfect water recovery of Mercury capsule at Langley Air Force Base.
Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 a record speed of 2,905 miles per hour, topping his mark of 2,275 miles per hour set on February 7 with interim engine.
NASA announced that Dr. Hiden T. Cox, executive director of the American Institute of Biological Sciences, would become Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, and “charged with developing NASA policies to insure that the character, the intent, and the results of America’s space effort are correctly and adequately interpreted to the people of this country and the world.”
USAF Discoverer XXVII destroyed by range safety officer 60 seconds after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Full Tass text of Marshal R. V. Malinovsky’s speech on October 23 as it appeared in Soviet dailies, showed no statement to the effect that the Soviets had perfected an antimissile missile, as had been reported by Moscow correspondents of the American press.
NASA awarded contracts to Convair, Lockheed, and North American for studies of space vehicles beyond the Saturn class, having first-stage thrust of 6 to 12 million pounds.
An F4H Phantom II piloted by Lt. Col. Robert B. Robinson (USMC), claimed a new world speed record at Edwards Air Force Base, averaging 1,606.324 miles per hour.
USAF Discoverer XX placed in polar orbit with 300-pound recovery capsule from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
Massive Soviet air show over Tushino Airport in Moscow, on Soviet Air Force Day, which demonstrated that U.S.S.R. had continued development of all classes of military aircraft.
Ten scientific organizations recommended that the American Association for the Advancement of Science create a new section to deal with scientific information and communication. The problem was seen to be one of an overabundance of information not accessible for the scientist, particularly in interdisciplinary science. Only three other new sections have been created in the American Association for the Advancement of Science in this century.
Italian Air Force crew fired Jupiter IRBM from Atlantic Missile Range, the third such launching.
Air Force Systems Command formed a Bioastronautics Division, effective October 1, to consolidate all USAF applied research in this area into a single organization. School of Aerospace Medicine, now under Air Training Command, becomes a part of Air Force Systems Command.
Second Atlas ICBM launched by SAC crew, from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
X-15 flown more than 40 miles into space—217,000 feet— and reached a speed of 3,647 miles per hour, Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. This was above 99.9 percent of Earth’s atmosphere; pilot’s heartbeat and respiration rose to twice above normal; and outside skin temperature of the X-15 rose to 900° F. on reentry.
Maj. Robert Rushworth, U.S. Air Force, flew X-15 to 2,820 miles per hour, with bottom tailfin missing in programed malfunctions for test of stability and control.
USAF Discoverer XXV placed into polar orbit by Thor-Agena B, at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.
Lt. Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of Air Force Systems Command, said that plans to orbit a monkey in Discoverer XXII (March 30) were canceled at the last minute, and that such plans had not been rescheduled.
X-15 (No. 1) on its first flight with new XLR-99 engine was flown to 2,735 miles per hour by Comdr. Forrest S. Petersen, U.S. Navy, at Edwards Air Force Base.
In a ceremony at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., the USAF graduated its first class of five pilot-engineers from its school for space pilots. Graduates were awarded advanced technical degrees.
Two U.S. Air Force officers were sealed in space simulator for 17-day test of man’s reaction to almost pure oxygen at 35,000 feet altitude, at School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks Air Force Base, Tex. Emerging on August 25, Lts. B. Appel and J. Slider had eaten dehydrated food, drunk water processed from the atmosphere and their own body wastes, and were pronounced in good physical condition.
Air Force Office of Aerospace Research (OAR) announced that its Office of Scientific Research had awarded 139 basic research grants and contracts worth almost $8 million so far this fiscal year.
Thomas F. Dixon of North American Aviation was appointed Director of NASA’s Office of Launch Vehicle Programs (OLVP), effective September 18, 1961. He replaced Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, U.S. Air Force, who returned to military duty as Vice Commander of AFBSD (AFSC), having served as first Director of OLVP since December 16, 1959.
USAF established a Council of Scientists to be comprised of senior civilian scientists of major Air Force organizations, Dr. Leonard S. Sheingold as Chairman.
USAF Bomarc B launched from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., on command from SAGE Center at Montgomery, Ala., destroyed supersonic Regulus launched from Venice, Fla.
Operational Atlas raised from emplacement and fired in an operational test exercise at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
USAF awarded an additional $52 mlliion contract to North American Aviation for development of a prototype B-70 bomber, bringing to $267 million the amount allocated for the B-70.
Italian Air Force personnel fired Jupiter IRBM in training launch at Cape Canaveral.
First silo launching of an ICBM, a USAF Titan at Vandenberg Air Force Base.
First Northrop T-38 supersonic jet trainer was delivered to USAF Air Training Command at Randolph Air Force Base, Tex.
USIA reported that U.S. space achievements were a leading item in their overseas information program and covered all media. USIA concluded: “The policy of ‘openness’ observed in both U.S. manned space flights during the year dramatized the basic difference between the American open society and the Soviet closed society, and drew widespread approval from commentators throughout the free world. The availability of full information about the events through all news media, together with the presence of foreign correspondents—who gave firsthand, on-tlie-spot coverage—enabled oversea audiences to achieve a high degree of self-identification with one. of the greatest adventures of our times.”
Air Force reorganized its headquarters staff to reflect creation of Air Force Systems Command (AFSC), which made the Deputy Chief of Staff for Development, Lt. Gen. Roscoe C. Wilson, Deputy Chief of Staff for Research and Technology.
USAF Discoverer XXVI orbited from Vandenberg Air Force Base, carrying instrument capsule to be recovered after 32 polar orbits and 4 days. Of the 25 previous Discoverers, 17 had gone into orbit and 15 carried recovery capsules, of which 5 had been recovered.
Tiros II completed 4 months in orbit and continued to provide useful cloud picture and radiation data. Signal from Tiros II was used on 1,763d orbit to trigger dynamite to break ground for new RCA Space Environment Center at Princeton, N.J.
Convair B-58 Hustler, jet bomber powered by four GE J-79 engines, broke six world speed records, Maj. H. J. Deutsch-endorf, U.S. Air Force, as pilot. On first closed-course run, the Hustler averaged 1,200.194 miles per horn, and it averaged 1,061.808 miles per hour on both runs carrying a payload of 4,408 pounds and a crew of three.
USAF B-58 Hustler flown from Carswell Air Force Base, Tex., to Le Bourget, Paris, in record 6 hours 15 minutes, covering distance from New York to Paris in 3 hours 20 minutes. This flight commemorated the 34th anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s transatlantic crossing on May 20-21, 1927, and the opening of the 24th Paris International Air Show.
Dr. von Karman and some of his associates organized the Astronautics Foundation, Inc., in Washington, D.C., to enable U.S. individuals and corporations to support through this nonprofit foundation various cooperative international activities.
Representatives of 30 American aerospace firms in Europe formed an informal organization known as U.S. Aerospace Industries in Europe.
USAF announced plans to institute special course for the instruction of space pilots at Edwards Air Force Base, and it was activated in June.
Tass announced that the “Air Force Herald” would be retitled “Aviation and Cosmonautics” (Aviatsiga I Kosmo-navtika), beginning in January 1962.
Dr. Carl Sagen, of University of California (Berkeley), disputed the “space seed” life theory in American Association for the Advancement of Science paper. “Panspermic” theory did not seem plausible in the light of the fierce environment of space and the vastness of the universe, he said.
Studies of “unconventional” rockets using liquid fuels in the thrust range from 2 to 24 million pounds announced by NASA; 2 contracts being carried out by Aerojet-General and Rocketdyne Division of North American Aviation.
Twelfth Congress of the International Astronautical Federation held in Washington, D.C.
General Curtis E. LeMay, Chief of Staff, U.S. Air Force, said in interview with U.S. News & World Report: “I think we’re at the period of space technology that we were in aeronautical technology along about 1914. At that time no one could predict the type of weapon systems that the airplane was going to produce, or the transportation system that it would eventually produce. As a matter of fact, it was pretty much a laughing stock—a very expensive toy. “We, of course, initially did a very poor job in our development program to advance the science of aeronautics in this country. I hope we do a better job in space. At the present time we can’t predict what will eventually come out of research in space in the way of weapon systems or commercial vehicles or any other use that we might put space to. I am sure that men are going out into space. I’m sure that they’ll find useful things to do out there, and I’m sure that, unless something is done to preclude it, they’ll find things to fight over out there, too.”
NASA selected North American Aviation to develop an upper stage (S-II) for an Advanced Saturn launch vehicle to be used on both manned and unmanned missions.
Speaking at the Air Force Association convention in Philadelphia, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of the Air Force Systems Command, said that “the United States has been notably slow to recognize the military application of new inventions. Two of the most significant inventions of this century— the airplane and the liquid-fuel rocket—are American inventions. Yet in each case their first application was made by other nations.” Gen. Schriever also stated: “We should recognize that there is no inherent difference between basic military and nonmilitary space technology. What really matters is not the technology but the intent * * * space power must become a vital part of our national strength and security.”
National Aeronautic Association appointed committee headed by Maj. Gen. Albert Boyd, U.S. Air Force (retired), to program U.S. efforts to break world aircraft records now held by other nations.
X-15 flown to unofficial record 2,275 miles per hour by Maj. Robert White, U.S. Air Force.
Lt. Hunt Hardisty, U.S. Navy, pilot, and Lt. Earl H. DeEsch flew an F4H Phantom II over the 3-kilometer course of Holloman Air Force Base, N. Mex., and averaged 902.769 miles per hour for a new world’s record for speed at low altitude.
Prof. Martin Schwarzschild, of Princeton University, named by the National Academy of Sciences to receive the Henry Draper Medal for his work as director of ONR’s Project Stratoscope (produced clear photos of the structure of the surface of the Sun).
The space surveillance system (Spasur) was formally commissioned at the Nava] Weapons Laboratory, Dahlgren, Va., under the operational control of the North American Defense Command.
Capsule of Discoverer XXVI snatched at 15,000 feet during final descent after 32 polar orbits. Midair recovery by C-119, Capt. Jack Wilson, U.S. Air Force, as pilot, was fourth so performed. Capsule carried undisclosed payload.
dod opened Defense Research Office in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to coordinate basic scientific research throughout Latin America. Col. Leonard M. Orman (usa) headed the office and the Army Element, and Lt. Col. Charles J. Lyness (usaf) headed the Air Force Element. Also established, near the Defense Research Office, were nsf and nih offices. U.S. Department of State would coordinate all the offices’ activities.
usaf released unclassified “U.S. Air Force Space Policy” Report to the House Armed Services Committee in executive session. It was reported as saying that the U.S. must “recognize the peril” of Soviet space supremacy, take the lead in military space technology, and called for continued close cooperation with nasa.
afsc formed the Research and Technology Division, Provisional, to “plan and manage afsc’s basic research, applied research, and advanced technology and . . . create a broad base of research and technology for rapid use in the development of Air Force aerospace systems.”
usaf sac crew launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in routine training exercise.
U.S. Army’s Nike-Zeus successfully intercepted icbm target in first test involving decoys, dod announced. Atlas icbm with its decoys was launched from Vandenberg afb toward Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, from which two Nike-Zeus were launched; one of the antimissile missiles had to be destroyed after launching, but the other successfully completed the mission.
usaf launched two Atlas D missiles in quick succession from Vandenberg afb toward impact area 5,000 miles away. Officials said the tests, the first demonstration of a multiple countdown capability, were successful.
usaf awarded contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for development of RS-70 prototypes, including fabrication of three aircraft.
usaf discoverer xxxvu launched from Vandenberg afb but did not attain orbit.
Boeing-Vertol was selected by the Air Force to build long-range helicopter capable of carrying a payload of at least 5,000 lbs. for 200 nautical miles or 2,400 lbs. for 700 miles. Modification of Vertol 107 helicopter, now in production for civil use, would satisfy usaf’s Specific Operational Requirement 190.
usaf Atlas F icbm was destroyed by tne range safety officer a few seconds after launch from Vandenberg afb.
norad announced Soviet manned spacecraft vostok iii and iv crossed the North American continent 70 times during their double orbital trips August 11-14. norad space detection and tracking system tracked the flights for 112 earth orbits.
Addressing American Association for the Advancement of Science, Dr. Loren K. Eiseley, anthropology prof, at Univ. of Pennsylvania, said that space defense efforts are “consuming an enormous amount of our wealth and energy. . . . Let a few generations go by, and so much of society’s wealth and employment will be wrapped up in this sort of thing that you will get-—as we are beginning to get now—a vested interest in war. . . . [The space/defense effort is] a kind of gigantic tumor. When these emerge, you not alone run the danger of weakening society, but also encounter the fact that these tumors grow and become monstrous; to reduce them to normal size becomes difficult if not impossible. . . .” Dr. Eiseley predicted the massive emphasis on space and armaments might lead to downfall of modern civilization; he compared the preoccupation with space and armaments to Imperial Rome’s colonialism, Ancient Egypt’s tomb and pyramid building, and India’s elaborate caste system which contributed to downfall of those ancient civilizations.
In response to statement by Col. Gen. Pyetr Braiko, Soviet Air Force chief of staff, regarding U.S.S.R. lead over U.S. in aircraft records, National Aeronautic Association president Martin M. Decker announced that Soviet claim was based on January 1, 1961, figures. At that time, U.S.S.R. held 176 world records— 113 aircraft, and 63 parachute; U.S. held 106 world records—all aircraft. By July 20, 1962, U.S.S.R. still led U.S. in total world records (including parachute), but U.S. held more aircraft records than U.S.S.R. Parachute records: 83 U.S.S.R. to 8 U.S.; aircraft records: 112 U.S.S.R. to 161 U.S.
Cosmonaut Gherman Titov arrived in New York City for 8-day visit to the U.S. in conjunction with cospar sessions in Washington.	_ _
Reported that hundreds of Soviet mathematics textbooks are being published in English, and that many of them are being used in American universities.
usaf Titan I icbm launched by military crew at Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Unidentified usaf payload launched with Thor-Agena vehicle from Vandenberg afb.
International Association of Machinists rejected contract offer of Aerojet-General Corp. and began a strike. In Washington, a Presidential committee opened talks on labor dispute between IAM and the Boeing Co. United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., had accepted a three-year contract, thus averting strike.
Six candidates were selected by the usaf for Dyna-Soar, including four Air Force and two nasa test pilots. Dyna-Soar is designed to be boosted into orbit by a Titan III.
Soviet Foreign Ministry told U.S. Embassy in Moscow that the “Soviet Union will not undertake any action that might hinder the flight of the American spaceman Walter Schirra.” The Soviets were replying to U.S. note requesting the U.S.S.R. to refrain from nuclear tests during the MA-8 flight.
First known antimissile missile interception of icbm nose cone announced by dod, the interception of an Atlas nose cone launched from Vandenberg afb high over the Pacific by a 3-stage Nike-Zeus fired from Kwajalein. Interception of 16,000-mph nose cone by experimental Nike-Zeus was regarded as comparable to a bullet hitting a bullet, although dod did not state whether physical contact had been made.
Preliminary results of solar-wind experiments by mariner ii were reported by Dr. Conway W. Snyder of jpl at American Geophysical Union meeting. Experiment measured velocity, density, and temperature of solar plasma using electrostatic analyzer onboard the probe. Results showed energies of gas atoms in solar wind are very low as compared to cosmic-ray particles, but number of solar-wind particles is about a billion times greater than number of cosmic rays, making total energy content of solar wind much greater than of cosmic rays. Solar flares eject plasma clouds which may have higher velocity, density, and temperature than undisturbed solar wind—which mariner ii found to be little less than 250 mi. per sec. velocity, 10-20 particles per cu. in. density, and few hundred thousand deg. temperature, mariner ii also found solar wind appears to be “supersonic”—and supersonic effects such as plasma shockwave ahead of the earth and other planets would be objects of study of future nasa space vehicles.
sac combat missile crew launched successful Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California.
Radiation research results reported by George M. Woodwell of Brookhaven National Laboratory to American Association for the Advancement of Science showed that plants, like animals, vary in sensitivity to radiation. Large plants that reproduce slowly, such as trees, appear more susceptible to radiation than less complex plants, such as algae and fungi. “. . . The hypothesis seems tenable that small organisms with wide ecological ampll-tudes and high rates of reproduction—in short, weeds and other organisms frequently considered pestiferous because of their persistence under persecution—have survival advantage under conditions of long-term exposure to ionizing radiation over large organisms with longer life cycles.”
In an address before the American Management Association Forum in New York, Maj. Gen. Robert J. Friedman, afsc Comptroller, spoke on “Management of the Decision-Making Process.” He pointed out that the Air Force Systems Command was an organization of 60,000 employees with an annual budget of seven billion dollars to administer, afsc has, he said, over 33,000 active contracts involving companies of all sizes and in all states. Gen. Friedman discussed the “boundaries” within which afsc must manage its decision-making processes: (1) actions of the military competitors of the U.S.; (2) the constraints of limited funds; (3) the number of alternative courses available in the solution of technical, strategic, and tactical military problems; (4) limitations of time; and (5) the availability of information and competence at various organizational levels within one jurisdiction.
The Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched a 150-foot balloon made of .001-inch-thick plastic. The test, intended to provide data for better research balloons, would send the balloon to an altitude of 117,000 feet for a fifty-hour period.
Aviatrix Jerrie Cobb told Women’s Advertising Club of Washington, D.C.: “We’re bypassing the one scientific space feat we could accomplish now—putting the first woman in orbit. . . .”
usaf 564th Strategic Missile Squadron of sac successfully launched an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb.
“American Roulette 500 Miles Up” was the title of the article by Sir Bernard Lovell in the Sunday Observer (London"), which repeated his arguments against the planned nuclear explosions by the U.S. over Johnston Island in June and July.
In testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee Air Force Chief of Staff LeMay requested additional funds to speed the development of the RS-70. Asking for nearly three times the Administration’s budget request, or $491 million, LeMay said that limiting funds “wollid lose more than a year” beyond the 1967 target date for the first three prototypes. “This program has been slowed down at least four years. We have delayed and delayed until there is practically no risk in it now.”
Awards for 1961 announced by the American Helicopter Society: first Igor I. Sikorsky International Trophy to Mikhail L. Mil of the Soviet Union; Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Brig. Gen. Robert R. Williams, U.S. Army Aviation Center Commander; Capt. Wm. J. Kossler Award to'Air Rescue Service, mats; Frederick L. Feinberg Award to Lt. Col. Francis M. Carney (usaf) ; and the Grover E. Bell Award to the engineering organization of Sikorsky Aircraft.
faa released memorandum dated December 29, 1961, stating that Stanford Research Institute’s radiotelescope was a hazard to air navigation. The first of three such telescopes to be built in the U.S. by sri extends 90 feet too high for Moffett Field air traffic and 128 feet too high for Palo Alto Airport traffic.
American Meteorological Society issued statement on the implications of the control of weather and climate, which endorsed the resolution adopted in the United Nations on December 20, 1961. U.N. resolution called for a cooperative international effort to improve weather prediction and to explore the possiblli-ties of weather control and climate modification.
dod announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted Atlas icbm over the Pacific Ocean. Target Atlas was launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., and two Nike-Zeus missiles were fired from Kwajalein Island, the first Nike-Zeus making the successful intercept. This was second successful intercept-test by Army’s Nike-Zeus.
Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) began negotiating a new type of three-year contracts for basic research with Westinghouse Electric, ibm, and rca in the solid-state field. This was the first time that basic research had been contracted on any other basis than one year at a time, is designed to provide more continuity and certainty of completion of research projects. As under the previous system, osr and industry each bear roughly half of the costs of the research.
Soviet News Agency Tass announced that the U.S.S.R. was again resuming nuclear tests in the atmosphere, quoting an official Soviet Government statement, in part: “The explosions of the American nuclear bombs above Christmas and Johnston Islands have produced their echo—they have made Soviet nuclear tests in reply inevitable.”
United Auto Workers (uaw) of North American and Ryan Aviation voted to delay walkout for 60 days as requested by the President, thus joining International Association of Machinists (iam) which had previously accepted the 60-day delay in planned strike against General Dynamics (Convair) and Lockheed.
Nine Soviet cosmonauts were lost in space between February 1959 and October 1961, it was reported by Oton Ambroz of North American Newspaper Alliance (nana). Article, relying heavily on European sources, claimed five cosmonauts were sent on orbital space flights from which they did not return; two cosmonauts, a man and woman, orbited in a single spacecraft May 17, 1961, but did not return; and two cosmonauts, man and woman, were sent on lunar flight Oct. 14, 1961. Conversations of the dual flights were reportedly monitored by Western receivers; signal from a single cosmonaut ("World—S.O.S.—S.O.S.”) was received Nov. 28, 1960. Other flights were based on reception of physiological, tracking, and other signals. None of the flights was reported) by U.S.S.R. andjjNASA had no comment on the report.
National Council of the Federation of American Scientists adopted a policy statement that space activities should be classified only when there are compelling military reasons.
Aerospace Research Pilot School began a seven-month course to train seven Air Force and one Navy officers for future space missions and projects. This was the second space-training course given at Edwards afb, Calif., but the first for potential “operational” personnel.
Announced that 1962 Daniel Guggenheim Medal for achievement in aviation would be awarded posthumously to James H. Kindle-berger, late board chairman of North American Aviation, Inc.
Pertinent facts of human evolution should be included in preparation for interstellar communication, according to Prof. Robert Ascher of Cornell Univ. dept of anthropology and his wife, Marcia, assistant professor in Ithaca College dept, of mathematics and physics. Models of primitive man’s efforts in surmounting barriers can be used as theoretical background for thinking about !>ossible civilizations on other planets. Problem of watching and istening for signals across space and developing means to reach source of those signals is essentially same as problem of prehistoric man making contact with other races or civilizations. Ascher also declared whenever two civilizations have made contact, conquest by dominant group has followed. Models of those communications should be constructed and studied, Ascher said, and applied to future interstellar communications.
E. I. DuPont de Nemours & Co. announced it had awarded grants totaling $1,693,300 to 161 American universities and colleges to strengthen the teaching of science and related subjects, to promote fundamental research, and to aid facilities for education or research in science and engineering.
Through the official Soviet newspaper Pravda, the U.S.S.R. asserted that the U.S. was endangering an international program for cooperation in the use and exploration of outer space by failing to accept the Soviet drafts of codes to regulate activities in space, and by planning to undertake a program for the military use of space. Pravda reported: The “United States thus had left the door open for carrying the armament race into outer space. It seems that American representatives have come to Geneva not so much to negotiate on the peaceful exploration of space as to justify by legal pettifogging the Pentagon’s militaristic plans in space and these plans already are too well known.”
usaf combat missile crew launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., during President Kennedy’s visit to the missile base, the first time an American President had witnessed a live launching of an icbm.
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, Commander of afsc, said in a speech at Mississippi State College: “The Materials Laboratories at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base developed the basic material and structures used in ‘sandwich construction’ of aircraft; titanium alloy as a structural material; plastic, ceramics, and metallic alloys to withstand the high temperatures encountered during re-entry into the earth’s atmosphere.”
Office of Aerospace Research announced scientists at Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl) would conduct the “most thorough study of atmospheric ozone ever made,” a concentrated one-year series of observations with more than 700 balloons carrying sensitive ozone meters into the upper atmosphere. New 11-station network, from Canal Zone to Greenland, would participate in project. To begin in January 1963, project was expected to yield data on nature of ozone.
United Aerospace Workers and the International Association of Machinists served a notice of intention to strike on July 23 “unless an honorable settlement is reached by that time” against five major space companies—Lockheed, North American, Douglas, General Dynamics, and Aerojet. Fifty-one plants, test sites, and missile bases would be affected by walkout of 125,000	union members.
United Auto Workers employed by North American Aviation, Inc., voted to defeat union shop proposal, iam workers at General Dynamics/Convair and uaw workers at Ryan Aeronautical Co. would also vote on the proposal.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center awarded $1 mlliion contract to North American Aviation, Inc., for a paraglider development program.
usaf Minuteman icbm fired in combat-ready test from Vandenberg afb, Calif., range safety officer destroying missile shortly after launch.
Final usaf Atlas icbm squadron declared operational at Plattsburgh afb, N.Y., bringing total operational Atlas force to 123. Additional composite squadron of Atlases was being maintained at Vandenberg afb, partly for r&d and partly for training use. December 19-21: President Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, meeting in Nassau, reached defense agreement designating Polaris missile to replace the Skybolt air-launched missiles as Britain’s primary nuclear deterrent weapon. Under terms also to be offered to France, Britain and France would receive Polaris missiles from U.S. and eventually these would form the backbone of a nato nuclear force.
usaf Atlas F missile flown 5,000 miles from Vandenberg afb carrying a special package of cameras to help locate and correct propulsion problems encountered in previous tests, the missile meeting all test objectives.
nasa announced signing of detailed contract with Space and Information Division of North American Aviation, Inc., for development and production of Saturn S-II stage. The $319,922,328 contract, largest single contract ever awarded by nasa, covered production of nine live flight stages, one inert flight stage, and several ground-test units for the Advanced Saturn vehicle.
Jacqueline Auriol set a new women’s international air speed record for 100 kilometers (62.10 miles) at Istres, France, flying a French-built Mirage III jet at 1,149.23 mph. Previous record, held by American aviatrix Jacqueline Cochran, was 783.02 mph.
explorer x detected a “shadow” on the side of the earth facing away from the sun; in this shadow there is an absence of the solar “wind”, a belt of plasma moving out from the sun at about 200 miles per second but deflected around the earth by the earth’s magnetic field and creating a cone-shaped “shadow” some 100,000 miles across at its larger end. The explorer x findings were reported to the annual meeting of the American Physical Society in New York by Dr. Bruno Rossi of mit.
usaf Atlas E successfully test-fired from pmr to impact near Wake Island, the second successflli firing of an Atlas E from Vandenberg AFB.
Dr. James B. Weddell of North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div. announced development of new technique to predict solar flares up to 35 days in advance with 70 per cent accuracy. Dr. Weddell announced his new forecasting technique at symposium on radiation hazards, Gatlinburg, Tenn., cosponsored by nasa, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and American Nuclear Society.
Development of new type of laser by General Electric and International Business Machine researchers was reported in American Physical Society’s Physical Review Letters and American Institute of Physics’ Applied Physics Letters. Called “injection laser,” new crystal laser was powered by electrical current; previous solid lasers used strong flash lamps as energy source. At least 10 times more efficient than existing lasers, injection laser was expected to enable engineers to broadcast audio messages on the beams of light and to modulate the brightness of the light according to voice, television, or other pattern. Researchers anticipated that single laser beam could transmit a million telephone messages or a thousand television channels.
usaf Minuteman icbm exploded within seconds after launch attempt from Vandenberg afb, Calif.
Stars may devote % of their lifetime energy to production of neutrinos, according to Dr. Hongyee Chiu of Yale and nasa’s Institute for Space Studies, speaking before the American Physical Society in New York. Neutrinos are among the most elusive of atomic particles, having no weight and no electrical charge, passing through matter with little chance of being stopped and with minimum interaction. Dr. Chiu theorized that the universe may have once been made up entirely of neutrinos which interacted to produce other particles and elements and that eventually the universe may return to neutrinos.
Two new sources of radiation in the Milky Way had been discovered by usaf Aerobee probe on June 18, physicist Riccardo Giacconi announced at Third International Symposium on X-Ray Optics and X-Ray Microanalysis, Stanford University. Giacconi said that knowledge of x-ray emissions was valuable because this kind of radiation was “intimately connected with the creation and behavior of cosmic rays and the properties of a galaxy. . . .” Discovery and investigation of such x-rays would “further understanding of the origin and dynamics of the universe . . . and may have a bearing on the study of communication of matter between galaxies.” A second probe was planned for launch on October 2, to investigate the discoveries.
usaf Atlas-E icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, the first such launch from this base.
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch by sac crew at Vandenberg afb on training mission, usaf spokesman said no one was injured and no facilities were damaged.
Radio Moscow quoted Mikhail Yarov-Yarovoy, senior scientist at U.S.S.R. Astronomical Institute, as saying: _ “We learn today that America’s space vehicle, the Mariner II, has passed quite close to Venus. The successful launching and the reception of radio signals from such a great distance indicate that American scientists and engineers have achieved more and more in conquering space. “We congratulate our American colleagues.”
usaf Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif., launching conducted by 12-man combat crew of sac’s 565th Strategic Missile Squadron from Warren afb, Wyo.
Tenth anniversary of Livermore Branch of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, University of California. Established to “help cope with problems involved in maintaining American superiority in nuclear deterrence,” the laboratory devoted about half of its effort to weapons research and the remainder to peaceful uses of atomic energy.
President Kennedy made a statement to the press on the lawn of the White House, expressing the “great happiness and thanksgiving of all of us that Col. Glenn has completed his trip .... “I also want to say a word for all those who participated with Col. Glenn in Canaveral. They have faced many disappointments and delays—the burdens upon them were great—but they kept their heads and made a judgment and I think their judgment has been vindicated. “We have a long way to go in this space race. We started late. But this is the new ocean, and I believe the United States must sail on it and be in a position second to none. “Some months ago I said that I hoped every American would serve his country. Today Col. Glenn served his, and we all express our thanks to him.”
Proposals to ban orbiting of nuclear weapons, and to seek international agreement on space activities irrespective of other disarmament measures were included in the final report of the second American Assembly—British Institute for Strategic Studies at Brighton, England.
Preliminary results of particle-flux-detectors onboard mariner ii were reported by Dr. L. A. Frank and Dr. H. R. Anderson at American Geophysical Union meeting, Stanford Univ. The instruments showed absence of particles near Venus, indicating the planet’s magnetic field does not extend out as far as trajectory of mariner ii; this observation was confirmed by onboard magnetometer. Cosmic-ray measurements during the probe’s interplanetary flight indicated cosmic-ray flux was a constant measurement throughout the flight (approximately 3.0 particles per sq. centimeter per sec.). High-energy solar particles were generally absent except for a single solar-flare event beginning Oct. 23; low-energy solar-particle counter detected this event and at least eight others. Total radiation dose recorded in Oct. 23 event was only about 0.24 roentgens inside ionization chamber’s 0.01-in.-thick steel wall, and radiation was very non-penetrating.
Titan I icbm was successfully fired 4,000 mi. down the pmr in test of recently modified ground support equipment. This was sixth Titan I launch from Vandenberg afb.
Studies conducted by American Airlines revealed that 78% of Americans have never traveled on commercial airliner, while 8 million use the airlines regularly (15% of these accounting for 64% of commercial air passengers).
Dr. Ross A. McFarland of Harvard University was awarded the Walter Boothby Award by the Aerospace Medical Assn, for outstanding research directed at the promotion of health and prevention of disease in professional airline pilots.
usaf Atlas F icbm was launched from a silo at Vandenberg afb in successful 5,000-mi. flight to vicinity of the Marshall Islands in the Pacific, the first Atlas F launch from an underground silo.
usaf announced “routine training launch” of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb by the 576th Strategic Missile Squadron.
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb down the Pacific Missile Range in routine training launch, (non Release 987-63)
sao crew launched a Titan I icbm froin Vandenberg afb, Calif., in a routine training launch. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/15/63)
A statement from the American Meteorological Society expressed the hope that the U.S. would continue to provide leadership in the challenging new field of meteorological rockets and urged support on an expanded and more enduring basis. The ams recommended that the national program should pursue three objectives: (1)	A U.S. Meteorological Rocket Network based on the existing network should be established and cooperative programs with other countries should be arranged. (2)	A first-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and at least 60 km. to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height should be produced. (3)	A second-generation meteorological rocket network capable of reliably probing the atmosphere between 30 and 100 km. or higher, to measure winds and either pressure or temperature or density as a function of height, and electron density above 60 km. should be established. (Bulletin of the AMS, May 1963)
Howard M. Weiss, nasa Director of Quality Assurance and Reliability, said total cost of the two Mariner shots, the second of which brought U.S. several firsts in knowledge of planet Venus, was $47 million. Weiss was addressing American Society of Quality Control, Southern Connecticut Section, in Bridgeport. (Bridgeport Post, 3/18/63)
Charles Michels, lrc scientist, described Lewis work with a “coaxial plasma-gun,” being studied as a method to propel future interplanetary spacecraft. Michels spoke before the American Physical Society in Cleveland, (lro Release 63-44, Lewis Chronology, 5)
American Geophysical Union, at annual meeting in Washington, adopted resolution urging that fcc protect Channel 37 for radioastronomy uses, fcc had received applications for operation of commercial TV on that channel in Paterson, N.J., and scientists feared that broadcasts from such station would interfere with research being performed with radiotelescope at Danville, HI. fcc had proposed in March to exclude for five years commercial stations on Channel 37 within 600 mi. of Danville and to limit nighttime hours that stations could broadcast on Channel 37. agu resolution asserted that the “needs of radio astronomy are not met by the limited protection” provided by fcc proposal and that the proposal “leaves unprotected nearly all of the active radio astronomy observatories in the United States.” {NYT, 4/22/63, 24)
usaf successfully launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight down the Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 12/23/63, 10.) . ...
Plans for orbiting 18 unhatched chicken eggs in Biosatellite were described at aaas meeting by Dr. G. N. Hoover, Chief of Life Sciences, North American Aviation, Inc. One of several Biosatellite experiments planned for life specimens, the experiment was expected to yield data on effects of weightlessness on incubating eggs. (Troan, Wash. Daily News, 12/30/63)
Titan II missile launched for first time from underground silo, in usaf test from Vandenberg afb. Re-entry vehicle landed in preselected target area and flight was described as a complete success. (upi, Wash. Post, 4/28/63, Al)
usaf accepted the first two F^C tactical fighter aircraft into the Air Force inventory in ceremonies at MacDill afb, Fla. The F—4C is the Air Force version of the Navy’s F^B, combines into one aircraft the capability for close air support, interdiction, and air superiority, (dod Release 1496-63)
President Lyndon B. Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress, his first major speech since assuming the Presidency on Nov. 22 following the assassination of President Kennedy: “The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our time .... “The dream of conquering the vastness of space—the dream of partnership across the Atlantic and across the Pacific as well— the dream of a Peace Corps in less developed nations—the dream of education for all of our children—the dream of jobs for all who seek them and need them—the dream of care for our elderly—the dream of an all-out attack on mental illness—and above all, the dream of equal rights for all Americans, whatever their race or color—these and other American dreams have been vitalized by his drive and by his dedication . . . .” (OR, 11/27/63, 21734)
usaf Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo in successful flight, (dod Release 767-63)
Ernest W. Brackett, Director, Procurement and Supply, at the NASA-Industry Programs Plans Conference, Washington, D.C., explained the role of small business in nasa contracting. “During fiscal year 1962 small business companies received 66 percent of the total number of contractual actions, large and small, placed by nasa. This small business share of nasa procurement amounted to approximately $125 million, or 12 percent of the total nasa procurement placed with all business firms . . . They are able to compete successfully for many of nasa’s contracts, particularly in furnishing components and supplies. During fiscal year 1962, of the hundred contractors who received the largest dollar value of nasa prime contracts, 24 were small business concerns. In those procurements where small business concerns submitted bids, they were successful in receiving 57 percent of the dollar value of the awards.” (Proceedings, nasa SP-29; Text)
Brig. Gen. Gerald F. Keeling, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Production and Procurement, said in address to American Ordnance Association meeting in Washington: “The fact that we will buy [for usaf] more than eight billion dollars worth of weapon systems, supplies, and services this fiscal year and will administer approximately 70,000 contracts for government purchases, which are administered by 57 field organizations, provides some idea of the sheer magnitude of afsc’s procurement management task. “A large majority of our funds is involved in weapon system acquisition contracts .... For the past two years the Air Force has undertaken a program of surveying certain selected contractors and related weapon systems. Two types of surveys are conducted. One type—called the Industrial Management Assistance Survey—looks at a particular contractor’s internal organization, management and operating practices as they affect all the Air Force contracts bemg performed. Nine of these surveys have now been completed. The second type is called the Systems Program Management Survey and looks at all aspects of a particular aerospace system at a given point in time, including an examination, as appropriate, of the prime, associate prime and major subcontractors involved. We have now completed 20 of .u;™ ----j UI19 DOAIllU vy pb VA 9U1 V xyy .	#	•	• “Altogether, we have identified some 37 prominent deficiencies in major areas of contractor management . . . .” (Text)
usaf announced routine training launch of Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 3/1/63, A6)
usaf launched Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb in successful routine training launch, (dod Release 987-63)
usaf announced routine launching of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb. ( upi, Wash. Post, 9/12/63)
Minuteman icbm successfully launched from underground silo, Vandenberg afb, by sac crew, seventh of series of Minuteman launchings down Pacific Missile Range. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 5/9/63)
Atlas missile was launched from Cape Canaveral in test of new slimsilhouette warhead intended to present less image on enemy radar screens. Atlas went out of control 2% min. after launch and fell into the Atlantic far short of its intended goal. This was the sixth successive failure of Atlas missiles, the previous five at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/29/63)
Senate unanimously passed a joint resolution authorizing a special medal to be struck in honor of Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (Ret.), one of the first military pilots in the U.S., chief of the Air Service of the American Expeditionary Force in World War I, and Chief of the Air Corps from 1931 to 1935. (CR, 6/27/63, 11203) June 28: nasa concurred in Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. selection of Radio Corp. of America as subcontractor for Lunar Excursion Module (lem) electronic subsystems and engineering support. ( nasa Release 63-143)
Ernie Smith, who made first civilian airplane flight to Hawaii from Oakland, Calif., on July 15, 1927, died in San Francisco. 2,393-mile flight took 25-hrs. 26-min. (AP, Wash. Post, 3/27/63)
French President Charles de Gaulle, speaking in press conference in Paris, referred to President Kennedy’s offer of Polaris missiles as joint defensive weapons for nato: “Nobody in the world, especially nobody in America, can say, if, where, when, how, and to what degree American atomic armaments will be employed to defend Europe. Therefore we will construct and if need be will employ our atomic force ourselves. “Of course, this does not exclude the combined action of our force with an analogous allied force of the same kind, but for us integration is unthinkable in this case. ... “We have neither the submarines to launch them [Polaris missiles] nor the nuclear warheads to arm them. By the time we have them, what good will the Polaris be? Without doubt, by then we will have our own missiles. For us, this matter has no present application. . . .”	(Wash. Post, 1/15/63, Al, A7)
usaf successfully launched a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the eighth successful Minuteman launch from the West Coast base. (NYT, 6/29/63, 8)
Ernest J. Sternglass, physicist at Westinghouse Research Laboratories, proposed theory at American Physical Society in New York that would offer a unified concept of nuclear and electrical forces, heretofore considered separate phenomena, and would reduce all matter to two particles—electron and positron. Sternglass hypothesized that all other particles found in atom (30 or more in recent years) are merely combinations and variations of negatively-charged electron and positively-charged positron. Simplest such grouping is single electron-positron pair, whirling near speed of light, which exhibits same properties as elementary particle known as neutral pi meson. Two such electron pairs, Sternglass said, exhibit properties of elementary particles K meson and Rho meson; other systems similarly account for all heavy mesons “within a few per cent of their observed values.” Combinations of electron-positron pairs with proton can explain other elementary particles classed as hyperons. Sternglass had assumed that Einstein’s special theory of relativity, which states that an object’s mass increases with its velocity, governs particles’ behavior; thus, if charged particles move fast enough and close enough in their orbits, they will generate sufficient force to hold atomic nucleus together. (Wash. Post, 1/25/63, A6)	_	,
In coordinating the military and civilian scientific and industrial efforts of the United States toward the development of aerospace weapon systems, afsc had managerial responsibility for some 40 per cent of the Air Force budget, or approximately 10 cents of each Federal dollar. (CR, 2/18/64, 2910) Through 1963: Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s ( apgc) Eglin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the “Project Firefly” program. The project involved intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and near space, (afsc Release, 312-R-114, Atch #2, 1/1/64, 1)
In American Univ. commencement address stressing action for world peace, President Kennedy said: “. . . Genuine peace must be the product of many nations, the sum of many acts. It must be dynamic, not static, changing to meet the challenge of each generation. For peace is a process—a way of solving problems . . . .” He announced his agreement with Prime Minister Macmillan and Chairman Khrushchev that “high-level discussions will shortly begin in Moscow looking toward early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty,” and declared that U.S. “does not propose to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere so long as other States do not do so. We will not be the first to resume . . . .” (Text, CR, 6/10/63,9870)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif., in successful flight down Pacific Missile Range. {M&R, 12/23/63, 10) ...
Report on laser research presented at meeting of American Physical Society by Robert W. Terhune, Ford Motor Co. physicist. Ford scientists had succeeded in altering laser’s ultraviolet-ray frequency to other frequencies, an achievement hailed as breakthrough toward using lasers for communications. {NYT, 4/24/63,18)
Air Force Systems Command and Air Force Logistics Command announced a joint program of data management applicable to all Air Force contracts from the two commands. Program calls for tight data control by project officer, selection of minimum essential data, line-iteming each data point in the contract, (afsc Release 310-R-87)
usaf launched Atlas E icbm on successful 4,000-mi. test-flight from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 810-63)
In Interstellar Communication, anthology of articles on man’s search for intelligent extraterrestrial life published by W. A. Benjamin, Inc., Dr. Freeman J. Dyson proposed that highly advanced civilization elsewhere in Milky Way galaxy may be using gravity machines instead of sunlight as principal power source. If a civilization on planet which orbits twin stars fired vehicle from planet toward twin stars so as to circle approaching star, vehicle would return with far more energy than initially; vehicle could then be recovered in manner exploiting the energy. Dr. Dyson is theoretical physicist at. Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, N.J. (Sullivan, NYT, 6/9/63)
afsc announced it launched more than 60 space experiments in FY 1963, encompassing following areas of study: aurora borealis; infrared spectrum of Agena engine plume; variations in earth’s magnetic field; effect of space environment on materials; impedance of near space; air density at satellite altitudes; earth’s albedo (whiteness) ; altitude of ozone layer; radio waves from outside solar system; emissions from upper atmosphere; thermal electricity; and space radiation. Spacecraft were launched with Atlas-Agena and Thor-Agena launch vehicles from Vandenberg afb and usaf facilities at Pt. Arguello. (Space Bus. Daily, 9/17/63, 400) _	.....
Speaking at American Institute of Chemical Engineers meeting in Buffalo, N.Y., engineers of Linde Co. described new process for making liquid hydrogen that would reduce its cost from $2 per pound to 35 or 40 cents per pound. (AP, NYT, 5/7/63, 11)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara sent telegram of congratulations to Maj. L. Gordon Cooper (usaf) : “Your Air Force leaders, Secretary Zuckert and General LeMay, and the entire Defense Department, join me in congratulating you on your record breaking achievement in behalf of our national space effort. “The scientific data that you have obtained will add tremendously to our store of knowledge about space. “You have earned the highest esteem of all Americans for your historic exploit.” (dod Release 710-63)
usaf launched Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb in flight some 5,000 mi. down Pacific Missile Range, (upi, Wash. Post, 8/31/63; M&R, 9/9/63,13)
First issue of Astronautics a/nd Aerospace Engineering, publication of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa), featured series of articles on manned orbital operations by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center personnel. (A&AE, 2/63)
usaf announced Titan II missile had been test-fired while locked in its 155-ft.-deep silo at Vandenberg afb. Firing of “brief” duration was to test the missile’s resistance to noise and vibration. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/11/63)
1963 Nobel Prize in Physics was announced in Stockholm to have been won jointly by American Prof. Maria Goeppert Mayer, of the Univ. of Calif. at La Jolla, and American Prof. Eugene Paul Wigner, of Princeton Univ., the former sharing her half of the Srize with German Prof. J. Hans D. Jensen, of the Univ. of [eidelberg. Mrs. Mayer and Prof. Jensen, working independently, devised nuclear models portraying the particles as arranged in levels or shelves which increase abruptly in number of particles at each level further out from the nucleus. Prof. Wigner was cited for devising symmetry principles explaining the interaction of the proton and neutron in accordance with the direction of their spinning motion. The prize in Chemistry was also announced, being awarded jointly to Italian Prof. Guilo Natta, of the Institute of Technology at Milan, and German Prof. Carl Ziegler, of the Max Planck Institute for Carbon Research in Mul-heim. They were cited for devising a system of controlling the polymerizing of simple hydrocarbons into large molecule substances. Their discovery had important commercial results, making possible the development of many kinds of plastics, synthetic detergents, antiknock mixtures for high-octane fuels, etc. {NYT, 11/6/63,1)
afsc announced awarding two six-month study contracts for operations analyses and preliminary design of long-range, low-level supersonic air-to-surface missile designated the Chemical Low Altitude Missile (clam). Recipients of the two $300,000 contracts were North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Division and Lockheed California Co. (afsc Release 39-107-104)
usaf conducted routine training launching of Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 844-63)
Dr. J. N. Bahcall of Cal Tech’s Kellog Radiation Laboratory outlined at American Physical Society meeting in Pasadena a proposed experiment to determine temperature of sun’s interior. A tank the size of an Olympic-size swimming pool, sunk at bottom of 5,000-ft. shaft drilled into the earth to screen cosmic rays, would be filled with 100,000 gals, of chlorine-37 isotopes. Neutrinos from sun bombarding the pool would change chlorine37 into argon-37. Measuring rate of change would help physicists determine solar temperature as well as sun’s structure and composition. (Becker, NTT, 12/20/63,31)
Dr. Jerome B. Wiesner, Science Advisor to the President, said in speech before Federation of American Scientists in Washington that the field of education was “probably the most backward field in our modem society” and that scientists were largely to blame. Pointing to “widespread lack of understanding” about science and technology, he said: “It is surprising that we scientists and technologists in universities who, in a sense, have made major contributions to the great revolution through which we are living, have failed to apply our methods to our own profession. “Modem teaching aids have been rarely employed, either in Seneral education or in the universities. The process of invention as been almost ignored. The most highly developed devices in common use are still the old-fashioned textbooks, the blackboard, the written examination . . . .” (Simons, Wash. Post, 4/22/63)	_	_	'
General B. A. Schriever (afsc) , addressing Waco Chamber of Commerce, referred generally to aerospace activities in Texas and specifically referred to nasa Manned Spacecraft Center at Houston: “Although the buildings are not yet completed, the Center has been operating for some time. Many nasa personnel are temporarily working in facilities at Ellington Air Force Base, and an air base group has been established to provide support for personnel at the Center. This is just one illustration of the fact that Air Force and nasa efforts in space are cooperative, not conflicting. They are complementary not competitive . . . .” (Text, afsc Release 32-R-19)
25th Minuteman icbm fired by usaf from Vandenberg afb made routine training flight downPMR. (M&R, 12/6/63,10)
Sixth Annual Robert H. Goddard Memorial Dinner, sponsored by the National Rocket Club, Washington, D.C. In address, Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson paid tribute to the “father of modern rocketry,” and said that those today who “understand the stakes of space” must help “the public to understand these stakes.” He urged that communications barriers among scientists, engineers, and politicians be abolished so that public support for public policy can be obtained. “Unless and until this is done,” said the Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council, “the technological community cannot justifiably be impatient with those who are chosen to represent and express the public’s own will.” In addition to honoring Mrs. Goddard, the National Rocket Club presented its annual awards: the Robert H. Goddard Memorial Trophy, its premiere award, to John H. Glenn, Jr., in recognition of the first U.S. manned orbital space flight; the Nelson P. Jackson Aerospace Award to the American Telephone and Telegraph Company for development and operation of telstar i; the National Rocket Club Award to the Radio-Television Industry (abc, cbs, mbs, and nbc) for “pioneering private enterprise efforts” under the U.S. open information coverage of the space program; the Astronautics Engineer Award to Jack Norval James of Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Technical Director of mariner ii. The First Robert H. Goddard Historical Essay Award was given to R. Cargill Hall of San Jose, Calif., for his prize essay on “World-Circling Spaceships—Satellite Studies in the U.S. During the 1940’s”; Honorable Mentions going to Wilfrid J. Mayo-Wells of Washington, D.C. (“Origins of Space Telemetry”) and Robert D. Roach of Buffalo, N.Y. (“The First Man-Rocket Belt”). The Robert H. Goddard Scholarship was awarded to Miss Marcia S. Miner, physics major at the American University. (Program)
A City of Los Angeles Commendation award was presented to Air Force Space Systems Division by Los Angeles mayor, The Honorable Samuel Yorty. The citation, in recognition of ssd’s contribution to the national space effort, was accepted by General Ben I. Funk, Commander. (A-N-AF Journal and Register, Jan., 1964)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert testified before Subcommittee on Investigations of Senate Committee on Government Operations that his own personal study of General Dynamics and Boeing Co. contract proposals for tfx convinced him that General Dynamics provided the most practical design and the most realistic cost, estimate. (Testimony)
Large fireball streaked across San Francisco Bay area sky, landing in the Pacific Ocean several miles off-shore, and witnessed by thousands of residents. Fireball was presumed to be a meteor. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/8/63, A3)
An aircraft somewhat similar to the U-2 reconnaissance plane was seen by reporters on the flight line at Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards apb, Calif. Air Force officials identified the aircraft as an RB-57F, a drastically modified version of the British Canberra jet light bomber. Chief modifications visible were two extremely long tapered wings similar to those of the U-2, with two very large engines mounted on them. Two smaller J-60 engines were mounted on the fuselage. The aircraft is used in Project Peewee, an environmental study of navigation and weather equipment at high altitude. (AP, NYT, 10/6/63) 63-22*1)"'" ^
Edmond E. Bisson, Lewis scientist, installed as president of American Socity of Lubrication Engineers, (lrc Release 63-45, Lewis Chronology, 5)
President Kennedy, speaking at a breakfast in Ft. Worth a few hours before his assassination, mentioned as part of the growing strength of the U.S. the development of the tfx aircraft: “There’s been a good deal of discussion about the long and hard-fought competition to win the tfx contract; but very little discussion about what this plane will do. “It will be the first operational aircraft ever produced that can literally spread its wings through the air. It will thus give us a single plane capable of carrying out missions of speed as well as distance; able to fly very far in one form, or very fast in another. “It can take off from rugged, short airstrips, enormously increasing the Air Force’s ability to participate in limited wars. The same basic plane will serve the Navy’s carriers, saving the taxpayers at least one billion dollars in costs if they built separate planes for the Navy and the Air Force.” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
The Air Force accepted the first Titan III engines from AerojetGeneral Corporation in Sacramento. The engines were the first-and second-stage liquid-fuel engines for the Titan IIIA (core) of the Titan IIIC. Together they produce a combined thrust of 530,000 lbs. (A-N-AFJournal and Register, Jan., 1964)
usaf announced Atlas F icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, its re-entry vehicle impacting on predetermined area more than 4,000 miles down the Pacific Missile Range, (dod Release 399-63)
Soviet Academy of Sciences announced that Soviet scientists had successfully bounced first radar signals off planet Mercury. Performed last summer when Mercury was 52-54 million mi. from earth, experiment was credited with confirming value of the Astronomical Unit calculated in 1961 by U.S., U.K., and U.S.S.R. using Venus as radar target. Eberhardt Rechtin of jpl called Soviet Mercurv achievement “another significant step in radar exploration of the solar system.” (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 1/5/63, A3; San Francisco Chronicle, 1/5/63)
nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Industry Affairs, Walter L. Lingle, Jr., reviewed nasa procurement policies before National Capitol Section of American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (aiaa) : “It is our objective in nasa to have one overriding objective in all of our procurement policies; and that is so to make our contracts that we will achieve the highest standards in reliability and systems performance . . . .” (Text)
usaf successfully fired Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, a routine training launch by sac crew, (dod Release 1142-63)
nasa Launch Operations Center awarded two contracts for construction at the Merritt Island site adjacent to Cape Canaveral: Ingalls Iron Works, $11,500,000 contract for three launching towers; and American Bridge Div. of U.S. Steel Corp., $23,534,000 contract for work on Saturn V vertical assembly building. {NYT, 7/10/63,5)	_
usaf Atlas icbm exploded shortly after launch from Vandenberg afb. Cause of explosion was not announced, (dod Release 341-63; urn, Wash. Post, 3/10/63)
Titan I icbm exploded during attempted launching at Vandenberg afb. usaf spokesman said no one was injured and damage to silo launch facility appeared slight. (AP, Wash. Post, 5/2/63; dod Release 624-63)
An American U-2 reconnaissance aircraft believed to be returning from a mission over Cuba had crashed into the Gulf of Mexico 40 mi. north of Key West. An air-sea rescue search failed to recover the pilot, (uri, Wash. Post, 11/21/63)
dod announced Dr. Theodore von Karman had been selected to receive the second annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award, established in 1962 by Air Force Association to be conferred on U.S. citizen for outstanding contribution to national defense, (dod Release 420-63)
In Air Force Academy commencement address, President Kennedy said: “It is my judgment that this Government should immediately commence a new program in partnership with private industry to develop at the earliest practical date the prototype of a commercially successful supersonic transport superior to that being built in any other country of the world .... Neither the economics nor the politics of international competition permits us to stand still in this area.” ( Wash. Post, 6/6/63)
usaf announced Atlas icbm launched from Vandenberg afb exploded shortly after liftoff. Cause of explosion was not determined. (dod Release 414—63)
nasa and the Air Force began a test of a 5-psi 100% oxygen environment in a 42-day experiment with four airmen at Brooks afb, Tex. It would include 7 days in the chamber in a normal atmosphere to f ather base-line data, 30 days in the test atmosphere, one half day or detailed lung and eye examinations outside the chamber, and then 5 more days in the test atmosphere for ‘‘follow-up” observations. Conducted jointly with nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, the experiment should lay to rest fears about the debilitating effects of pure oxygen on lungs, blood, and other organs. A&AE, December 1963, 91)
In formal statement of policy, Air Force Association declared Senate ratification of nuclear test ban treaty would entail “unacceptable” risks to security of U.S. and Free World. Statement also said: “One area of military technological potential in which this nation obviously is making less than a maximum effort is military space .... We must exploit military space to extend and preserve our deterrent strength, to control and inhibit those who would use their power aggressively to dominate life on earth. All of our national space efforts, including purely scientific exploratory programs, must be measured first against this yardstick. The national interest must be the prime purpose of every national program . . . .” (afa Statement)
dod announced that the Nike-Zeus antimissile missile had scored another successful interception against an icbm. This 10th successful Nike-Zeus interception was from Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific, the target a Titan I icbm launched from Vandenberg afb, Calif, dod refused to state the date on which the interception took place, (dod Release 1519-63; Wash. Post, 11/30/63)
Maj. Harold W. Dietz (usaf) of Vandenberg afb told aerospace medicine conference at sam that it was “practically impossible” for a single commanding officer of an icbm site, even if he lost self-control in a nervous breakdown, to start a nuclear war. Major Dietz reviewed the safeguards built into the complex procedure for preparing and firing icbm’s. (Wash. Post, 2/5/63, A6)
Hanson W. Baldwin reported in New York Times that during latest Soviet nuclear tests “one high-altitude explosion destroyed two incoming missiles. In one American high-altitude test in the Pacific, a fairly small nuclear detonation high above the earth caused fission—an atomic chain reaction—in a nose cone 150 miles above the earth and 800 miles from the explosion. “This phenomenon, called neutron flux, travels great distances in a virtual vacuum. Thus it may be able to neutralize fissionable material in incoming warheads. This is a technique about which the Russians are believed to know more than American scientists . . . .” (Baldwin, NYT, 7/26/63)
Youth Science Congress, sponsored by nasa and the National Science Teachers Association, was held at gsfc. Feature event was presentation of 25 award-winning research papers by high school students from Washington, D.C., Md., Del., Pa., and N.J. (gsfc Release G-20-63)
Trevor Gardner, former Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d (1955-56) and advocate of increased funding for icbm development, died at his home in Washington. (AP, NTT, 9/30/63, 29)
Revolutionary new helicopter, called XH-51A, was described in paper by Lockheed Aircraft Corp. engineers W. H. Statler, R. R. Heppe, and E. S. Cruz delivered at meeting of American Helicopter Society, Washington. Built for Army and Navy, experimental craft was said to be first helicopter to fly with ease and stability of an airplane because it employed rigid mounting of rotor blades to shaft and three-armed gyroscopes linking pilot control sticks with rotor. {NTT, 5/4/63, 38)
Rainer Berger, senior research scienti^. at Lockheed-Califomia, Co., predicted man would probably encounter some form of extraterrestrial life within 10 years. Speaking at ninth annual meeting of American Astronautical Society, Los Angeles, Berger also suggested “greenhouse effect” of planet Jupiter might make possible the existence of warm oceans hospitable to life on that planet. (L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 1/18/63,6)
Pan American World Airways President Juan T. Trippe announced Pan Am had ordered six Concorde supersonic airliners being developed jointly by British Aviation Corp. and Sud-Aviation of France, boac also reported ordering six of the 1,500-mph jetliners; Air France was believed to have ordered six, but report was unconfirmed. (Carter, NYT, 6/5/63,34)
George Low, nasa’s Deputy Director of Manned Space Flight, speaking at an aiaa-nasa symposium on interplanetary exploration in Palo Alto, Calif., spoke of two areas of possible U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar flight: (1) a series of jointly programed space probes to survey the lunar surface prior to a manned flight; and (2) exchange of information on problems of re-entering the earth’s atmosphere at 25,000 mph. (San Francisco Chronicle, 10/2/63)
aec announced Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer would be recipient of Enrico Fermi Award, aec’s highest honor, in recognition of his leadership in development of the atomic bomb and of atomic energy for peaceful purposes. Dr. Oppenheimer has headed Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, since 1947. {NTT, 4/6/63,1,5)	_
usaf launched Thor-Agena D space vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Wash. Post, 1/8/63, Al) center could acquire' management responsibility for all or part of these planetary projects, study having been initiated at request of nasa Hq. Unnamed Hq. spokesman pointed out that jpl is now responsible for all nasa unmanned lunar and planetaiy programs and has heavy workload with Ranger, Surveyor, and Mariner R projects; Goddard may be asked to perform major subsystem work in Mariner B and Voyager, perhaps leading to eventual overall direction of the projects. (MdkR, 1/7/63,14)
Use of helium-neon gas laser for transmitting television pictures was demonstrated by scientists of North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. Terming the development a “breakthrough,” scientists said new system using one-inch-cube, four-pound modulator could send TV pictures from deep in space and its pictures could not be tapped by outsiders, (upi, Wash. Post, 3/13/63)
Communist China’s press agency Hsinhua announced that more than 1,000 Chinese and. foreign scientists met in Peking to celebrate establishment of center for the World Federation of Scientific Workers devoted to the “advancement of science in Asian, African and Latin American countries.” (NYT, 9/26/63, 5)
usaf launched an Atlas D iobm from Vandenberg afb, Calif. {M&R, 11/18/63, 11)
In the speech which President Kennedy was on his way through Dallas to deliver when he was assassinated, the President had prepared a statement on U.S. preparedness. After reviewing the improvements in military readiness, the President would have said: “I have spoken of strength largely in terms of the deterrence and resistance of aggression and attack. But, in today’s world, freedom can be lost without a shot being fired, by ballots as well as bullets. The success of our leadership is dependent upon respect for our mission in the world as well as our missiles—on a clear recognition of the virtues of freedom as well as the evils of tyranny .... “And that is also why we have regained the initiative in the exploration of outer space—making an annual effort greater than the combined total of all space activities undertaken during the fifties—launching more than 130 vehicles into earth orbit—puttihg into actual operation valuable weather and communications satellites—and making it clear to all that the United States of America has no intention of finishing second in space. “This effort is expensive—but it pays its own way, for freedom and for America. For there is no longer any fear in the free world that a Communist lead in space will become a permanent assertion of supremacy and the basis of military superiority. There is no longer any doubt about the strength and skill of American science, American industry, American education and the American free enterprise system. In short, our national space effort represents a great gain in, and a great resource of, our national strength . . . .” (NYT, 11/24/63, 2)
afsc announced installation of 100-in. centrifuge at Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility, Air Force Missile Development Center (afmdc), Holloman afb. Intended primarily for calibration, testing, and evaluation of high-precision inertial accelerometer, centrifuge was capable of providing acceleration forces up to 25 g’s, giving usaf “a laboratory capability for simulating accelerations common to actual missile flight.” (afsc Release 31-53-18)
A. Scott Crossfield, first pilot of the X-15 and now an executive with North American Aviation, Inc., said in an interview that he thought the X-15 “can fly twice as high as its present record and probably can go several hundred miles faster than it has been flown . . . .” The increased altitude “. . . would be more difficult than the extra speed and it would create re-entry problems too.” (Tulsa Daily World, 10/11/63)
usaf announced Minuteman icbm was successfully launched from Vandenberg afb in routine launch, (dod Release 997-63)
usaf launched Scout vehicle from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload, (upi, Chic. Trib., 9/28/63)
usaf launched a Titan II icbm from an underground silo at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Test, sixth Titan II launch from Vandenberg, was to check operation of the total weapon system. (AP, Wash. Post, 11/10/63) During early November: usaf selected General Dynamics/Ft. Worth, Boeing, and North American Aviation, Inc., to study feasibility of an Advanced Manned Penetrator (amp), revision of previous Low Altitude Manned Penetrator (lamp) . All three had proposed use of kerosene-type fuels in the engine. {Av. Wk., 11/11/63, 25)
usaf launched Titan icbm in routine training test from Vandenberg afb. (dod Release 1018-63)
General Curtis LeMay (c/s usaf) said in address to Air Force Association, Washington, that usaf was “making a concerted effort to maintain a mixed force of manned aircraft and missiles and, for the longer term, vehicles that could operate in space. The Secretary of Defense . . . has directed that we continue our studies of follow-on manned, strategic vehicles that can counter threats and survive in the varied plateaus of aerospace operations . . . .” (Text)	. General B. A. Schriever (usaf) said that during the next “ten to fifteen years aircraft technology promises to make major advances which will provide significant improvements in range, speed, and versatility.” As examples, he cited use of laminar flow control which “promises to make possible a significant increase in the subsonic range and endurance of large aircraft”; technical progress in such areas as “aircraft configuration, high temperature structural materials, and propulsion systems” which will “make feasible the development of a great variety of advanced types of aircraft, ranging from conventional design to V/Stol, variable geometry, and paraglider configurations.” (Text, A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,18) Lt. Gen. T. P. Gerrity (usaf) told afa Industrial Associates’ Luncheon that “there is a recognition of our future mixed force needs and new manned strategic systems are currently under consideration” and spoke of threat of a “manned aircraft gap.” (A-N-AF Journal & Reg., 9/21/63,19)
Minuteman icbm launched from Vandenberg afb silo on 5,000-mi. flight down Pacific Missile Range. Launching wTas conducted by sac crew. (M&R, 9/9/63.13)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara said in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “. . . if we were to draft every scientist and engineer in the country into weapons development work, we could still develop only a fraction of the systems that are proposed .... This process of choice must begin with a requirement for solid indications that a proposed system would really add something to our national security . . . . “Development costs alone on typical major weapons systems today average upward of $1 billion. Over a billion dollars was spent on the atomic airplane, which was little closer to being a useful weapon when we canceled it, shortly after taking office, than it had been half a dozen years earlier. Eighty million was spent on the Goose decoy missile, essentially a pilotless aircraft that the enemy would confuse with our B-52’s .... “The RS-70 is an example of a weapon which, it seems to me, fails to meet the basic requirement for a major systems development: a solid indication that the weapon, if developed, would add significantly to our national security. It happens to be a particularly expensive weapon: to develop, procure, and operate a modest force of these planes would cost us at least $10 billion. Yet considering the weapons we already have, or will have by the time the RS-70 could be operational, it is very hard to see how this weapon would add to our national security .... “As weapons systems grow more complex, more expensive, and more difficult to maintain in a high state of military readiness, it is essential that we limit as far as possible the number of new systems that we bring into operation; for we want to be as sure as possible that wTe can depend on every system to operate when it is really needed. A basic fact of life is that under the chaotic conditions of combat you do not get anything like the efficiency of weapons systems that you get on a test range. Relative simplicity is a most desirable characteristic of a weapons system, or of a combination of systems . . . .” (Text, in CR. 4/24/63, 6580-83)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired and controlled from Kwajalein Island in mid-Pacific, recently made successful interception of target vehicle launched by Titan I icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1170-63)
usaf launched Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif., the 20th of the solid-fueled missiles launched from the West Coast base. (AP, Wash. Sun. Star. 11/3/63)
X-15 No. 2, being remodeled under usaf contract by North American Aviation, Inc., would have as one of its most important research objectives the testing of a ramjet engine modified to bum liquid hydrogen. Using the basic configuration of the Navy’s Typhon missile engine, the ramjet would slow the supersonic airstream of the X-15 to subsonic speed for burning in the engine. Theoretically the ramjet flying at 4,600 mph should be twice as efficient as a jet engine. (Clark, NTT, 11/10/63, 88)
President Johnson delivered a personal Thanksgiving Day message to the American people via TV and radio, less than one week after he assumed the duties of the Presidency upon the assassination of President Kennedy. “All of us have lived through seven days that none of us will ever forget .... “A great leader is dead; a great nation must move on. Yesterday is not ours to recover, but tomorrow is ours to win or lose .... “And to honor his memory and the future of the works he started, I have today determined that Station No. 1 of the Atlantic Missile Range and a nasa launch operations center in Florida shall hereafter be known as the John F. Kennedy Space Center. “I have also acted today with the understanding and the support of my friend, the Governor of Florida, Farris Bryant, to change the name of Cape Canaveral. It shall be known hereafter as Cape Kennedy.” (AP, Was A. Post, 11/29/63)
usaf launched Atlas missile from Vandenberg afb in “routine training launch.” (dod Release 220-63)
WTright Brothers Day. Events commemorating the 60th anniversary of powered flight were highlighted by dedication of First Flight Airport at Kitty Hawk, N.C., the 3,000-ft. l iinwriy parallel ing flight path of Wright Flyer. Airport was built by State of North Carolina, fa a, and National Park Service. Dedication speeches were made by Governor Terry Sanford and Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges. Other participants in ceremony included Sen. A. S. Monroney (D.-Okla.), cab Chairman Alan Boyd, tac Commander Gen. Walter C. Sweeney, Jr. (usaf), and Park Service Director Conrad L. Wirth. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine, and Coast Guard joined for first time in display of air power, with more than 70 airplanes flying over the site. (NYT, 12/16/63; NYT, 12/18/63, 30)
In interview during annual meeting of American Geophysical Union, Dr. Lewis B. Kaplan of jpl, said mariner ii’s discovery of 800° temperatures of Venutian surface indicated possibility that atmosphere of Venus and clouds surrounding that planet contained organic compounds—including formaldehyde, oily hydrocarbons, and certain methyl compounds. Although large quantities of carbon dioxide were present in Venutian atmosphere, carbon dioxide alone would not account for the “greenhouse effect.” Other substances—probably organic compounds—existed in Venutian atmosphere to absorb heat and radiation from planet and reflect it back to surface. (Carey, AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/20/63)
usaf Outstanding Unit Award was presented to the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine for having “formulated new scientific concepts and performed original research of great national and international significance.” Award was made during ceremonies in which President Kennedy dedicated the school’s new facilities at Brooks afb, Tex. (Air Force Magazine, 1/63, 84)
Luncheon in Wright brothers’ hometown, Dayton, 0., commemorated 60th anniversary of powered flight and 50tb anniversary of Air Force Silver Wings. General Mark Bradley, Commander of afcl, Wright-Patterson afb, made presentation to Maj. Gen. Benjamin D. Foulois (usa, Ret.) one of first military officers to fly an airplane. National Aviation Hall of Fame president, James Jacobs, announced four selections to Aviation Hall of Fame: Octave Chanute, General Foulois, Frank Purdy Lahm, and Samuel Pierpont Langley. Luncheon was sponsored by Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce and National Aviation Hall of Fame, Inc. (Cfi, 12/17/63, 23666-67)
usaf Atlas E icbm was launched by sac crew from Operational Systems Test Facility at Vandenberg afb in successful flight test, (dod Release 585-63)
Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, scored its ninth “intercept” of Atlas icbm target fired from Vandenberg afb, Calif. (MocR, 9/9/63,13)
Louis B. C. Fong, Director, Office of Technology Utilization, addressing the American Management Association, Inc., said: “nasa’s activities in space operate across all of the interfaces in the total transition process which starts with basic research and advances through applied research, development, engineering design, test and fabrication to ultimate production. Industry must be ready to determine in which phase it should act and direct space technology to an industrially oriented goal. “Resistance to new ideas and new technologies is part psychological ; a good deal of it is practical when new expenditures have to be justified to stockholders in terms of an upward sales curve. Often it is economic, since to implement a new technology may result in a tremendous impact upon a way of life of a major industry—e.g., oil vs. coal, transistors vs. tubes, solid state physics vs. conventional circuit design, diesel vs. steam engines, etc. . . . “Companies must organize to accept this data; must be geared to use what is helpful; must work to break down the barriers between one division and another. For economic survival, the time lag can no longer be accepted as standard operating procedure in the laboratory-to-consumer cycle .... “The accepted business patterns of the past must change if you singularly as a company and we collectively as a national business enterprise are to stay in the race.” (Text)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert said in letter to Air Force Association President J. B. Montgomery regarding afa’s Statement of Policy on nuclear test ban treaty: “. . . I recognize the right of the Association to express itself but the resolution is so immoderate and based on such misinformation as to disregard completely the best interests of the United States, as well as of the Air Force . . . .” He also canceled his appearance at afa reception in his honor. (Letter/DOD Release)
Washington (D.C.) Academy of Sciences presented its 1962 scientific achievement awards to: the Rev. Francis J. Hey den, Professor of Astronomy and Director of the S. J. Observatory, Georgetown Univ., winner for science teaching because “by combining teaching and research, he leads others to join his adventures in science”; Dr. Marshall Nirenberg, National Institutes of Health, winner in biological sciences; Lindell E. Steele, Naval Research Laboratory, winner in engineering sciences; Dr. Bruce L. Reinhart, Univ. of Maryland and Research Institute for Advanced Study, Baltimore, winner in mathematics; and Dr. Edward A. Mason, Univ. of Maryland, winner in physical sciences. (Wash. Sum,. Star, 2/17/63)
Titan I missile successfully launched from Vandenberg afb by sac crew in routine training exercise, usaf announced. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/30/63, Al)
Atlas icbm was launched from Vandenberg afb in routine training launch for sac missile crews, (dod Release 105-63)
usaf sac crew conducted routine training launch of Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 1188-63)
usaf launched Titan I icbm with dummy nuclear warhead from Vandenberg afb. {M&R, 9/23/63,10)
U.S. Army announced Nike-Zeus antimissile missile successfully intercepted re-entry target vehicle launched by Atlas icbm in recent test. Nike-Zeus was fired from Kwajalein Island in the Pacific, Atlas from Vandenberg afb, Calif, (dod Release 858-63)
Dr. J. Herbert Hollomon, addressing American Meteorological Society in New York, said: “A global system of weather services and atmospheric research requires much more than the sum of separate national programs, much more than traditional cooperation or coordination. Its success depends upon a world-wide joint effort benefiting a world-wide task . . . .” (ams Release)
Selection of Lockheed California Co. and Boeing Co./North American Aviation, Inc., as contractors to conduct airframe research in supersonic transport program was announced by faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby. Lockheed would perform research in three study areas under $950,000 contract; Boeing/North American, operating as a joint venture, would perform research in six areas under $850,000 contract. Under the cost-sharing agreement, government was providing $1.8 million and industries $1.6 million toward total program costs, (faa Release 63-35)
Sen. Hubert H. Humphrey (D.—Minn.), Vice-Presidential candidate, told rally in Washington, D.C., that the Administration would form a study group to seek “the appropriate mechanisms of development and research” by U.S. industry. (Pomfret, NYT, 10/12/64,15)
Spacecraft Technology and Advanced Re-entry Tests (Start) established in Advanced Planning Directorate of the Deputy for Technology, Air Force Space Systems Div. Start included two activities: Asset re-entry vehicle program and unnamed glide re-entry vehicle, still under study. (Av. Wk., 4/27/64,30)
The usaf successfully fired a Minuteman icbm from Vandenberg AFB, Calif. (M&R, 8/3/64,8)
usaf successfully launched Atlas F icbm from Vandenberg AFB in routine training mission. (M&R, 2/17/64,13)
usaf version of F-lll tactical fighter plane, designed for use by both usaf and usn, rolled out of General Dynamics’ Fort Worth, Tex., plant, in ceremony attended by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert, Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze, and other officials. Secretary McNamara said: “For the first time in aviation history, we have an airplane with the range of a transport, the carrying capacity and endurance of a bomber and the agility of a fighter-pursuit plane. . . .” The technology of the variable-geometry wing configuration was developed at NASA Langley Research Center, (dod Release 719-64; Witkin, NYT, 10/16/64,1, 11; Fryklund, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/15/64; Av. Wk., 10/26/64, 32)
I remain convinced that it will be possible to develop an American supersonic transport which will be economic to operate, will find a substantial market among the airlines of the world and will help to maintain American leadership in the air.
FAA released summary statements on the supersonic transport by the six companies that submitted initial design proposals—three airframe companies (Boeing, Lockheed, and North American) and three engine manufacturing companies (Curtiss-Wright, General Electric, and Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft). Boeing’s proposed SST.was based on basic arrow-wing shape, designed to carry 150 passengers, and cruise at mach 2.7. Lockheed’s proposed SST was based on advanced “double delta” wing shape, designed to carry 218 passengers, and cruise at mach 3. North American’s proposed sst was based on modified delta shape wing, was designed to carry up to 187 passengers, cruise at mach 2.65. Curtiss-Wright’s summary said its proposed turbojet engine would produce thrust about twice that of current transport jet engines. GE’s proposal offered choice between advanced turbojet or turbofan engine types suitable for cruising speeds at mach 2.5 to mach 3. Pratt & Whitney offered two configurations of turbofan engine for aircraft flying up to mach 3. (faa Release 64-8)
At White House news conference, President Johnson announced: “The United States has successfully developed an advance experimental jet aircraft, now the A—11, which has been tested in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles an hour and at altitudes in excess of “The performance of the A-ll far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today. The development of this aircraft has been made possible by major advances in aircraft technology of great significance to both military and commercial application. Several A-l 1 aircraft are now being flight-tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California. . . . “The development of supersonic commercial transport aircraft will also be greatly assisted by the lessons learned from this A-ll program. For example, one of the most important technological achievements in this project has been the mastery of the metallurgy and fabrication of titanium metal which is required for the high temperatures experienced by aircraft traveling at more than three times the speed of sound. “Arrangements are being made to make this and other important technical developments available under appropriate safeguards to those directly engaged in the supersonic transport program. “This program was first started in 1959. Appropriate members of the Senate and the House have been kept fully informed on the program since the day of its inception. The Lockheed Aircraft Corporation at Burbank, Calif., is the manufacturer of the aircraft. The aircraft engine, the J—58, was designed and built by the Pratt & Whitney Division, United Aircraft Corporation. The experimental fire control and air-to-air missile system for the A—11 was developed by the Hughes Aircraft Company. “In view of the continuing importance of these developments to our national security, the detailed performance of the A-ll will remain strictly classified and all individuals have been directed to refrain from making any further disclosure concerning this program. . . .” The President also announced he would release on March 2 Eugene Black’s supersonic transport study. (Transcript, Wash. Post, 3/1/64, A20)
A National Geographic report, based on findings by nasa and Air Force researchers, estimated that the earth’s gravitational field picked up several million tons of dust and small particles every year and that the total accumulation of this material on the earth’s surface since its formation two billion years ago was well over ten feet. {NYT, 12/27/64)
USAf’s “Summary of Lessons Learned from Air Force Management Surveys” found that cause of management deficiencies was absence of three essential elements: program-oriented management structure; comprehensive written procedures spelling out guidelines in all foreseeable situations; and effective discipline. (Armed Forces Mgmt., 5/64, 37)
Venus was found to be rotating backward with a period of between 248 and 258 earth days, Dr. Gordon H. Pettingill of Cornell Univ. reported at iau assembly in Hamburg. The new value was a refinement of one made in late 1962 by JPL studies, which indicated a rotation of between 239 and 293 (266 mean period) and was obtained by radarastronomers using new l,000-ft.-diameter antenna at Arecibo, Puerto Rico. (Hines, Wash Eve. Star, 8/27/64; Sullivan, NYT, 8/28/64)
North American Aviation, Inc., announced FY 1964 sales of $2,189,594,000, the largest annual total ever recorded by a company predominantly in the aerospace business. (Av. Wk., 11/16/64, 29)
Dr. Bruno Bettelheim, professor of educational psychology at Univ. of Chicago, said in address before symposium on American Women in Science, at MIT, that women’s “specific genius for nurturing, humanizing, and preserving” should be made use of in all spheres of living, in science, engineering, architecture, medicine, and all other professions. (Leland, Poston Globe, 10/23/64)
A 60-ft. pad was rapidly fabricated at Moffet Field, Calif., for full-scale evaluation using the Bell X-14 vertical take-off aircraft. In this test neither the. 1,500° F temperature nor the wheel-loading adversely affected the rapidly prepared pad, AFSC Research and Technology Div. reported. The instant-landing pad, a ground-hardener of polyester resin, was being developed by Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory for rapid preparation of landing sites for future jet vertical take-off and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Operational Vtol aircraft would drop or spray the semi-liquid preparation in forward combat areas, land on it 15 min. later. (AFSC RTD Biennial Rpt., 7/62-7/64, 23)
17-nation Disarmament Conference resumed in Geneva. In his letter of Jan. 19 to the Conference, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “There is only one item on the agenda of this conference—it is the leading item on the agenda of mankind—and that one item is peace. “Already this conference has led to more concrete and effective results than any disarmament conference in modern history. Your efforts and deliberation laid the ground work for the nuclear test ban treaty—for the communications link between Washington and Moscow—and for the U.N. General Assembly action against nuclear weapons in space. . . .” President Johnson then proposed five major types of potential agreement : to stop spread of nuclear weapons to nations not now possessing them; to accept observation posts on both sides; to stop all production of fissionable material; to ban threat or use of force in changing boundaries or controlling territories; and to freeze numbers and kinds of strategic nuclear-carrying vehicles (aircraft and missiles). (Text, CR, 1/22/64, 812; “Statement to American People,” CR, 122/64, 813)
Dr. Norman W. Rosenberg, of the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, was presented the DOD Distinguished Civilian Service Award, highest decoration for civilian employees. Since joining AFCRL in 1959, Rosenberg designed and executed a number of important experimental studies in upper atmosphere physics, most of which were part of Project Firefly. ( oar Release 7-64-3)
Dr. Herman J. Sander, Behavioral Scientist in USAF OSR Life Sciences Directorate, was presented Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal by Maj. Gen. Don R. Ostrander, OAR Commander, (oar Release 2-64-1)
The policy committee of the Cornell Guggenheim Aviation Safety Center of New York urged the Government to begin immediately to develop procedures for the selection and training of crews for the supersonic transports now in the design stage. The group urged the initiation of intensive studies of the “operating environment” of supersonic aircraft now in use by the military, and the development of joint management-union programs for selection of crews based upon physical and technical competence rather than upon the seniority principle. (AP, NYT, 6/2/64, 63)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara announced that President Johnson had ordered development of the world’s largest airplane— a giant military subsonic jet transport able to carry 600 troops or 250 tons of cargo nonstop for 7,000 mi. at 550 mph. The CX (Cargo Experimental) military jet transport was predicted to be ready for the Air Force by later 1968. Development costs would total $750 million. According to McNamara the CX would “maximize the effectiveness” of eight combat-ready divisions stationed in the U.S. and reduce “reaction time in meeting global crisis.” It would also “have potential commercial use for both passenger and cargo purposes.” In addition the CX would be able to carry any piece of divisional equipment used by an Army division, which present aircraft cannot do. (Mohr, NYT, 12/23/64, 1; Glass, N.Y. Her. Trib., 12/23/64)
Lt. Gen. William J. Ely (usa), Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering (Administration and Management), said in testimony before House Science and Astronautics Committee’s Research and Development Subcommittee: “For the past six years, over 80% of the net value of rdt&e contracts of the Department of Defense has been to companies concerned with aerospace and electronics. Actually, 11 states received 88.3% of the awards in FY 1962; 18 states received 95.3% of the total. Five major Defense rdt&e complexes, centered around Los Angeles, the San Francisco Bay area, the New York City-northern New Jersey area, Boston, and the Washington, D.C., area accounted for about 58% of the total net value of rdt&e awards. . . we recognize that Defense R&D is concentrated geographically and that this concentration will continue for the foreseeable future. The Department of Defense, of all the agencies of government, is the one that must feel itself most constrained to the purpose of getting the best results in rdt&e at the least cost. We cannot speak for the remain* der of the government; such agencies as the National Science Founda* tion and the National Institutes of Health were created in part to support research, and therefore have legitimate additional criteria for their operations. We tend to follow competence where we find it and therefore consider that greater uniformity in the geographical distribution of our R&D contracts and grants can only be achieved to the extent that more uniform competence is developed.” (Testimony)
Atlas F icbm exploded on launch pad at Vandenberg afb, Calif. (M&R,
usaf’s big Project Forecast, according to Richard Witkin in New York Times, anticipated eventual need for four new manned aircraft: Advanced Manned Precision Strike System (ampss), intercontinental-range attack aircraft; transport capable of 10,000-12,000 mi. range; Vtol attack-reconnaissance craft; and limited-range Vtol transport. Begun almost a year ago at request of Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuc.kert and Chief of Staff General Curtis E. LeMay, Project Forecast was said to be virtually completed. (Witkin, NYT, 2/16/64,1)
President Johnson appointed a national commission to study the impact of technological changes on American life. Howard Bowen, an economist and president of the Univ. of Iowa, was nominated chairman of the 14-member panel which would submit a report to Congress and the President on four areas: the role and pace of technological change, both past and future; the impact of technological change during the next ten years on the Nation’s economy and social structure; unmet community and human needs to which modern technology might be effectively applied; the most effective means for channeling technology into promising directions. (Wash. Post, 11/15/64, A6)
Dr. S. Burman Long, Worcester, Mass., minister, delivered address on religion in the space age at the 73rd convention of the General Federation of Women’s Clubs in Atlantic City, N.J.: . . My religion in the space age confirms my faith in a spiritual heaven as real as my humble earthly home. The sooner that mankind accepts an orderly and unlimited universe, the earlier we will have faith in truth. Our cosmology has changed because our knowledge has changed. It has changed before. Once a new continent was discovered. We no longer limit the universe to hell below, heaven above, and some of both between. The God of creation is in control now as He always has been. ...” (Text, CR 7/24/64, A3801-02) Early June: Air Force Space Systems Div. announced 10-ft. delta wing glider able to travel almost around the world as goal of improved Asset program. Glider would be ready for launch in two years. This improved Asset program was said to be more “realistic” prospect for manned reentry vehicle than canceled Dyna-Soar project. (M&R, 6/15/64, 10)
usaf successfully fired an Atlas icbm from Vandenberg afb, California. (M&R, 8/3/64, 8)
Pan American Airways’ Guided Missile Range Div. was awarded one-year, $112 million contract from usaf for continued operation of Air Force Eastern Test Range. (Av. Wk., 6/29/64, 25) During May and June: Project Taper (Turbulent Air Pilot Environment Research) was conducted by FAA and NASA to study turbulent air hazards for jet aircraft and ways for pilots to deal with them. Project involved flights into light-to-moderate turbulence at high altitudes by faa Convair 880 flown by faa and NASA pilots. Data on motion effects experienced in the cockpit, gathered in the 800 flights, were used in NASA laboratory tests on motion simulator. In second series of flight tests, using FAA Boeing 720 airliner, instruments recorded pilot control actions and aircraft response in turbulent air, also tested autopilot and yaw damper for their ability to maintain control. (Hudson, NYT, 5/1/64, 58)
Air Force Systems Command announced first successful demonstration of internal thrust from a “scramjet” (supersonic combustion ramjet) engine. The test was one in a series to demonstrate that scramjet engines could be developed for very-high-speed vehicles and was conducted under the direction of Air Force Aero Propulsion Laboratory. Test conditions in the 30-in.-long scramjet engine simulated a speed of approximately mach six over a brief burning period. Frontal area of the engine was approximately three-by-four inches. Scram jets differed from conventional engines in that they had moving parts only in the fuel feeding system and produced thrust by burning fuel in a supersonic air stream. ( afsc Release 49—40-141)
Rocketdyne Div. of North American Aviation and Douglas Aircraft Co. received three contract increments totaling more than $8 million for work on S-IVB stage of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles from NASA msfc. Additional funding of $3.6 million went to Rocketdyne to equip their plant for production of J—2 engines and for providing static test site and propellant storage area. Douglas received two incremental contracts. One, for $2.3 million, was for purchase of long-term items on recently ordered additional eight S-IVB stages. Other, for $2.2 million, was for purchase of additional set of automatic checkout equipment. (SBD, 7/14/64, 63; Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 9)
Life science researchers in North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. were studying effects of weightlessness and increased gravity on boa constrictors, NAA reported. The eyes of the boas were of special interest, for they offered easily observable reactions to the conditions. Normally a slit that remains vertical, the pupil of the boa’s eye tilted some 15 degrees after the snakes were subjected to centrifuge. The snakes were “grossly disoriented” and, in striking at objects, they missed widely, (naa s&id Skywriter, 2/7/64, 2)
Comparison of science in U.S. and U.S.S.R. was subject of article by Prof. Robert E. Marshak, Univ. of Rochester. Distinguishing between “pure science or basic research and applied science or technological development,” he said U.S. was “doing exceedingly well in basic science. . . . The striking American performance in pure science in recent years results from a combination of fortunate circumstances. A primary factor is that the openness, freedom and emphasis ou individual initiative that characterizes the American way of life provide a favorable climate for the practice of pure science. . . . “On the other hand, in applied science the U.S.S.R. has demonstrated its capability of organizing large team undertakings whose favorable outcome depends as much on careful mobilization of material and human resources as on scientific brainpower. . . .”	(NYT Mag., 10/11/64,
AFSC established Hq. National Range Division (NRD), Provisional, at Patrick AFB, Fla., with Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (USAF), as commander. Replacing General Davis as AFMTC commander was Brig. Gen. Harry J. Sands, Jr., vice commander of afmtc. At the same time, afsc established Air Force Space Test Center, Provisional (AFSTC), at Vandenberg afb, with Brig. Gen. Jewell C. Maxwell, commander of 659th Aerospace Test Wing (SSD) as commander. To become fully operational on July 1, Hq. nrd would coordinate activities of AMR (managed by afmtc commander) and of that portion of PMR transferred from usn to usaf (managed by AFSTC commander). (afsc Release 41-5-1; SBD, 1/7/64, 26; M&R, 1/13/64, 10)
Thomas D. Morris, Assistant Secretary of Defense (I&L), advised Army, Navy, Air Force, and DSA that it was dod policy “to provide quality and reliability assurance services to NASA in a manner fully responsive to NASA’s technical requirements,” Memo clarified use of nasa Quality Status Stamps by dod personnel and npc 200-1A as the document establishing NASA’s quality assurance requirements, (nasa Proj. Off.)
Air Force Systems Command’s Research and Technology Div. reported the High Power Facility at the Rome Air Development Center (radc) was operational. It was designed to evaluate high-power transmitting tubes and radio frequency components, and would support research in plasma physics and engineering where brute force was needed in direct current and pulse radio frequency, (afsc Release 44-128-139)
USAF fired Titan II icbm from Vandenberg AFB more than 5,000 mi. down the Pacific Missile Range in 10th and last of series of R&D tests at pmr. (AP, Wash. Past, 3/14/64)
dod announced it had undertaken comprehensive review of procurement policies and practices affecting labor-management relations at missile and space sites.. NASA was cooperating in the study, which in 1964 was expected to involve the following sites: Vandenberg AFB, Warren AFB, Minot AFB, Whiteman AFB, and NASA’s Mississippi Test Facility. The first on-site review was made at Cape Kennedy late last month, (dod Release 110-64)
AFsc announced new graphite refractory coatings for use in aerospace vehicles had been developed by Research and Technology Division’s Air Force Materials Laboratory. Materials research engineer Khodabakhsh S. Mazdiyasni applied for patent on the process of coating graphite with zirconium oxide, (afsc Release 43—13—64)
USAF launched Adas-Agena D combination from Vandenberg afb with undisclosed payload. (M&R, 3/2/64,12)
afsc/bsd commander Maj. Gen. W. A. Davis, asked at Cape Kennedy press conference to comment on the recently reported Atlas ICBM failures at Vandenberg AFB, said: “There are several possible reasons for the failures. The Adas is a complex piece of machinery that has a habit of using up some of its reliability with age. SAC has been taking Adases off of operational sites, where they have been for a year or more, placing them on the stand at Vandenberg and firing them. “I feel that this type of test is not operational realism as SAC calls it You take the missile out of its environment, load it on a plane, fly it 1,000 or more miles, load it on another stand and fire it. This requires disconnecting and reconnecting wires and fuel lines and installing destruct packages and some instrumentation for the training launches.” (AP, Wash. Post, 4/23/64)
usaf fired a Minuteman missile from Vandenberg afb. It was the 70th Minuteman to be launched from that base. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 11/5/64)
In a New Year’s greeting addressed to President Anastas I. Mikoyan and Premier Alexei N. Kosygin of the Soviet Union, President Johnson urged agreement on a series of United States disarmament proposals and arms control: “Arms control remains especially urgent; nothing can contribute more to the hopes of mankind for the future. During the months ahead I hope we can work for practical agreements to this end. We can and should move to limit the spread of nuclear weapons; to achieve a verified worldwide comprehensive test ban; to make a cut-off of fissionable material production for weapons coupled with measures to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear power; and to agree on a verified freeze in existing offensive and defensive strategic nuclear delivery systems. “By progress in this critical area, our Governments can help to make this a happier and safer world for all people. You may be certain that the American people and their Government will never be second in this effort.” (Mohr, NYT, 12/31/64,1—2)
usaf launched Titan IIICBM from Vandenberg AFB on 5,000-mi. flight down pmr. (upi, Houston Chron., 2/18/64)
Institute for Strategic Studies, an international organization for research on defense, security, and disarmament, reported U.S. had increased its strategic superiority over U.S.S.R. The report warned, however, that “this may he the last year in which the western superiority in long-range striking power is so marked.” By early next year the U.S. would have 925 intercontinental ballistic missiles, compared to U.S.S.R.’s 200. American superiority in fleet ballistic missiles had increased to four to one over U.S.S.R.’s less advanced counterpart of the Polaris. Soviet Union had maintained her superiority in submarine strength. (Cerutti, Chic. Trib., 11/13/64)
Indonesian air force launched Soviet-built surface-to-air missile in connection with military alert exercises, according to official Antara news agency. (M&R, 2/24/64, 11)
New evidence of possible explosions in Milky Way galactic core, reported by Soviet astronomer Dr. Iosif S. Shklovsky, was discussed by British astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Dr. Shklovsky discovered that spurlike structures above and below the galaxy are connected in a single figure-8 configuration, its center at the galactic core. It is possible that the loops, which are strong sources of radio emissions, are magnetically trapped particles which may have been forced from the core by a past eruption. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/24/64, 48)
usaf announced that Douglas Aircraft Co., Inc., Missile and Space Systems, would receive a $4,000,000 order to an existing contract for procurement of Thor space boosters from Space Systems Div. of Air Force Systems Command, (dod Release 888-64)
Richard L. Schleicher of North American Aviation, Inc., received Royal Aeronautical Society of Great Britain’s George Taylor Gold Medal for 1963 for paper on X-15 structural design which he presented to the Society. (Av. Wk., 6/1/64, 13)
usaf fired Atlas E icbm on successful 5,000-mi. flight down the Atlantic Missile Range, testing advanced nose cone design. Same day, USAF also fired Minuteman icbm from Cape Kennedy and two Minuteman Icbm’s from Vandenberg afb, Calif., within 45 min. of each other, (upi, NYT, 2/27/64,17; M&R, 3/2/64, 12)
Trans-American Aeronautical Corp. of Washington had reserved a delivery position for U.S. supersonic transport aircraft, faa announced. TransAmerican was expected to make the aircraft available to a Latin American flag carrier through leasing arrangement, (faa Release 64-14)
faa disclosed it was requesting Coordinating Research Council of New York City to study comparative safety features of the two most commonly used aircraft fuels—kerosene and JP—4. (Hudson, NYT, 2/26/64,21)
Explosion-fire of fuel for usaf XB-70 aircraft at Edwards afb, Calif., caused four injuries and one death (Ivan W. Mayo of North American Aviation, Inc.), (upi, Wash. Post, 10/21/64)
usaf fired Atlas-D 5,000 miles downrange from Vandenberg afb as part of an advanced re-entry systems program, and indicated shot was successful. (upi, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/18/64)
Rep. Roland V. Libonati (D.—111.) presented to the House a group report on AFSC, SAC, TAC, and Air Force Academy, after Congressional delegation visited various usaf installations. Listing highlights of afsc during 1963, report said: “Since March 1959, more than 460 space probes have been conducted from Air Proving Ground Center’s Elgin afb, Fla., aerospace launch facility on Santa Rosa Island. The probes included at least 87 in the Project Firefly program. The project actually is the intense investigation of the earth’s atmosphere and an assault on the secrets of ‘near space’. . . . “amrl [Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories, Wright-Patterson afb] initiated the first lunar gravity research in 1963. Using a zero-gravity parabola, aircraft tests were conducted under actual lunar—one-sixth earth gravity—conditions. . . .” (CR, 2/18/64, 2906-35)
Nasa conducted two successful test-flights of paraglider vehicles at Edwards AFB, Calif. In the first test, a simulated Gemini spacecraft manned by North American Aviation, Inc., test pilot E. P. Hetzel was towed aloft beneath a pre-inflated paraglider landing system. The tow test vehicle (ttv) was towed to 6,000-ft. altitude by CH—46C helicopter. While airborne, Hetzel manually controlled the ttv through preplanned maneuvers to its landing. In the second test, a similar but unmanned system was dropped from a C—130 aircraft at 32,000-ft. altitude. The paraglider was automatically deployed and remotely controlled in flight from 22,000-ft. to 12,500-ft. altitude, where it was separated from the Gemini test vehicle. The tests were part of NASA’s continuing evaluation of the paraglider system as a means of landing and recovering manned spacecraft (msc Roundup, 8/5/64,1)
Minuteman icbm exploded shortly after launch from silo at Vandenberg Afb, and usaf was investigating cause of the explosion. This came five days after usaf conducted 50th launch in its Minuteman development program, a successful AMR flight. (M&R, 3/30/64,16)
USAF Air Defense Command 10th Aerospace Missile Sq., a fully operational unit of adc at Vandenberg afb which would man an antisatellite weapon, was on 5-min. alert status. (Av. Wk., 12/14/64, 13)
The Air Force version of the controversial F-lll fighter-bomber, formerly called the tfx, made a successful but somewhat abbreviated maiden flight from Carswell afb, Tex. (the site of the General Dynamics Corp. plant that built the plane). Piloted by Richard L. Johnson and Val E. Prahl, the 1,650-mph aircraft performed all the items on the test program that were possible with the malfunctioning wing flaps. The variable-geometry wings, capable of a 70° sweep, were kept in 26° position during the first flight. In 21 min. of flight, the F—111 achieved an altitude of 17,000 ft. and a speed of 230 mph. On takeoff it required less than half the runway used by conventional jet planes. The Navy version of the F-lll was scheduled to fly by mid-1965. (Witkin, NYT, 12/22/64, 12; UPl, Chic. Trib. 12/22/64; Aviation Daily, 12/23/64)
U.S. Navy was reported to be defining its manned orbiting laboratory (mol) ocean surveillance experiment despite the proposed merger of the Air Force mol and NASA’s Apollo-X programs. Navy felt its space mission potential should be explored as thoroughly under either military or civilian programs. The Navy space mission was first envisioned to involve five major areas concerning shipping: detection; location; identification; classification; tracking of surface and subsurface craft. (Fink, Av. Wk., 12/28/64,13)
Office of Naval Research was studying submarine-based antisatellite missile system, according to Aviation Week & Space Technology. System would use Polaris fleet ballistic missile to supplement existing Army and Air Force weapons. (Av. Wk., 9/28/64, 18)
Reported that new 125-ft. radiotelescope opened at England’s Jodrell Bank Radio Astronomy Station early in June could give insight into creation of universe. Radiotelescope was to detect and analyze high-frequency radio pulses emitted by stars 6 billion light-years distant. (Reuters, Chic. Trib., 7/6/64) During week of July 5—11: Unmanned paraglider wing designed to make air-to-ground cargo deliveries to forward battle areas successfully completed series of three flight tests at U.S. Army Yuma Proving Ground, Ariz. The paraglider, also designed to be a spacecraft recovery system, slipped three 1,000-lb. cargo packages to earth without mishap from 3,100 ft. Demonstration was performed by Space and Information Div. of North American Aviation under program called Precision Aerial Delivery System (pads) . (naa S&id Skywriter, 7/17/64, 1)
Plans for adding a transmitter to the Pan American Boeing 707 for twoway communication tests using syncom ill as a relay point were discussed at an Air Transport Association meeting attended by representatives of FAA, nasa, Bendix, Pan Am, and Hughes Aircraft. Teletypewriter messages had been successfully transmitted in November from a ground station at Camp Roberts, Calif., to a Pan Am 707 enroute to Honolulu. (Av. Wk., 12/7/64, 34)	_
Minuteman icbm fired from Vandenberg afb after sundown left spectacular trail across the sky seen from San Francisco to San Bernardino and caused Redding and Chico areas to call civil defense alerts. Cross winds distorted the exhaust trail and it was lighted by rays from the sun below the horizon. (AP, NYT, 2/27/64,17)
Full-scale paraglider was successfully deployed at Edwards afb in test conducted by North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. for NASA to demonstrate the method of maneuverable recovery of manned spacecraft. After an air drop from usaf C-130 transport at 33,000 ft., the 31-ft.-long inflatable wing deployed and assumed the programed trimmed glide, (naa s&id Skywriter, 5/1/64, 1 ;Av.Wk„ 5/4/64,27)
usaf launched Titan II icbm from underground silo at Vandenberg afb in successful flight 5,000-mi. down Pacific Missile Range. (M&R, 2/3/64, 10)	.......................
At American Physical Society Meeting, the planet Jupiter was reported to be rotating slower. Prof. Alex G. Smith said in 1961 radio sources showed an abrupt change in rotational rate; observations made by radio observatories in Florida and Chile showed that the rotation had slowed by 1.3 sec. Dr. Smith said this was “almost as surprising as if the city of Washington had begun to drift across the surface of the earth at a rate of 10 degrees longitude a year.” Studies were continuing to determine whether Jupiter itself had changed its rotation or whether the change was limited to radio sources. (Finney, NYT, 4/28/64, 19)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, spoke on “New Technology—Its Selection and Development” before the Atomic Industrial Forum conference in San Francisco. His address made the following points: (1) preeminence in space demands that a program of development of new technology be continuously supported; (2) the formulation of a responsible requirement requires the existence of an underlying body of technology; (3) the development of a new branch or extension of a branch of technology should be directed at a related class of requirements rather than a single requirement; (4) development of a new technology requires the existence of a focal point in the form of advanced hardware; (5) short and long-term goals must be related to the Nation’s policies and plans; (6) our goals must be continuously assessed; (7) our work must be relevant to the goals which have been set; and (8) better processes of program management must be devised. He said in conclusion: “A balance of technologies in our favor will, however, require wisdom in the selection of new technologies in which to invest our resources and resolution in their development.” (Text)
General Bernard A. Schriever, afsc, said in speech to the Aviation/Space Writers Association in Miami, regarding the USAf/usn F—111: “The outstanding characteristic of the F—111 is its versatility. The F—111A—the Air Force version—can penetrate supersonically on the deck for interdiction or low altitude tactical reconnaissance. For purposes of close support, it must be able to maneuver well at low altitudes and be able to carry a variety of conventional weapons. It must also be able to loiter for extended periods while awaiting target assignments from the local ground commander. Combined with this low altitude capability, the F-lll requires a very high altitude capability for reconnaissance flexibility and air superiority missions. It must be capable of high altitude deployment between theaters without tanker support. “The F-111A will significantly increase the Air Force’s capability in support of the Army. Its great ferry range will increase Tactical Air Command’s capability to react even more rapidly than now to meet contingencies anywhere in the world. But even more importantly, the F—111A, with its variable geometry wing design will operate effectively over a wide range of speeds and altitudes in any conservative combat environment. “Basically the F-lll will be the first truly multi-purpose all-weather tactical fighter in tac’s inventory with a capacity to operate from short austere fields. This means greater dispersal and flexibility and, of course, quicker responsiveness to support Army requirements for immediate and effective close air support, air superiority and interdiction. In short, the F—111 represents a quantum step forward in the development of a tactical air weapon system providing optimum combat effectiveness at the lowest cost and with the greatest possible flexibility. “The F—111B—the Navy version—has a primary role of air superiority. It will be armed with the Phoenix missile system and will be able to loiter at the outer defensive perimeter of the fleet for much longer periods of time than present day Navy fighters. It will also be able to accelerate out of a subsonic loiter condition and maneuver for supersonic attack. “It is easy to see that both the Air Force and Navy versions of the F-lll call for a number of conflicting inflight performance characteristics. The requirements for high subsonic cruise efficiency and for short takeoff capability call for maximum lift from the wing area. In other words, you need wings swept fully forward. On the other hand, supersonic low altitude flight calls for swept back wings, since the body design itself provides sufficient lift to support flight; and additional wing area only induces instability. At altitude more wing area is required, but the higher speeds obtainable dictate either very thin straight wings or else a higher degree of sweep. “How do you answer these conflicting demands? The answer is obvious—develop a variable sweep wing aircraft. Contrary to some impressions, the variable sweep design is not new. A variable sweep design was used in the Bell X-5, which was developed under Air Force sponsorship and flown at Edwards in 1951. A similar principle was utilized in the Grumman F—10F prototype which flew in 1952. But there is a major difference between those designs and the one to be used in the F—111. The early designs required a bulky internal mechanism to move the wings. That mechanism is not required for the newer designs, and consequently the use of a variable sweep wing has become practical.” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-64)
White House announced new development plan for U.S. supersonic transport, authorizing technical design competition between two airframe manufacturers (Boeing and Lockheed) and two engine contractors (General Electric and Pratt & Whitney). Thus North American Aviation and Curtiss-Wright were eliminated from airframe and engine competition respectively. New “program of action” recommended by FAA and President’s Advisory Committee on Supersonic Transport and endorsed by President Johnson called for: Commerce Dept, studies and forecasts of overall economy of the 1970’s; National Academy of Sciences advice on sonic boom studies; and Boeing and Lockheed examination of purchase cost, operating cost, and sonic booms as related to various designs, sizes, and ranges of the plane. This phase would be completed in November. (Clark, NYT, 5/21/64, 1; Av. Wk., 5/25/64, 22)
Soviet Chief Air Marshal Konstantin A. Vershinin said in Red Star that Soviet air force can destroy any enemy land, sea, or air target. Soviet air power now is based on supersonic, rocket-carrying planes capable of operating in all weather conditions, (upi, Wash. Post, 2/2/64, A16)
Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex was officially redesignated Cape Kennedy Air Force Station. (Special Order GA-7, issued by usaf CofS Curtis E. LeMay, in khn-i )
General Curtis E. LeMay, usaf Chief of Staff, was interviewed in General Electric Forum and discussed aerospace power’s contribution to national security. “In recent months, the area of direct technical concern to the Air Force has 'become much broader. For example, we must now press for technical superiority not only in aircraft but also in missiles, space systems, and command and control systems that are responsive to the compressed time scale of military operations. We cannot afford to fall behind in any of these fields, because the potential enemy can be expected to exploit Jill of the important technical gaps that might appear.” LeMay said that “chiefly because of the cost factor, we are not exploiting anything like the total amount of technology that we think might be useful. Certainly we would like to do more, but our r&d outlay already comprises 18 percent of the Air Force’s total budget and must be balanced against other needs.” (GE Forum, 10-12/64,14-17)
First manned free-flight test of Gemini paraglider landing system was unsuccessful at Edwards afb, Calif. The paraglider, with pilot E. P. Hetzel of North American Aviation in mockup spacecraft slung beneath it, was towed to 13,000 ft. by helicopter, then was cut loose. Pilot Hetzel lost control and at 3,000 ft. was forced to bail out. The paraglider crashed. (Wash. Eve. Star, 8/7/64)
usaf launched Titan II ICBM from Vandenberg AFB with pickaback instrumented capsule equipped to study heat and shock of reentry. The package containing 25 experiments was provided by General Electric Co. Re-entry Systems Dept, for DOD’s Advanced Research Projects Agency (arpa). The Titan II was launched by a SAC crew on routine training mission. (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/3/64; M&R, 10/12/ 64, 10)
The largest contract awarded to date for work on the NASA Mississippi Test Operations facility was awarded to Koppers Co., Inc., Malan Construction Department, New York City, for the construction of the first test position on the S—IC dual test stand. The contract was for $17,280,157, and was awarded by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Mobile District. Work on the stand would include construction of three concrete tiers each about 158 ft. high, a tower approximately 105 ft. high, a steel flame deflector, and other equipment. (Marshall Star, 7/15/64, 1) . .
ComSatCorp announced six companies had made summary proposals to provide research data and consultant services for ground terminal stations: American Telephone & Telegraph Co.; ARCS Industries, Inc.; Daniel, Mann, Johnson & Mendenhall; Hughes Aircraft Co.; Page Communications Engineers, Inc.; Westinghouse Electric Corp. Of these, one or more contractors would be selected. (ComSatCorp Release)
usn announced KC-130F (Hercules) transport, a four-engine turboprop aircraft, had made series of landings and take-offs from aircraft carrier Forrestal without aid of arresting gear or catapults. The tests were made last November, but USN spokesman said reason for delaying announcement was that “the project was being analyzed.” {NYT, 11/1/64,20S) During October: NASA Assistant Administrator for International Programs Arnold W. FrUtkin said in id erospace: “The prime purpose of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration’s international space program is to serve broad foreign policy objectives through useful scientific and technical projects. “But a practical consequence for the American aerospace industry is that the program has stimulated a level of space activity abroad which might not otherwise have been achieved. Purely as a by-product, then, cooperative space projects have created limited markets for American know-how and hardware overseas. .. .” (Aerospace, Fall 1964, 10-15)
Evidence that the electron is smallest indivisible unit and that the proton lacks a core, as had been postulated, was reported at annual meeting of American Physical Societv in New York. Experiments were made with electron accelerator built by Harvard Univ. and mit and were described by Dr. Roy Weinstein of Northeastern Univ. (Boston), Dr. Richard Wilson of Harvard, and Dr; Louis S. Osborne of MIT. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/23/64, 20)
Air Force Systems Command announced plans to orbit an experimental fuel cell able to produce both electricity for space power and pure drinking water for space crews. The fuel cell would be orbited from Vanden-berg afb early in 1965. (afsc Release 43-11—145; NYT, 11/10/64,34; Houston Post, 11/10/64)
North American Aviation’s Space and Information Systems Div. was studying the planaria to help understand human healing process under conditions of weightlessness. Planaria was capable of regeneration even under extremes of temperature, vibration, and shock. (M&R, 2/17/64, 21)
Dr. Robert L. Barre, former nasa Scientist for Social, Economic, and Political Studies, said in address before American Orthopsychiatric Association in Chicago: “Space activities may be viewed either as a cause or as a consequence of social and cultural change. From either point of view, freedom to engage in scientific activity entails significant social responsibility. . . . “It is ironic that a consequence of the extension of definite verifiable knowledge, the primary product of science, should be to extend confusion. To increase knowledge, not only adds knowledge where it did not previously exist, but corrects previously held mistaken knowledge and belief. In so doing, it alters the conditions of existence; hence man’s relationship, not only to his physical environment, but to other men. “Scientists produce the conditions from which these alterations develop. The inescapable responsibility of scientists is to continuously inform society of the knowledge they have, or are trying to create, and to explain its scientific significance. “The institutional locus and the social role of the scientist has traditionally fulfilled this responsibility. The scientist in the past was, not only a creator of knowledge, but an integrator, a teacher—a transmitter of knowledge. New knowledge could be incorporated in its appropriate context and transmitted more rapidly than it could be produced. Today we have altered these arrangements. . . . “While slowing down the system for the transmittal of new knowledge and reducing the proportion of the educated populace who have access to the existing system, we are simultaneously speeding up the production of new knowledge. While ignoring the processes of evaluation, integration, interpretation, and assimilation of new knowledge, we have fixedly accelerated the processes of specialized acquisition of new knowledge. “We have upset the equilibrium between invention and innovation. I submit that the social responsibility of the scientist is obvious: to assist society restore the balance.” (Text)
usaf successfully launched 30th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, a routine training launch by sac crew. (M&R, 2/17/64, 13)
President Johnson announced he was sending a set of lunar photographs taken by RANGER VII to leaders of 110 nations. “The success of the Ranger 7 exploration has been greeted with enthusiasm and interest around the world. Men of all nations recognize this is one of the greatest extensions of human knowledge about the lunar surface to occur in many centuries. “The American people can be justly proud. We started behind in the space age. But we placed our trust in our open society and free system. Our achievements in peaceful exploration of space give us all cause to be proud, grateful and confident. . . . “More than 60 countries now work together voluntarily in this pursuit. We continue to hope that the extent of such international cooperation will be enlarged and that all nations will join through the United Nations to place the peaceful realms of space off limits to the designs of aggressors on earth. “I am sure the American people will continue to support what is necessary to assure leadership. In return, they will rightfully expect that our program hold to the orderly and responsible course which has brought such outstanding success in such a short period.” (Spivak, UPI, Wash. Post, 8/17/64)
usaf launched a new Advanced Ballistic Re-entry System experimental nosecone (Abres) from Vandenberg afb 5,000 mi. down the WTR on an Atlas-D icbm. The nosecone tests were being conducted to develop more effective re-entry systems for America’s intercontinental ballistic missiles. (AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/64; Houston Chron., 12/1/64)
In the Journal of the American Physical Society, Irwin I. Shapiro of mit’s Lincoln Laboratory proposed use of radar as a test for Einstein’s general theory of relativity: radar pulses would be sent to one of the solar system’s inner planets, either Venus or Mercury, and the time-lapse before the radar echoes’ return measured on the earth. According to Einstein’s theory, when the radar beam passed close enough to the sun to encounter a very strong gravitational field, the radar waves should slow down. The slowdown should be sufficient to delay return of the radar echoes by as much as 0.0002 seconds, a time interval accurately measurable by electronic techniques. {Wash. Post, 12/28/64)
Dr. Hari K. Sen, research scientist in Space Physics at usaf oar’s Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, had shown that evaporation of solar corona was largely responsible for origin of the solar wind, OAR announced. Dr. Sen evolved simple physical theory explaining how electrons and protons of solar winds escape solar corona, then compared his results with observed interplanetary electron densities and with experimental data obtained from spacecraft on solar winds near the earth. His theory agreed, in order of magnitude, with experimental data and gave estimate of interplanetary electron density beyond observed range out from the sun. He set critical altitude for escape at about four solar radii, about 1,300,000 mi. above the visible solar disc. (oar Release 3-64-5)
Maj. Gen. Ben I. Funk, Commander of AF Space Systems Div., said in speech before Tennessee Valley Post of American Ordnance Association, Redstone Arsenal, Ala.: “Space can be nothing less than a total national undertaking. “Space has to do with our future, with our country’s future, and with the progress of civilization. It also has to do with our personal and our national security. . . . “I personally believe that the working partnership between NASA and the Department of Defense will grow increasingly close in the months and years just ahead, and that joint efforts in ventures such as Gemini, and the lunar expedition, will serve to identify this country’s slate of space activities as national programs. . . .” Discussing role of the military in space, he said: “As a national policy, we have declared that space will be reserved for peaceful purposes. This, I submit, serves to put the military into space—not restrict space to purely non-military activities. . . . “In describing the military mission, I like to say that the Defense Department’s job is to insure that space is used for us—not against us.” {Marshall Star, 1/15/64,1—2)
usaf Titan III transtage was successfully static-test-fired for more than six minutes to verify compatability of various subsystems, in operation to simulate injection of mol into 100-mi. orbit. Officials said firing went as expected, including length of bum time, although no mention was made as to whether it reached 312-second specific impulse demanded by Air Force. (SBD, 7/14/64, 66; M&R, 7/20/64, 8)
usaf launched Blue Scout, Jr., probe from Vandenberg AFB on a nonorbital space mission. Press sources reported this as the second successful launch of a contact cesium ion engine, developed by Electro-Optical Systems, Inc. (hhn—48; M&R, 1/4/65,11)
Effective this date, usaf Western Test Range’s facility at Point Arguello became part of Vandenberg afb, and its facility at Kwajalein Island was turned over to the Army. Organization plans for National Range Division with its Eastern Test Range and Western Test Range had been announced Mfiy 4.	(L.A. Times, 7/2/61)
Scientists from the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, the Swedish Space Committee, and NASA announced they would investigate the nature of noctilucent clouds during a period starting the last week in July and extending through Aug. 24. This would be the second in series of rocket-borne experiments to be conducted from' Kronogard Range in Northern Sweden. Principal purpose of experiments was to confirm results of experimental flights completed in August 1962, when it was tentatively determined that noctilucent clouds were composed of meteoric particles or the residue of burned out meteors. Program calls for the firing of four Nike-Apache rockets for collection purposes and four Nike-Cajun rockets to measure temperatures and winds associated with the presence or absence of the clouds, (oar Release 7-64-2)
Air Force Office of Scientific Research and Massachusetts Institute of Technology announced jointly that scientists at the National Magnet Laboratory, using a giant water-cooled magnet, had produced the strongest continuous magnetic fields generated by man to date—up to 255,000 gauss. Maximum fields were maintained for periods of a minute. (afosr Release, 11/64,2S)
Ray Romatowski, NASA Deputy Assistant Administrator for Legislative Affairs, was among the 12 Federal employees selected by Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs to study at Princeton Univ. during 1964r-65 academic year. (Wash. Post, 4/27/64)
usaf launched final Minuteman I test icbm from Cape Kennedy. First-stage flight was satisfactory, but second stage veered out of control and had to be destroyed by range safety officer 165 sec. after launch. In launches from Cape Kennedy, the missile scored 38 successes, 8 partial successes, and 8 failures. From Vandenberg afb, it scored 60 successes, 4 partial successes, and 2 failures. (AP, Balt. Sun, 9/30/64; M&R, 10/5/64, 11)
Paraglider landing system definitely would not be used for the scheduled Project Gemini space flights, msc Public Affairs Officer Paul Haney announced. Development of paraglider system was too far behind for the 12 scheduled flights. After many rumors and much speculation, this statement was first official announcement of decision not to use the paraglider. It followed by three days the first manned free-flight test of the system, which was unsuccessful. Development and testing of paraglider by North American Aviation would continue, Haney said. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/11/64)
At American Meteorological Society meeting, ucla campus, Lewis D. Kaplan presented paper on current ideas about atmosphere of Mars-— surface pressure is considerably lower than previously estimated and C02 concentration is considerably higher—and discussed significance of these findings for Martian-atmosphere entry spacecraft, (ams Program, 717)
Minuteman ICBM was successfully fired from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., by a Strategic Air Command crew from Malmstrom AFB, Mont. The missile traveled 5,000 mi. down the Western Test Range. (MdeR, 11/9/64, 10)
XB—70 supersonic aircraft was unveiled at North American Aviation plant, Palmdale, Calif. The 2,000-mph intercontinental-range plane would be used to investigate feasibility of long-range high-speed flight. Speaking of achievements in the program thus far, Brig. Gen. Fred J. Ascani (afsc Aeronautical Systems Div.) said: “. . . Not all of these and other accomplishments can be termed radical breakthroughs (although the XB-70 program has produced about a thousand patent disclosures), but taken together they have helped to advance a technology which constitutes a base for a new generation of civil and military aircraft which will operate at sustained supersonic speeds.” (dod Release 374r-64; Witkin, NYT, 5/12/64,1; AF Pol. Info. Ltr., 6/1/64)
Maj. Gen. Marvin C. Dernier, Commander, Research and Technology Div., AFSC, speaking at the Seventh Hypervelocity Impact Symposium, said: “Another example of advanced development hypervelocity in nature if you will, is the asset Program. ASSET stands for Aerothermodynamic/ Elastic Structural Systems Environmental Tests, and involves the flight verification and demonstration of aerodynamic and structural design concepts for the lifting re-entry class of aerospace vehicles. Three ASSET vehicles have been launched to date of which two were quite successful. The ASSET Program was originally conceived and conducted by the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory and has now been turned over to the Systems Command’s Space Systems Div. program for even more advanced vehicles.” (Text, AFSC Release)
USAF successfully fired an Atlas-F icbm down the WTR from Vandenberg afb—the third major launching from the base in two days, (upi, NYT, 12/23/64, 28)	'
Senate adopted a resolution requesting President Johnson to proclaim Sept. 17 and 18 as special days in honor of the memory of James Smithson, the Englishman who willed all his property for establishment of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C. 200th anniversary of his birth would be celebrated this year, (ap, NYT, 6/26/65, 20)
H. Z. Hopkins, Jr., chief of North American Aviation, Inc., flight test operations at Edwards afb, Calif., was named president of the Society of Experimental Test Pilots (setp). Also honored by setp during its annual meeting in Los Angeles was A1 White, naa’s chief test pilot, who was recipient of the Ivan C. Kincheloe Award. White was cited for his role in development and testing of XB-70a research aircraft. (naa Release NL-19; naa S&ID Skywriter, 10/1/65,2)
Commenting on American contributions to space science, N.	M. Sissakian, Soviet biochemist, wrote in Pravda: “Soviet scientists note with satisfaction the considerable contribution of American science to the study and opening up of cosmic space, which specifically manifested itself in a series of flights of cosmonauts in one-seater and two-seater ships. Most essential results were obtained by the American scientists from the flights of the ships Gemini 4 and Gemini 5. . . . . . The flight of G. Cooper and C. Conrad was additional proof that the state of weightlessness during the minimum time required for a flight to the moon and back does not cause essential physiological changes in the human organisms and has no noticeable influence on his ability to work. “Of great interest in the cosmic flight of man from the biological viewpoint is the study of such problems as the functional state of the cardiovascular system, the water-salt exchange, and the vestibular apparatus. “Aboard the ship Gemini 5 a number of physiological experiments . . . were performed. The method tested on the Cosmonaut C. Conrad of inflated cuffs around the extremities, which were intended to maintain the necessary functional vigor of the cardiovascular system, merits attention. . . . “The flight of Gemini 5 is a great success for U.S. scientists. The Soviet scientists sincerely congratulate Cosmonauts G. Cooper and C. Conrad on the successful conclusion of their flight, giving due credit to their courage and endurance. They transmit to the scientists and the entire personnel which prepared and carried out the flight their congratulations and wishes for further successes in the peaceful opening up of the cosmos.”	(Pravda, 9/2/65)
dod announced Peter Kiewit Sons Company had received a $9,495,000 contract for modification of Titan II launch facilities in the vicinity of Davis-Monthan afb, Ariz.; Little Rock afb, Ark.; McConnell afb, Kan.; and at Vandenberg afb, Calif. The Army Corps of Engineers awarded the contract, (dod Release 18-65)
Prime Minister Harold Wilson announced plans to buy American military aircraft to replace British aircraft, an action he said would save more than $840 million over a 10-yr. period. The two U.K. projects being dropped were the P-1154 vertical take-off supersonic strike aircraft and the hs-681 short take-off military transport. Both were made by the Hawker Siddeley group. American Phantom iTs, made by McDonnell Aircraft, would be ordered to replace the P-1154. Phantoms were already on order to replace the Royal Navy’s Sea Vixens. Lockheed’s C-130’s would replace the hs-681. The American planes would be equipped with British engines. On the question of the tsr-2, which the U.K. was considering replacing with General Dynamics’ F-lll, Mr. Wilson said there was not enough information yet to make a final decision. (Farnsworth, NYT, 2/3/65, 9; Clymer, Balt. Sun, 2/3/65)
Tribute to Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert by Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D—Nev.) was read on the floor of the Senate: “It is no surprise that Eugene Zuckert served in the office of the Secretary for longer than any other man. His leadership spans nearly 20 years, dating almost from the time that the Air Force became an independent service while Mr. Zuckert served as special assistant to the Assistant Secretary of War for Air. He served for a time on the Atomic Energy Commission and brought a high degree of competence and ability to this important operation. “After more than 4V2 years as Secretary, Eugene Zuckert has established an enviable record, and I suggest that his devotion to the service and his unique skills will make his absence from Government of very short duration. No man who has done what he has for the Air Force in the critical years when that service entered the space age can be forgotten or easily replaced.” {CR, 9/29/65, 24571)
Rains forced Princeton Univ. scientists to postpone launching from Palestine, Tex., of a Stratoscope II balloon and its telescope designed to photograph Saturn and its rings. No new launch date had been set. (Houston Chron., 7/14/65)
Najeeb Halaby, faa Administrator, announced that he would ask Congress for enabling legislation authorizing a ten-day, federally-sponsored International Aerospace and Science Exposition, to be held the summer of 1966 at Dulles International Airport, Washington, D.C. The Exposition, approved by President Johnson March 31, 1965, would attempt to stimulate export sales of U.S. products and to demonstrate U.S. accomplishments in aerospace and related sciences, (faa Release 65-25)
Prof. Robert H. Dicke of Princeton Univ. suggested in the Astronomical Journal that a way to map the sun’s shape as a test of Einstein’s theory of relativity would be to use measurements of the orbit of the asteroid Icarus as it passed within 4 million mi. of earth on June 15, 1968. Two peculiarities would make Icarus, discovered in 1949, valuable for such an experiment: (1) Icarus was the only body in the solar system known to pass inside the orbit of Mercury; and (2) Icarus’ orbit was highly inclined to that of the other planets. Dr. Dicke proposed that measurements be taken when the planet cut across the plane of the earth’s orbit. If the two measured points changed with each close passage to the sun, then the sun would be known to be less than a perfect sphere. And, the amount by which it was not truly spherical would be known precisely. If the sun’s radius at the equator exceeded its polar radius by as little as 0.005%, the distortion of the sun’s gravitational field that this would cause would be enough to account for 10% of the predicted effect on Mercury’s orbit. But the general theory of relativity had already accounted for the peculiarities in Mercury’s orbit. Therefore, if the distortion were found, the theory must be incorrect. In other words, said Dr. Dicke, gravitational attraction of one body for another must be accounted for, not by relativity, but by some other mechanism. (AIP News, 8/28/65)
Vice Adm. H. G. Rickover (usn) spoke before the Publishers’ Lunch Club of New York. In his speech Admiral Rickover said: “How to resolve the antithesis between technology and individual liberty; how to insure that technology will be beneficial, not harmful, to man, to society, and to our democratic institutions—this, I would say, is a public question. I raise it here because I believe the members of this audience are particularly well qualified to explore this problem. In your business the conflict between technology and liberty —so prevalent everywhere else in our society—is muted, if not absent altogether. “Improvements in the mechanics of producing and selling books have not diminished the importance of the author. Your success still depends on	him. He cannot be rendered	obsolete by automation. The human factor therefore continues to outweigh the technical. As in the past, your main function is to discover talent and help bring it to fruition. You know that liberty enhances creativity, that men with a special competence must be allowed to follow their own judgment. . . . “How to make technology most useful to ourselves and our society, yet prevent it from controlling our lives—that is the problem. The problem is aggravated by the bureau-cratization of American life, itself largely a result of technology.” . (Text, CR, 1/29/65, 1522-24)
In a farewell speech at a dinner meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M.	Zuckert said that in contrast to five years ago, the Air Force today was better. He predicted it would continue to improve: “We have not reached a plateau in technology, strategy, concepts, or doctrine. All kinds of changes will continue—in both hardware and ideas.” (ap, Balt. Sun, 9/18/65, 5)
Formation of Institute for Oceanography, part of the Environmental Science Services Administration, was announced by Dept, of Commerce. Interaction between ocean, earth, and atmosphere would be studied in programs designed to gain new knowledge of the ocean. Headed by Dr. Harris B. Stewart, Jr., formerly chief oceanographer of the Coast and Geodetic Survey, the Institute had headquarters in Washington, D.C. (Dept, of Commerce pio; NYT, 12/30/65,42)	_
New York Times editorialized: “The Aerospace Corporation, a multimillion-dollar nonprofit organization sponsored and financed by the Air Force, has been subject to a searching scrutiny by a House Armed Services subcommittee. Its report is a devastating indictment of Aerospace’s financial management. . . . “The abuses at Aerospace are mainly the fault of the Air Force, which indulged its prodigal offspring by failing to exercise any real control. Aerospace is only one of a growing number of Government-owned non-profit companies working on important defense assignments; there is no evidence that all are as expensive in their spending practices, but we agree with the subcommittee that it would be a good idea to examine the function and the costs of the rest and bring their fees under strict regulation. There is no reason for maintaining such operations if their work can be done cheaply and effectively either by the Government itself or by private enterprise.” (NYT, 9/7/65, 34M)
afsc’s 6595th Aerospace Test Wing assumed responsibility for Atlas launches into the Air Force Western Test Range in support of the Army Nike antimissile program and the usaf Advanced Ballistic Reentry Systems ( Abres) program. ( afsc Release 46.65)
Extraterrestrial dust particles would be collected by U.S. and foreign scientists using five rockets launched into the extreme upper atmosphere from Churchill Research Range, Canada, by the Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories (afcrl), NASA and USAF announced jointly. Each of the five Aerobee 150 rockets would carry a recoverable device called a “Venus Flytrap” designed to capture micrometeoroids and noctilucent cloud particles at various altitudes for laboratory inspection. NASA had provided partial funding for the project and had arranged for participation of organizations from abroad: the Commonw'ealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, Radio Physics Laboratory, Sydney, Australia; the National Center for Radioactivity Research (CNRS), France; the Meteorological Institute, Stockholm Univ., Sweden; Max Planck Institute, Heidelberg, Germany; and the Univ. of Tel Aviv, Israel, (nasa Release 65-223; afoar Release 7-65-1)
American Telephone and Telegraph Co. made the first formal bid to become a customer of ComSatCorp. In a filing with the FCC, AT&T asked for the right to lease 100 voice-grade channels that would operate through early bird I comsat and connect with European telephone companies. AT&T also asked that it be allowed to acquire a television channel for use from time to time in providing TV service to and from Europe in ventures with various European communications carriers. (WSJ, 6/3/65, 4)
USAF named Robert G. boewy chairman of the U.S. Air Force Scientific Advisory Board, (Hussie, Phil. Inq,, 9/26/65) *	ComSatCorp asked fcc for permission to make available service via early bird i outside of normal hours to permit transatlantic televising of Pope Paul vis visit to the U.S. October 4. The Corporation normally could offer its services between 5 a.m. and 9 p.m. daily; it was seeking to extend them from 9 p.m. to 5 a.m. during the papal visit. (ComSatCorp Release) *	Potential of a manned orbiting vehicle to obtain advanced photographic and electromagnetic intelligence on Soviet ICbm defenses, on Russian deployment of new smaller solid propellant icbms, and on Chinese progress toward a strategic missile force was suggested by Aviation Week and Space Technology as being significant factor behind Defense Secretary Robert S, McNamara’s decision to proceed with manned military space missions. It was photographic evidence provided fay Samos, shortly after McNamara had come to the Pentagon, that had enabled the U.S. to determine that the Russians were not building and deploying icbms as fast as had been believed and which had allowed McNamara to establish more modest missile production goals. (Av. m„ 9/27/65, 261
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Director Dr. Robert Gilruth received the China-Burma-India World War li service group’s annual Americanism award at the national convention in Houston as “the man who has contributed the most during the past year to the American way of life.” (Houston Chron., 8/8/65)
For more than six years, U.S. nuclear warheads had been mounted secretly on planes and missiles of West Germany and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, the New York Times reported. Through a combination of physical and electronic controls, the warheads had remained under American custody, and the allies could not use the weapons without specific approval of the U.S. (Finney, NYT, 11/21/65, 1)
Dr. Robert H. Goddard was posthumously awarded the Daniel Guggenheim Medal by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. Mrs. Goddard accepted the medal. (Av. Wk., 3/22/65, 13)
usaf launched an Atlas D icbm from Vandenberg afb in test of the Army’s Nike-Zeus antimissile missile, (upi, NYT, 7/2/65)
Science interest among U.S. high school students was declining, Dr. Robert Jastrow, director of the New York branch, nasa Goddard Institute for Space Studies, told the New York City Youth Board, meeting to inaugurate Youth Week. Citing figures from a study covering 1958 to 1963, Jastrow reported a 30% decline in the number of semi-finalists competing for National Merit Scholarship Awards who whose physics as a career preference. He suggested that the image of science as “a dehumanized field of work open only to a gifted few” could be counteracted only if scientists “are willing to step down from this pedestal and interact with voung people.” (Whitehouse, NYT, 12/5/65, 71)	'	“ ‘ '
Pan American World Airways had ordered four Boeing 727-QC (quick change) jet aircraft that could be converted in less than half an hour from an all-cargo plane to a complete passenger aircraft or a passenger-cargo plane. Aircraft would have a psssenger capacity of 119; in an all-cargo operation the plane could carry a payload of 41,000	lbs. more than 1,400 mi. Delivery was scheduled for summer 1966. (NYT, 7/26/65, 39M)
Snap 8, NASA—aec experimental reactor, had run continuously at power for 209 days, thereby completing the longest known power operation of a nuclear reactor. Built by Atomics International Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., Snap 8 began power operation in November 1963, ran 91% of the total time available, and produced more than five million kw. hours of heat. It was operated in a shielded AEC test facility near Los Angeles. (Atomics International Release Ai-18)
Distinguished Lecture Series sponsored by the Metropolitan Washington Board of Trade was opened by Dr. James A. Van Allen, head of the Univ. of Iowa’s physics and astronomy department. Dr. Van Allen discussed “Space Science.: Past, Present, and Future” at the Univ. of Maryland. Series of seven lectures was designed “to foster bettef understanding between industry and local universities in an effort to create a research community in the Washington [D.C.] area equivalent to the Harvard-MIT complex in the Boston area.” (Wash. Post, 10/3/65, B2)
Jerome Lederer, director of the Flight Safety Foundation, Inc., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at the Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. He was cited for “35 years of distinguished service and unceasing devotion to increasing the safety of flight throughout the world . . .” (naa News; ap, L.A. Times, 11/27/65)
Commercial aviation’s first nonstop crossing of the Pacific was made by Qantas Airlines Boeing 707: San Francisco to Sydney in 14 hrs., 33 min. (Wash. Daily News, 3/8/65)
U.S. and Argentina jointly announced plans to collaborate in launching weather rockets to gain information about hemispheric weather patterns. Under terms of an agreement, Argentina would provide launching facilities, would transport rockets and equipment from the U.S. where they would be manufactured, and would assemble and launch the rockets. U.S. launchings would be made from Wallops Station; launching pads in Argentina would be at Chamical. Other Latin American countries had been invited to participate in the program, (ap, NYT, 5/22/65)
afsc Aeronautical Systems Div. had awarded to North American Aviation, Inc., an $8,150,000 increment to previously awarded contract for the xb-70 aircraft, dod announced, (dod Release 100-65)
Resignation of Eugene M. Zuckert as Secretary of the Air Force, effective Sept. 30, was announced by President Johnson. To succeed Zuckert, who had served since Jan. 23, 1961—longer than any previous Air Force secretary—the President named Dr. Harold Brown, DOD Director of Defense Research and Engineering since May 3, 1961. No replacement was named for Dr. Brown. President Johnson also accepted the resignation of Dr. Brockway McMillan as Undersecretary of the Air Force, also effective Sept. 30. (White House Release; Horner, Wash. Eve. Star, 7/11/65, 12)
usaf “ripple-launched” two Minutemen icbm’s from Vandenberg afb. Roth were launched from silos, the second within minutes of the first. (M&R, 2/15/65, 12)
Richard E. Horner, former Associate Administrator of NASA (1959-60), was installed as 1965 president of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. (Av. Wk., 2/8/65, 13)
First s-il-s ground test stage in the Saturn s-n program was completed by North American Aviation at Seal Beach. The stage would be used for structural tests simulating critical thrust and pressure loads anticipated during Saturn V/Apollo flight missions. This stage would not be fired—it would have no engine, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 2/5/65, 1)
In a congratulatory wire to President Johnson, Yugoslavia’s President Tito called the gemini v spaceflight a “major achievement of American science” and expressed hope that it would “serve peace in the world.” (upi, NYT, 9/5/65, 28)
Concern regarding the secrecy shrouding the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol) program received editorial comment in the Washington Post: “The President has given assurances that although information gained through MOL will relate to America’s defense capability, the thrust of the project is peaceful. On the other hand mol’s director seems quite willing to provoke a military race in space. There is one easy, proven method by which the doubts and misgivings about MOL can be allayed. The Air Force should adopt NASA’s open public information policies at once and apply them to every stage of MOL.” {Wash. Post, 10/22/65, 24)
North American Aviation, Inc., and United Aerospace Workers Union announced approval of a new three-year contract covering 35,000 workers in four states, (ap, NYT, 10/11/65, 28; ap, Wash. Post, 10/11/65, A19)
A six-and-one-half-minute captive test firing of Saturn V booster’s second (S—II) stage was conducted at the Santa Susana, Calif., static test laboratory of North American Aviation, Inc., NASA announced. The test—first full-duration firing—continued until the stage’s propellants were depleted, slightly longer than normal flight duration, (msfc Release 65-203; Marshall Star, 8/11/65, 1, 7)
Arthur E. Jenks, retired FAA official, received the Laura Taber Barbour Air Safety Award for 1965 at a luncheon in Washington, D.C., given by the Society of Automotive Engineers in conjunction with its annual meeting. The award, sponsored by the Flight Safety Foundation, was presented to Jenks because of his “contributions to improving the techniques for flight checking the accuracy of air navigational aids and improvement of landing aids on and around airports.” (faa Release 65-30)
A new telescope on Mt. Wilson, after surveying more than half the sky visible from that site, had detected from 400-1,000 celestial objects cooler than 1,500° F, reported Dr. Bruce T. Ulrich of Cal Tech at a meeting of the American Physical Society in Chicago. Since between 70% and 80% of them lay along the Milky Way, it was theorized that they were “very large—probably thousands of times larger than the sun, very distant, and quite rare.” The new telescope was novel in several ways: its concave mirror was of an epoxy plastic coated with aluminum; the mirror rocked back and forth at 20 cps, so that light from an infrared source in the sky would sweep across detectors of lead sulphide and silicon; the detectors, kept at —320° F, were sensitive enough to detect the slight increase in the infrared as the arm of the telescope swept past one of these objects. (Sullivan, NYT, 10/30/65, 28C)
Secretary of the Air Force Eugene M. Zuckert named Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) as Director of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory Program. This assignment was in addition to his duties as Commander, Air Force Systems Command. B/Gen. Harry L. Evans was named Vice Director of the Mol Program and B/Gen. Russell A. Berg was named Deputy Director, (dod Release 560-65)
Pan American Airways announced it would purchase four additional Boeing 727 jet aircraft, bringing its Boeing purchase program total to 19. {WSJ, 5/7/65,3)
Hsinhua, official Chinese Communist press agency, announced public display in Peking military museum of a pilotless JJ.S. reconnaissance plane, shot down over central south China, Jan. 2, 1965, “by the Air Force.” {NYT, 4/3/65, 2)
Atlas launch vehicle sustainer engine system had been successfully fired for the first time using flox, a combination of liquid fluorine and liquid oxygen, as the oxidizer. This was the first time a complete engine system had been fired using this high-energy oxidizer. Approximately 20 firings would be conducted in the series using the standard concentration of 30'/ liquid fluorine to 70% liquid oxygen. Conditions involving thrust level, oxidant fuel ratio, and other engine variables would be run to establish engine performance limitations. The tests were being conducted under LRC contract, by North American Aviation’s Rocketdyne Div., Canoga Park, Calif. ( LRC Release 65-211
The President has taken the moderate and, in this case, wise course in deciding to speed up the development of an American supersonic commercial airliner with an additional $140 million in research over the next IV2 years,” said a Washington Post editorial. It continued: “He could have called a halt to the program and abdicated America’s aviation industry leadership to France and Britain, who already are developing their Concorde, or to the Soviets with their TU-144. Or he could have followed the recommendation of some of his advisers and spent even greater sums of money to build two competing types of planes which both might end up as impractical white elephants. . . the President’s moderate speed-up decision certainly is justified on scientific grounds, for research invariably turns up new ideas for progress. And it is justified on political grounds as well, for this country must maintain its pioneering leadership in all forms of transportation.” {Wash. Post, 7/17/65)
SlO-million seismometer post was dedicated in Billings, Mont., at ceremonies attended by more than 60 scientists from 30 nations who would tour the 525 seismometer sites in Montana. President Johnson, in Washington, D.C., said: “This new Department of Defense installation, the first of its kind, will help detect and identify earthquakes. It brings us closer to the day when science can distinguish with certainty between underground nuclear explosions and other forms of seismic disturbances.” Scientific data would be made available to the world, Johnson added, (ap, NYT, 10/14/65, 3)
20th anniversary of the United Nations celebrated in San Francisco. President Lyndon B. Johnson said in an address to the General Assembly: “The movement of history is glacial. On two decades of experience none can presume to speak with certainty of the destiny of man?s affairs. But this we do know and this we believe: Futility and failure are not the truths of this organization brought into being here 20 years ago. “Where historically man has moved fitfully from war toward war, in these last two decades man has moved steadily away from war as either an instrument of national policy or a means of international decision. . . . “The promise of the future lies in what science, the ever more productive industrial machine, the ever more productive, fertile and usable lands, the computer, the miracle drug and the man in space all spread before us. The promise of the future lies in what the religions and the philosophies, the cultures and the wisdoms of 5,000 years of civilization have finally distilled and confined to us—the promise of abundant life and the brotherhood of man.” (Text, NYT, 6/26/65)
North American Aviation’s xr-70a supersonic bomber reached 2,000 mph and 60,000-ft. in a one-hr. 47-min. experimental flight from Edwards afb across Calif., Ida., Nev., Utah, and Ariz. The aircraft was powered by six 1,500-lb. turbojet engines, each with more than 30,000-lb. thrust. XB-70a flights were being used to obtain data valuable for design of the supersonic transport (Sst) now in the design study phase. (NYT, 10/15/65, 45)
Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara confirmed that the U.S. had given Great Britain option to purchase F-lll aircraft and spare parts totaling more than $1 billion for its Royal Air Force. Delivery orders for the F-lll were expected to be placed after completion of the British defense review, (dod Release 210-65)
Explanation of rash of Ufo sightings was given by Howard Margolis in the Washington Post: “The latest flurry of saucer reports, according to the Air Force, seems to he based on such things as a conjunction-of the planet Jupiter and some bright stars, compounded by atmospheric conditions that produce an enhanced twinkling effect, further compounded by the annual summer meteorite showers; still further compounded by some other atmospheric effects that tend to produce bogus radar reflection, and finally compounded by the well-marked tendency of any good Ufo sighting reported in the newspapers to lead many more in the same area—in this case the Midwest—for a time thereafter.” (Margolis, Wash.- Post, 8/10/65)
Britain and France signed an agreement to jointly build two supersonic military aircraft for the 1970s: (1) a strike trainer; and (2) a pivoting-wing attack plane. The strike trainer, to be based on France’s twin-engine Breguet 121, would be built by the British Air-, craft Corp. in cooperation with the Societe des Ateliers d’Aviation Louis Breguet. Rolls Royce, Ltd., and Turbomeca, a French engine concern, would supply the engines. The variable sweep wing, aircraft similar to the American F-lll fighter-bomber, but smaller, would be based on the concept of British aircraft designer Dr. Barnes Wallis and built by the British Aircraft Corp. and the Societe Generale Aero-nautique Marcelle Dassault. The agreement committed each country to an initial expenditure of $56 million, most of which would be spent on a prototype for the strike trainer. (Farnsworth, NYT, 5/18/65, 8)
North American Aviation Co.’s xb-70a experimental bomber reached altitude of 59,000 ft. and speed of 1,500 mph on its tenth flight from Edwards afb. Duration of flight was 1 hr. 39 min., of which 1 hr. 14 min. was at supersonic speed, boosting its total supersonic flight time to 5 hrs. 5 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/21/65, A7)
usaf Chief of Staff Gen. J. P. McConnell told a meeting of the Air Force Association in Washington, D.C., that “any reports of the impending demise” of the flying Air Force were “slightly exaggerated.” In fact, he added, a wide variety of new and better aircraft was needed to meet “the ever-changing nature and scope of the threat to our national interests.” (Text)
Suggestion that synthesis of life should be a national goal by Dr. Charles C. Price, president of the American Chemical Society, received comment from the New York Times: “Could such an effort be added to the total national scientific enterprise or could it be fitted in only by cutting back on other sectors, particularly the very expensive programs in space or particle physics? Would mankind benefit more if the funds needed for this project were devoted instead to less exotic but perhaps more vital needs of ending the pollution of the air we breathe and the water we hope to drink? The verdict on Dr. Price’s proposal is by no means immediately obvious. “The most unfortunate result that could come from Dr. Price’s suggestion would be the mounting of a new international competition, a ‘life race’ that would produce the same tension and needless duplication that the space race has produced. Men of many nations have contributed to the progress that makes it possible now to consider the goal Dr. Price has put upon the public agenda. If any such effort is undertaken it should be as international as the common humanity that makes all men brothers.” (NYT, 9/15/65, 43)
Dr. Edmund Klein of Roswell Park Memorial Institute for Cancer Research and Dr. Samuel Fine, Northeastern Univ. professor, in a report prepared for the 149th national meeting of the American Chemical Society, disclosed that laser beams may cause damage to the eyes, brain, and other organs in a way that may not be immediately apparent. Klein recommended that researchers “err on the side of safety in precautionary measures.” Lasers are devices for concentrating light into extremely powerful beams; researchers were exploring their usage in fields of communications, eye surgery, cancer treatment, and in chemical and other industrial applications, (ap, Houston Post, 4/5/65)
American Airlines would directly support San Francisco Oakland Helicopter Airlines under the terms of an agiecment recently submit* ted to the cab for approval. (ATT, 7/28/65, 54M)
Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told members of the Overseas Writers Club in Washington, D.C., that Communist China could produce hydrogen bombs by a comparatively simple process and could possibly develop a nuclear delivery system in five years. Dr. Urey said Communist China had surprised world scientists, including himself, when it produced a nuclear bomb last fall with uranium 235— one of the technically most difficult ways to produce the nuclear bomb. (ap, NYT, 4/30/65, 3)
Dr. Albert C. Hall, Deputy Director of Defense Research and Engineering, told the National Space Club meeting in Washington, D.C., that a significant announcement on the Mol program would be made in the “near future,” according to Missile/Space Daily. When asked if Mol would match the capability demonstrated by the U.S.S.R. in July 16 launch of proton i, Dr. Hall replied: “We feel a capability in the order of placing 25,000 lbs. in orbit would enable us to meet DOD needs.” Dr. Hall said that DOD was interested in the development of recoverable, reusable boosters and he felt that the reduction of problems in mating payloads to boosters had been a “significant event during the past year.” (M/S Daily, 7/21/65; nsc Release)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay, former Air Force Chief of Staff, was awarded the 1965 Collier Trophy, U.S. aviation’s highest honor, in a ceremony at the Executive Office Building, Washington, D.C. General LeMay was cited for “development of high performance aircraft, missiles, and space systems which in 1964 significantly expanded the frontiers of American aeronautics and astronautics.” (naa News, 10/18/65; Raymond, NYT, 10/22/65,1)
Washington Post editorial comment on President Johnson’s assignment of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory project to the Air Force: “. . . Anxiety arises out of the Air Force commitment to total secrecy in its space operations. . . . [nasa] has pursued a brilliantly successful open public information policy. It has made every American a participant in its exciting conquest of space, aroused the national interest in the whole world of science, stirred the youth of the country to enthusiasm and stimulated national pride. The Vandenberg Air Force Base which will become a major site for MOL launching has operated under a veil of secrecy. . . . “The Pentagon has not yet devised a policy for informing the public on the man-in-space MOL project. If it continues the Vandenberg policies of the past, the country is going to know very little about MOL. Such secrecy is bound to arouse international suspicions and alarms, particularly since the flights will be over Soviet territory. Either this is primarily a project in the peaceful penetration of space that requires little secrecy; or it is a secret military project that cannot be reconciled with our previous professions.” (Wash. Post, 8/27/65, A23)
Describing the size, capacity, and productivity of the c-5a aircraft, recently approved and funded by DOD and ordered by the Air Force from Lockheed Aircraft Co., Ira C. Eaker said in the San Diego Express: “A fleet of 130 c—54 aircraft, the best then available, were required for the Berlin airlift. Five c—5as could have done that job more efficiently and with a saving of 5,000 crew and support personnel.” (Eaker, San Diego Express, 10/26/65, 29)
Discussing the problems of organizing and consolidating the vast amounts of technical and scientific data at the Congress of the International Federation for Documentation in Washington, D.C., Dr. Eugene B. Konecci, National Aeronautics and Space Council, said: “It is felt by many that the most highly advanced information system in the Federal Government has been and remains the program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. This program has been a pace-setter lor information advances, both on the part of the Government and private sectors of our economy. The NASA contractors and grantees get the benefit of the most widely-diversified and promptest information service rendered by any government agency. The NASA attempts to cover world space literature, star [Scientific and Technical Aerospace Reports] is reproduced semi-monthly and through arrangement with the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s open literature is covered in the international aerospace abstracts. A total of more than 50,000 items a year are indexed in depth on magnetic tape for use in the NASA computer base literature research system. Tapes are updated monthly and distributed to the NASA Research Centers, a dozen major NASA contractors, and three university research centers that use them in dissemination of technological information to industry. . . .” (Text)
North American Aviation’s xb—70a made its fifth flight from Palmdale, Calif. Maximum speed was mach 1.6; maximum altitude 45,000 ft.; duration of flight, 1 hr. 10 min. During the flight the wingtips were folded to 25° and then to the full-down position of 65°. It was the first time this total deflection had been attempted. Flutter and stability characteristics, the inlet control system, and the air inlet bypass door system were investigated during the flight. Although the emergency landing parachute system did not function during landing at Edwards afb, the aircraft completed a normal landing with normal braking. The drag chute had deployed, but the three-chute pack did not deploy. (Av. Wk„ 2/22/65, 22; upi, NYT, 2/17/65, 74)
The 10 crew members of a Pan American World Airways Boeing 707 jetliner that caught fire just after take-off and lost an engine and part of a wing would receive faa’s Exceptional Service Citation and medals, faa announced. Capt. Charles H. Kimes and his crew landed the plane safely at Travis afb; all passengers were clear of the plane within the two-minute goal set by faa as a maximum safe evacuation time. (NYT, 6/30/65, 59)
afsc announced award of five letter contracts totaling $3.8 million for conceptual phase of Mark II Avionics Svstem being considered for use on f-111a aircraft. General Dynamics, Hughes Aircraft Co., Sperry Gyroscope Co., Westinghouse Electric Corp., and Autonetics Div. of North American Aviation, Inc., would perform analyses leading to system design recommendations integrating many subsystems. (afsc Release 30—65)
Report of experiments by the European Organization for Nuclear Research indicated there was no fifth force in nature as had been proposed, independently, by two groups of American physicists to explain some unexpected experimental results. The four forces in nature were gravity, electromagnetism, and weak and strong nuclear forces. (Reuters, NYT, 2/28/65, 69)
A working model of Electro-Optical Systems, Inc.’s new 100-lb., 15in.dia. ion engine, using accelerated ions to gain thrust, was presented to Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C., for display in the Arts and Industries building. {Wash. Post, 5/27/65, F3) May 27-29:	Forty educators from Alabama, Arkansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, and Tennessee attended a NASA-Univ. of Alabama Educational Symposium whose prime purpose was to determine the impact upon the curriculum of secondary schools of new knowledge and developments in science, sociology, and human relations created by NASA MSFC activities. Symposium and workshop were conducted by the University under a msfc contract, (msfc Release 65-129)
Much has been done in an effort to alleviate aircraft noise. Annual expenditures have risen from $100,000 in 1961 to $1.3 million to be spent by faa alone in 1965,” faa Administrator Najeeb E. Halaby told a National Aircraft Noise Symposium in New York City. He warned: “If we fail to make progress in reducing noise . . . pressure may perhaps ultimately exclude the availability of aviation facilities to our centers of trade and commerce. I feel it is essential that we all recognize the price that we may be forced to pay for a tolerable environment next door to our airports.” (Text)
boac announced in its annual report that it had asked British and American aircraft manufacturers to submit plans for a subsonic airliner accommodating up to 250 passengers. Sud Aviation of France and Hawker-Siddeley of Great Britain told the Corporation they were not interested in the project. (Reuters, NYT, 7/29/65,48)
L/Col. Pavel R. Popovich, who orbited the earth 48 times in vostok IV in August 1962, said in an interview with Izvestia that the rendezvous of GEMINI vi and Gemini vii was “a great achievement of American cosmonautics on the way to exploiting space around the earth.” (Reuters, NYT, 12/22/65,19)
usaf launched a Titan I ICBM from Vandenberg AFB, Calif., as one of a series of tests to determine compatibility of the missile with various payloads, (ap, NYT, 3/6/65, 9; M&R, 3/15/65,11)
Representatives of companies planning to buy the supersonic Concorde airliner were told in a report prepared by the joint builders, British Aircraft Corp. and Sud Aviation France, that the makers were confident, following extensive wind tunnel tests, that the Concorde represented “the best possible compromise for a supersonic transport” and would be “safe and easy to fly.” A special report on the problem of sonic boom said tests had shown that the calculated extent of these sharp detonations had been “generally pessimistic.” It said that climb and acceleration techniques were being developed that would keep the shock waves of air causing these booms as slight as possible. The experts present for the three-day talks on the airliner’s progress were from Air France, British Overseas Airways Corp., Pan American World Airways, American Airlines, Continental Airlines, Qantas, Air India, and Middle East Airlines, which had together ordered or taken options on 45 of the aircraft, valued at $560 million. (Reuters, NYT, 5/19/65, 94C)
The Space Act of 1958 may have unwittingly provided competition that is getting results, said an editorial in the Cleveland Plain Dealer: “There was conjecture then, and there is conjecture now, that NASA and the Air Force duplicate efforts in the parallel development of rockets. There are rumors of smouldering controversy. “But yesterday’s dramatic blastoff of the triple-barrelled Titan 3-C by the Air Force, coming closely on the heejs of NASA’s sensational Gemini performance, indicates the competition, thus far is beneficial to both.” (Cleveland Plain Dealer, 6/19/65, 23)
Immediate planning for a fourth jetport for the New York City area was advocated by Harold E. Gray, President of Pan American World Airways, at the ' Annual Aviation Luncheon of the Queens Chamber of Commerce: “Maybe the need is eight years from now. Maybe it is twelve years from now. But it would take ten years, as I understand it—starting today—to develop a fourth airport. So, tomorrow may be too late to make this start. Manana is not soon enough for me!” This was the first time a Pan Am official had stated the airline’s position on the jetport issue. (Hudson, NYT, 6/22/65, 58)
In an editorial titled “Loss of a Leader,” the Washington Sunday Star concluded a review of Dr. Hugh L. Dryden’s contributions to American aeronautics and astronautics: “It is in the tradition of NASA, and of NACA before it, to name its research centers and after important figures in the development of aeronautics and astronautics: Langley, Lewis, Ames, Marshall, Kennedy. One major center—the one at Houston— remains unnamed. It would be a fitting tribute to a dedicated American if that center were henceforth to bear the name of Hugh L. Dryden.” (Wash. Sun. Star, 12/5/65, B2)
American Institute of Physics established a Center for History and Philosophy of Physics, which was the merging of aip’s Niels Bohr Library of the History of Physics, History of Physics Archives, and Project on the History of Recent Physics in the United States, (aip Release)
Sen. Ralph Yarborough (D-Tex.) said on the floor of the Senate that results of Government-sponsored research should be “freely available to the American public” and that he “viewed with . . . skepticism any proposal to create a private monopoly” over this information. (CR, 3/16/65, 5051)
A “Dictionary of Scientific Biography” containing essays on careers of scientists and mathematicians would be published by Scribner with a National Science Foundation grant of more than $250,000. Dr. Charles C. Gillispie, Princeton professor of History of Science, had been named Editor-in-Chief. {NYT, 3/7/65, Book Review Sec., 8)
A new theory for the behavior of matter, called SU-6, was presented in New York at the annual meeting of the American Physical Society by Dr. Abraham Pais of the Rockefeller Institute. The concept, based on a branch of mathematics known as symmetry group theory, supported views that all matter might be composed of basic building blocks, or “quarks,” that could be either real fragments or mathematical entities smaller than the electron. It grouped the 100+ known fragments of matter into groups and then predicted behavior. A modification makes the theory also compatible with Einstein’s relativity theory. (Sullivan, NYT, 1/28/65, 1, 10)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $17 million increment to a previous contract for the xb-70 flight test program. USAF Aeronautical Systems Div. was the contracting agency, (dod Release 374-65)
British Minister of Aviation Roy Jenkins said at a London conference on European cooperation in advanced technology that Britain might seek collaboration with France in developing the VC—10 aircraft into an “air bus” capable of carrying 265 passengers. This move was thought to be precipitated by activities of two American companies, Boeing and Douglas, both of which had approached boac with their versions of an air bus. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/6/65, 54M)
Israel, to reassure U.S. of her peaceful intentions for use of atomic energy, had permitted two aec commissioners to inspect Dimona reactor, a natural uranium, heavy-water-moderated type, capable of producing enough plutonium for several relatively small atomic weapons. Israel had imposed strict secrecy on the inspections, one a year ago and a second last month. U.S. tentatively concluded that Dimona was not being used to produce plutonium for atomic weapons but suggested that reactor be placed under inspection by International Atomic Energy Agency. Israel refused, explaining: (1) she should not be forced to place her national development under agency inspection until international inspection had been accepted by all nations, and (2) the Agency had discriminated against her in favor of Arab states in membership of its board and location of research centers. Many American and British specialists feared that Israel could be “keeping the option open” to develop atomic deterrent against Arab nations. (Finney, NYT, 3/14/65, 1)
X-22a vertical/short take-off and landing aircraft (V/Stol) was inspected by Government and military representatives at the Bell Aerosystems plant in Niagara Falls. Its unique characteristic was the ducted fan concept of propulsion consisting of four shrouded propellers—two forward and two on the tips of the 39-ft. wing aft—driven by four T-58 turbine engines. The four engines, expected to propel the aircraft at a cruising speed of 300 mph, were run for about five minutes. X-22a was constructed for the Army, Navy, and Air Force under a Navy-administered contract for $25 million. First flight test would be made in September 1965. (dod Release 341-65: ap, NYT, 5/26/65, 94)
Aerospace Corp. was accused of practices that were “uneconomical, unnecessary, unreasonable, or unjustified” by the Special Investigations Subcommittee of the House Armed Forces Committee, in a report on an examination of business management and fiscal controls at Aerospace that had culminated in hearings in May 1965. The report recommended a reappraisal of the usaf concept that had led to the creation of Aerospace, the abolishment of the fee-funding system, a review and reform of Aerospace’s security procedures, and a study of personnel policies and salaries. It also said usaf exercised improper and inadequate control of its contracts with Aerospace, often resulting in fees being provided “for purposes for which they were never used,” and Aerospace using “fees for purposes never intended by the Air Force . . .” (Committee on Armed Services Report)
“Early Bird should not be construed by any government as just another door to be opened when there is a self-serving point to be made, and a door to be slammed when that point is in danger of being questioned,” said Dr. Frank Stanton, president of the Columbia Broadcasting System, in a speech at the Career Services Awards dinner of the National Civil Service League in Washington, D.C. Dr. Stanton said it was agreed the peoples of the world should have an opportunity to hear foreign leaders, but that this must be done in an atmosphere of freedom “with openness and in candid discussion.” He added: “Early Bird must not be transformed from the unprecedented opportunity into the most universal and pervasive censorship—both affirmative and negative—ever known.” (NYT, 5/20/65, 75)
U.S. Army modified Redstone missile was successfully test-fired from wtr as part of Advanced Research Projects Agency’s Project Defender. Some 24 Army-stockpiled Redstones had been ordered by arpa for use in reentry measurements. This seven-year-old Redstone, among the first Redstones reactivated last June for Project Defender, was the first Redstone to be launched since November 1963. (SBD, 1/13/66. 72: M&R, 12/13/65, 17)	'	'	' During November: Wendover Air Force Auxiliary Field, Utah, an empty facility in “caretaker” status, was reported to be leading candidate for site of the first American inland landing station for spacecraft. A study made by a dod committee had described Wendover as “the only site known to satisfy the recovery requirements of polar orbiting vehicles.” (NYT, 11/28/65, 50)
“We are already getting ready for the next manned flight,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev’s backup pilot wrote in a Soviet air force journal. “We are getting acquainted with the construction of a new ship” and “planning new flights on new courses with more complicated assignments.” {Wash. Post, 5/8/65)
Spokesmen for some 43,000 United Aerospace Workers Union members employed by North American Aviation, Inc., announced plans for possible strike action Oct. 10 unless negotiators reached agreement on a new wages and hours contract. UAW members involved worked in plants in Los Angeles, Calif.; Tulsa, Okla.; Columbus, Ohio; and Neosho, Mo. (upi, Houston Chron., 9/16/65)
First regularly scheduled air cushion service in the U.S. was initiated between Oakland and San Francisco over San Francisco Bay in a yearlong test, authorized by the Civil Aeronautics Board, to determine feasibility of using Hovercraft in ferrying passengers in metropolitan areas. Eight round trips a day would he provided by a seven-ton, $300,000 craft by Bell Aerosystems. (NYT, 8/8/65, 74)
Brig. Gen. Charles A. Lindbergh (usafr) was elected to the Board of Pan American World Airways. During his 36-year association with the airline, he had helped develop several aircraft from the Fokker and Sikorsky to the Boeing and Douglas jets. Recently he had worked on the supersonic transport and the fan jet Falcon. He was also a member of the naca from 1931 to 1939. {NYT, 3/18/65, 47)
North American Air Defense Command said reported Ufo sightings from six states were probably the planet Jupiter or one of the stars Rigel, Capella, Betelgeuse, or Aldebaran. A usaf weather observer in Norman, Okla., taking issue with the Air Force’s stand, said: ‘‘What we saw was not an aircraft . . . nor was it a planet or star ... It was about 22,000 feet high and pitched at about a 45 degree angle.” He said he and a friend had observed the object, which was “moving quite rapidly,” for a little less than five minutes through a 40-power telescope. (Wash. Post, 8/3/65)
A shipment of American Hawk missiles was unloaded recently at the Israeli port of Haifa. Israel announced, (upi, Wash. Daily News, 4/19/65)
AFSC announced that an airspace surveillance and weapons control system had been proposed for installation in the Ryukyu islands, southwest of Japan. Through use of semi-automatic data processing, the Ryukyu Air Defense System (Rads) would pick up airspace intruders in its area almost instantly, enhancing defense capabilities of the Pacific Air Force in that area. The system would consist of radars, ultra-fast communications, data processors, display consoles and command posts where decision makers could direct manned or unmanned weapon interception. Returning aircraft could be directed home or to alternate bases through the system, (afsc Release 54.65)
Statistics on intercontinental ballistic missiles were given by Robert R. Brunn in an article in the Christian Science Monitor: “In the Soviet Union 270 to 300 intercontinental ballistic missiles (icbms) are in place. Underground and overseas the United States has more than 1,300. “Within five years the Soviets may have emplaced 500 to 600 of these great birds with nuclear warheads. But by then the American missile arsenal may have the destructive power of 3,000 1965-type A multiple warhead for the Minuteman had been developed, Brunn said, which could triple the effectiveness of this missile: “Approaching enemy territory, it could separate into three warheads, each with its own guidance system. It would be steered to the target and report if it was going to miss or hit.” (Brunn, CSM, 7/2/65, 9)
A commercial model of the military c—5a subsonic jet was being considered by Pan American World Airways to provide cheap air transportation, reported the Wall Street Journal. The aircraft would measure 230 ft. or more from nose to tail, weigh over 700,000 lbs., and carry a payload of over 250,000 lbs.; four jet engines would propel it at 550 mph. The passenger version would hold between 700 and 1,000 people. The jet bus could cut cargo rates 50% or more and cut fares 20 to 25%. Problems would arise, however, in that present airport runways might not be able to sustain the great weight and new procedures would have to be developed to handle the increased traffic. (Cooke, WSJ, 7/16/65,1, 8)
Two workmen were killed and three were injured in an explosion and fire in the propellant preparation building at Thiokol Chemical Corp.’s Minuteman missile facility. The accident occurred at Minuteman Plant 78, an Air Force facility operated by Thiokol. An investigation was underway to determine the cause, (ap, NYT, 10/28/65, 43M)
65-ton Saturn s-ivb “battleship” tankage and associated vehicle equipment were shipped from San Francisco by msfc to usaf Arnold Engineering Development Center, Tullahoma, Tenn., for use in high-altitude tests of the stage’s J-2 engine, (msfc Release 65-291)
Positive action must soon replace delay and procrastination” on the development of an American supersonic airliner, Sen. A. S. (Mike) Monroney (D-Okla.), Chairman of the Senate Aviation Subcommittee, told a Washington, D.C., meeting of the Society of Automotive Engineers. Monroney said that U.S. failure to build the plane could “choke off” 375,000 jobs within several years. Sen. Monroney added that if U.S. carriers did not fly supersonic planes as early as foreign airlines, it could mean a loss of $1 billion a year in passenger revenues. “If we capitulate, it would mean the eventual loss of technical superiority and a second class airline industry,” he said. (NYT, 4/15/65, 15)	.	.
FCC approved ComSatCorp’s proposal to build a ground station at Brewster Flat, Wash.—a U.S. link in their proposed worldwide communications system. The approval applied only to transmission and receiving facilities; other portions of the application such as ownership of the station and establishment of its links with San Francisco were still under consideration. (Wash. Eve. Star, 10/8/65, A17; WSJ, 10/14/65)
Air Force Secretary Eugene M. Zuckert placed further restrictions on simulated bombing missions of b-58 Hustlers over Chicago: the supersonic bombers would fly at higher altitudes (48,000-49,000 ft. instead of 41,000-44,000-ft. range originally programed) to reduce impacts of sonic booms; flights would be canceled during bad weather. It had been announced earlier that the number of training missions per day would be reduced from a maximum of four to two. (Chic. Trib., 1/7/65)
Ives, Whitehead & Co., Inc., a Washington, D.C., management and trade consultant company, proposed that the Nation’s program to develop a supersonic airliner be financed by a special Government corporation similar to ComSatCorp. The plan would eliminate the necessity of asking Congress to appropriate the minimum $1 billion needed for development of the aircraft. The proposed company would be known as the sst Development Corp. and would be authorized to raise capital funds through private investment channels, by issuing and selling bonds or notes or both. The corporation would then enter into contracts with airframe and engine manufacturers whose designs had been selected by faa. The corporation’s obligations would be repaid by a predetermined percentage of the profits earned by industry by selling the planes to private airlines and by royalty payments added to the sale price of the plane by the airlines, (upi, NYT, 6/26/65, 42)
In a report to President Johnson on the Titan II missile silo disaster of Aug. 9 which had claimed 53 lives, Air Force Secretary Eugene Zuckert said: “The cause of death was almost exclusively asphyxiation. A number of men had attempted to escape by the emergency ladder which apparently was blocked by two men who became jammed together in trying to pass simultaneously through a restricted area on the ladder, thus denying access to those on the ladder below them.” (Text)
French Ambassador-designate Charles Lucet awarded gold medals and citations to French and American scientists who had worked on the FR-1 project. The French satellite was launched from the Western Test Range Dec. 6 with a nasa Scout booster, nasa officials honored at the French Embassy ceremony in Washington included Arnold W. Frutkin, Assistant Administrator for International Affairs; Robert C. Baumann, Chief of Spacecraft Integration and Sounding Rocket Div., gsfc; and Dr. Robert W. Rochelle, Chief of Flight Data Systems Branch, Spacecraft Technology Div., gsfc. (Ross, Wash. Post, 12/9/65, Kl)
In an interview on the eve of his retirement as Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Curtis E. LeMay discussed the role of the military in space: “Developing military capabilities in space is a task that I think we ought to accept as an unavoidable requirement. It is the only way that we can establish control over corridors of access to our country that would otherwise be open to exploitation by aggressor forces. . . . “I am confident that man will prove useful in this medium. Just as he has adapted aircraft to tasks no one could foresee in 1903, he will undoubtedly discover uses for space systems over the years ahead that go far beyond the observation and inspection functions we envision at this time.” (ap, Haugland, Balt. Sun, 2/1/65)
Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf) announced the activation of the Contract Management Div., Air Force Systems Command (afsc), under the command of Col. Fred L. Rennels, Jr. (usaf). Located at Los Angeles Air Force Station, the new division would be responsible for DOD contract management activities in those plants assigned to the Air Force under the dod National Plant Cognizance program, (afsc Release 61.64)
Final test in North American Aviation Space and Information Systems Div.’s seven-month paraglider operational test program was successfully completed at Edwards afb, when Gemini boilerplate suspended beneath an inflated paraglider was towed to 9,000- to 10,000-ft. altitudes and released for free flights that averaged four and one half to five minutes. The test program, in which 12 consecutive successful flights and landings in tow-test vehicles were executed by company pilots, was not related directly to the NASA Gemini program but was an investigation in general operational aspects of manned landing using deployable maneuverable landing systems and emphasizing pilot problems. No further NASA funding was expected but naa was performing some company-funded work on adapting the paraglider for controlled delivery of air-dropped cargo and had submitted a proposal to the U.S. Army for further work on this technique, (naa S&ID Skywriter, 11/12/65, 1)
FCC rescinded an earlier order and granted a group of communications companies temporary authority to provide television service from EARLY bird i comsat. The order authorized AT&T, ITT, RCA Communications, Inc., and Western Union International, Inc., to pool their efforts and resources in a consortium which would buy the television service from ComSatCorp and then sell the service to American television networks. In its earlier order, FCC had granted temporary authority to ComSatCorp to provide the television service directly to the television networks. (Weekley, Wash. Post, 7/16/65)
A Titan II icbm was fired from Vandenberg afb underground silo on a routine flight down the Western Test Range by a Strategic Air Command (sac) crew, (upi, Boston Globe, 6/30/65)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon, National Aeronautics and Space Council Staff, in NASC compilation of international space programs, predicted that future Soviet activities in space would include: manned circumlunar flight; development of a Soviet version of Mol; large manned stations maintained for indefinite periods by supply ferries; manned lunar landing; major new version of an interplanetary probe, notably on using Venus as a target this fall. (Normyle, Av. Wk., 10/11/65, 32) During October: USAF had formed a seven-member, top-level policy committee to function as chief advisory group of manned orbital laboratory (Mol) objectives and problems, reported Aviation Week and Space T echnology. Chaired by Air Force Secretary Harold Brown, the committee would establish program objectives, plans, schedules, milestones, and development and test goals; make program and system changes; define major technical developments; and identify management and fiscal problems, as well as problems that affect other military departments and Government agencies. (Av. Wk., 10/4/65, 25)
President Johnson’s order for the Air Force to proceed with development of a Manned Orbital Laboratory produced a quick reaction in Wall Street: stock of the companies involved registered rapid and sometimes sizable gains. {NYT, 8/26/65, 46)
The House Armed Services Real Estate Subcommittee approved Air Force plans to dispose of Atlas and Titan missile sites representing an investment of $856,900,000. The 14 missile complexes, embracing 113 missile launching silos, were being declared surplus as a result of the obsolescence of the missiles they were built to accommodate, (ap, NYT, 5/29/65, 25)	_
Dr. Charles H. Townes, provost of MIT, reported at the meeting of the American Physical Society in Washington, D.C., that a laser beam had been used to produce sound waves more than a million times higher in pitch than those audible to the human ear. Dr. Townes explained that the laser beams at MIT had been used to produce oscillations constituting sound waves in solids and liquids. Sound had been produced by means of the laser at 3,000 me in a fluid and 60,000 me in a solid. It should be possible, Dr. Townes said, to generate sound at 300,000 me in diamond. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/65)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller announced that the New York State Atomic and Space Development Authority had selected American Machine and Foundry Co. for a $2.75-million fixed-price contract to design and build a nuclear-powered plant which would produce a million gallons of fresh water daily from seawater. Named Surfside (Small Unified Reactor Facility with Systems for Isotopes, Desalting and Electricity), the plant would be constructed on Long Island and would also be able to generate 2,500 kw. of electricity and produce high-energy radioactive isotopes. (Sibley, NYT, 7/20/65, 1, 14)
Survey issued by the North American Air Defense Command revealed 879 objects orbiting in space: American, 672 (164 payloads, 508 pieces of debris); Soviet, 198 (53 payloads, 145 pieces of debris); Canadian, 4(2 payloads, 2 debris); British, 3 (2 payloads, 1 debris); French, 2 (1 payload, 1 debris). Except for the payload and debris from France’s recent launching, all the objects in space were launched on American or Soviet rockets. (Wash. Eve. Star, 12/7/65, All)
usaf was reported to be considering the use of surplus Wing 1 Minuteman ICBMS as Guidance Error Analysis Vehicles (Geav). According to Air Force Central Inertial Guidance Test Facility (cigtf), surplus Minuteman boosters could be the cheapest means to evaluate future inertial guidance systems in a true missile environment. ETR was selected for Geav because no other range could measure missile velocity in three axes to the required accuracy. The Minuteman guidance system itself would be reprogramed and located in a recoverable payload for reasons of economy. (M&R, 1/25/65, 34)
Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) asked faa to refund $200,000 which company had deposited to reserve delivery on Sst being developed under faa contract. This was first Sst cancellation request. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
faa lost its first customer for supersonic transport (Sst), paid Pan American Grace Airways (Panagra) $200,000 refund requested by company on Feb. 25. Panagra was one of eight U.S. and 14 foreign customers which had deposited money to reserve delivery positions for Sst. (AP, NYT, 3/28/66, 57)
usaf successfully carried out second launch from Vandenberg AFB in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program to investigate and measure infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products. Nike-Javelin combination carrying payload of plume measurement was launched seconds after launch of its target, a Titan II icbm, and data were telemetered back to Vandenberg station. Preliminary reports indicated that missile was on target for preselected Pacific target area. (upi, NYT, 3/26/66, 27; dpi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)	/
NASA-sponsored space exhibit opened in Arts and Industries Building of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.; exhibit would begin U.S. tour Sept. 5. (EH)
faa awarded $65,000 contract to North American Aviation, Inc., to study competing Boeing Co. and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. Sst designs for possible size reduction that would reduce sonic boom. (WSJ, 12/5/66,12)
nas Space Science Board chairman Harry H. Hess, Princeton Univ. geology professor, received Geological Society of America’s Penrose Medal "for distinguished achievement in the geologic sciences” at society’s 79th annual meeting in San Francisco, (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 11/66, 6)
Biologist Dr. Colin S. Pittendrigh, Dean of Princeton Univ. Graduate School, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics that biological exploration of the planets would be "a milestone in modern science,” but such an undertaking, he cautioned, would first require scientific readiness and organization. Without adequate preparation, outright commitment now would risk the political consequences that would attend failure of a major, costly project. "Could commitment now to the opportunities in mid-1970s fail to freeze an inadequately formulated strategy? Could it avoid outright assignment of responsibility and the authority for decision on design and tactical detail to one of several single laboratories, no one of which can marshal the necessary scientific talent to ensure a competent project? . . . The task immediately confronting those of us anxious to see Voyager go in the 1970s is thus more organizational than scientific. . .	(A&A, 11/66, 76-89) During November: Department of Transportation would be the means and choice to begin a new era in transportation planning, Alan S. Boyd, Under Secretary of Commerce for Transportation, wrote in Astronautics & Aeronautics. ". . . transportation policy-making today necessitates a resolving of three different elements: The methodology for planning and programming; the organization to parallel such methods; and the leadership to carry them out. These three ingredients have never been combined in an effective manner. ... If the nation takes this opportunity, benefits to the public and to the users of transportation will be tremendous. . . .” (A&A, 11/66, 112-116)
H.S. Becker, former North American Aviation, Inc., executive, had been appointed Deputy Director of msfc’s Advanced Systems Office, (msfc Release 66-199)
nasa’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe launched from etr Dec. 16, 1965, completed six-month nominal mission at a range of 54.6 million mi. with all spacecraft systems performing well. Perihelion had been passed May 20, 1966, and aphelion passage would occur Oct. 24. Preliminary results of experiments had been reported Apr. 19 at American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C. (nasa Proj. Off.)
Advanced Minuteman icbm was launched from a modernized Minuteman I silo at Vandenberg afb as part of a series of tests to verify modernization procedures for upgrading of Minuteman I silos and control centers. (upi, NYT, 1/23/66, 57)
Air Force Assn, honored four officers for exceptional achievement at its second annual fall meeting in Washington, D.C.: Col. Robert A. Berman, Wright-Patterson afb, Logistics Executive Management Award; Col. Spencer S. Hunn, Hanscom Field, Mass., afsc Distinguished Award for Management; Col. Gregory C. Frese, Jr., Washington, D.C., afsc Meritorious Award for Support Management; and L/Col. Martin H. Brewer, Vandenberg afb, afsc Meritorious Award for Program Management. (J/Armed Forces, 9/10/66, 25)
Hourly bus tours—for a fee—began at ksc. Announcing the new service, ksc Director Dr. Kurt H. Debus said: "We want to provide the public with as meaningful a tour as can be permitted without interference with mission operational requirements. On Sundays, the public will continue to have the option of the free drive-through, in private vehicles, of the [nasa] center and the Cape Kennedy Air Force Station.” (NYT, 5/12/66, 21; Hines, Wash. Sun. Star, 6/13/66, El)
faa cautioned airline executives during briefing in Washington, D.C., not to let desire for a "fly-off competition” keep them from making as clear-cut a first choice as possible for the supersonic transport. If they did not, they might get aircraft they did not want or Congressional critics might use indecisiveness to stall or kill program. Possibility that prototypes of both the Boeing and Lockheed airframe designs would be built was virtually ruled out. (Av. Wk., 10/31/66, 25) During October: Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown summarized USAf’s position on its future in space in an interview with Armed Forces Management: "It is not a matter of desiring to conduct military campaigns in space but rather to preclude any aggressor from using space as an area of operations for launching attacks against the U.S. . . . "We should not be doing things just to be doing them. Rather, they must have direct relation to establishing military needs. "Space is not a mission but a place to perform a mission. When a mission can be performed from space, the Air Force will perform it from there. . . .” (Armed Forces Management, 10/66, 69)
afsc had completed 110 successful tests of Bak-11 (Barrier Arresting Component)—device to stop aircraft on runway during emergency—at Air Force Flight Test Center (afftc), Edwards afb. Device, developed by Research, Inc., consisted of an arresting cable which engaged main gear struts when actuated by aircraft’s wheels rolling over switches mounted on the runway, (afsc Release 46. 66)
cab study revealed that in 153 U.S. air carrier accidents between 1955 and 1964 caused by or resulting in fire, 297 of 1,955 fatalities would not have occurred had fire been prevented. 1,628 persons died of impact forces, and 30 for other-reasons. All fire victims were involved in 13 of the accidents. Report recommended strengthening of structures to withstand impact, improvement of onboard and ground fire-fighting and rescue equipment, continued improvement of exit facilities, development of emergency communication systems, and more detailed passenger briefings. (cab, bosp, 7-6-3) During April: Men and women engaged in the national space program should reverse defensive and apologetic attitudes toward the commitment to space exploration, according to Aerospace Industries Assn. President Karl G. Harr, Jr., addressing American Astronautical Society annual meeting in San Diego. "If we were the only nation in the world that had the capability to proceed into this new dimension, we should do it,” Harr said. "We should do it as part of a national renaissance on all fronts; for a great society . . . cannot confine its attention to certain challenges selected under past conditions, but must . . . move comprehensively to accept the challenge of the future. ".. . As the huge challenge of space generates and consumes and then regenerates our material and human resources, so does it widen the scope of the environment in which our citizens will exist and make their contribution in the years ahead.” (Aerospace, 4/66, 7-9)
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara’s contention that Nike-X antimissile missile system was incapable of defending U.S. against Soviet attack and should be kept in r&d stage, received support from Society of American Scientists’ executive board. In a statement opposing Senate vote providing $168 million toward deployment of Nike-X system, the sas board said: "These expenditures, truly enormous over extended periods, would be the hallmark of a frightened, not a great society. . . .” {Wash. Post, 5/8/66, P14)
faa announced that Washington (D.C.) National Airport would be open to short-haul jet traffic April 24. (faa Release 66-5) James W. Miller, Office of Naval Research, reported that results of the Sealab II experiment had indicated that at ocean depths 600 ft. and below man could perform useful tasks such as salvaging ships and aircraft if he were equipped with electrically heated diving suits, diver-to-diver communications, and underwater swimming aids. Outside of Sealab II, the aquanauts had been cold, frustrated, unable to talk to one another, limited in their visibility, and constantly in danger. Inside the capsule, they had experienced difficulty in sleeping and had had speech problems because of the helium atmosphere. There were no serious medical problems, and "an unprecedented amount of useful work was accomplished.” (Text)
Two solid-fueled Minuteman icbms were launched simultaneously from Vandenberg AFB, to evaluate multiple-firing techniques which could be used "under combat conditions at operational bases.” This was first salvo launch down wtr. (sac Release 6-17)
Air traffic control radar equipment which could automatically display the third dimension of aircraft position—altitude—would go into service in New York City metropolitan area by late 1967, according to faa. Present radar equipment employed by faa air traffic controllers provided only two-dimensional—distance and direction—picture of air traffic, (faa Release 66-6)
It was one minute after Command Pilot Walter M. Schirra, Jr., decided not to eject in the Dec. 12, 1965, Gemini VI launch failure at etr, that his pulse rate increased, reported Gemini medical director Dr. Charles A. Berry in the American Medical Assn. News. Delayed reaction was viewed as supporting theory that fear follows action in an emergency— particularly in the case of a highly trained subject, (msc Morning Neivs Flyer, 1/7/66)
nas Committee on Public Engineering Policy (copep) held first meeting in New York City; chairman was Dr. Chauncey Starr, president of Atomics International Division of North American Aviation, Inc., and as of January 1, 1967, UCLA Dean of Engineering. (NAS-NRC-NAE News Report, 10/66, 1, 3)
msfc awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $23,438,532 modification to an existing contract for "additional work in building and testing the Saturn V launch vehicle’s second stage [S-II].” Work would include redesign of stage’s umbilical system and additional testing of stage’s hardware under simulated flight conditions, (msfc Release 66-181)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling $1.5 billion to Avco Corp., Martin Co., North American Aviation, Inc., Northrop Corp., Fairchild Hiller Corp.. and LTV, Inc., for work on Sst prototype. (Boeing Release S-8928)	'
U.S. Ambassador-at-Large and newly appointed Ambassador to U.S.S.R. Llewellyn E. Thompson and Soviet Minister for Civil Aviation Yevgeni F.	Loginov signed agreement authorizing direct commercial airline flights between New York and Moscow at State Dept, ceremony. Service would begin in spring 1967 with weekly flights by ran American World Airways and U.S.S.R.’s Aeroflot. (Eder, NYT, 11/5/66, 1; Roberts, Wash. Post, 11/5/66, Al)
Dr. Hans-Joachim von Merkatz, member of West German Bundestag, charged in report prepared for delivery before meeting of Assembly of the Western European Union that U.S. was trying to "break up” Western Europe’s space program with "tantalizing” offers for joint U.S.-European planetary exploration: "In other words, the exploration of Jupiter could divert us from the essential economic benefits to be derived from space through the exploration of communications satellites. The American approach to date has definitely been aimed at insuring United States monopoly and leadership in this field as in the nuclear field.” Western European Union was composed of U.K., France, West Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg. (NYT, 6/9/66, 3)
NASA awarded five contracts to Saturn contractors to continue studies to improve Saturn concepts of an intermediate vehicle with a payload capability between that of Saturn IB and the Saturn V. On Saturn V, Boeing Co. received $370,500; North American Aviation, Inc., $329,624; and Douglas Aircraft Co., $96,730. Eight variations of the Saturn V vehicle would be examined. Boeing would be study systems integration contractor for all prospective configurations involving the S-IC stage, naa for all others. On Saturn IB, Chrysler Corp. received $450,000; Douglas, $116,345. Six Saturn IB configurations would be studied. All five contracts would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 66-3)
usaf awarded contracts totaling over $6 million to Lockheed-Georgia Co. and North American Aviation, Inc., to advance Vtol aircraft development. naa received $5,671,000 to develop and demonstrate a Vtol integrated flight system; Lockheed received $975,000 to modify XV-4A "Hummingbird” to new system with direct lift and diverted thrust engines, (afsc Release 288.66)
Pan American World Airways’ fan-jet Falcon claimed new speed record for business aircraft when it flew from St. John’s, Newfoundland, to Lisbon, Portugal, covering 2,388 mi. in 4 hrs. 38 min. 28 sec. North American Aviation’s Sabreliner had set previous record of 4 hrs. 45 min. 59.4 sec. on Oct. 26, 1963. Both flights had been piloted by George Eremea of Petit Jean Air Service. (NYT, 9/29/66, 86)
A phased-out Bomarc missile, serving as target for USAF and USN missiles, exploded shortly after it was fired from Vandenberg afb. (upi, Wash. Post, 8/27/66, A3)	...
nasa awarded North American Aviation, Inc., a $37-million, costplusaward-fee contract supplement for launch preparation and checkout of ten Saturn V 2nd stages (S-II). (nasa Release 66-281)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received Henry H. Arnold Gold Medal for "distinguished service to augment progress and readiness in air and space” and. for "distinguished service in defense of our country” at American Ordnance Assn, meeting in Washington, D.C. In his acceptance speech, General Schriever quoted General Arnold’s 1938 prediction: " 'Planes of the future may have telescopic wings, which, once in flight, can be foreshortened, telescoped, or pulled in . . . thus greatly accelerating the forward progress of the vessel of reduced size and decreased air resistance.’ This description . . . anticipated the principle which is employed today on the F-lll sweepwing fighter. . . .” (Text)
Pictures from U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft that apparently entered lunar orbit were received and tape recorded by Jodrell Bank Experimental Station. Although unable to immediately decipher pictures, Station officials said . . they appear to be similar to those of Luna 9 and the American Lunar Orbiter transmissions.” U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Aug. 24 launch, (upi, NYT, 8/29/66, 11; upi, Chic. Trib., 8/30/66; upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 8/30/66)
Study of Ufo’s had been "relegated to the bottom of the barrel” by usaf, Dr. James C. McDonald, Univ. of Arizona professor, charged at Washington, D.C., American Meteorological Society meeting. Attacking usaf’s Project Bluebook as "extremely superficial and of a low level of technical competence,” he urged that Ufo responsibility be taken away from usaf and put "into scientific hands.” The hypothesis that Ufo’s might be "extraterrestrial probes” could not be ruled out, he said. (Adams, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/20/66, C14)
New mineral named "djerfisherite”—a copper-iron sulfide—had been found in meteorites. Since it does not exist naturally on earth and could be formed only at high temperatures, it was speculated that djerfisherite might have originated in the sun’s outermost layer. Report of finding was released through American Assn, for the Advancement of Science by Dr. Louis H. Fuchs. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/7/66, D2)
afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever received National Aviation Club’s (nac) 1966 Award of Achievement for his "significant contributions to the creation of the Air Force strategic missile force.” The award would be presented Aug. 16 in Washington, D.C. (Tech. Wk., 8/8/66, 13)
Under Secretary of the Air Force Norman Paul told Rep. George H. Mahon (D-Tex.), chairman of House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, in closed session that usaf officials were unaware that the XB-70 which crashed June 8 was to be used for commercial publicity purposes: "The Air Force definitely does not put its stamp on this sort of business. . . . Had we been aware, I think it is safe to say it would not have happened.” Representative Mahon said Committee would "insist that procedures be established which will make impossible a recurrence of such misuse of men and military equipment.” (Morris, NYT, 6/11/66, 1; Simons, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A8)
Absence of statement by President Johnson and West German Chancellor Erhard after their September meeting in Washington, D.C., on suggested U.S.-Western Europe program of unmanned exploration of Jupiter indicated that the proposal had been "killed for the foreseeable future,” Technology Week speculated. (Tech. Wk., 10/3/66, 3)
AFSC Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever, at Armed Forces Management Assn., in Washington, D.C., predicted a management revolution commensurate with the explosive advance of technology and the pressing nature of military requirements. "I think that the biggest challenge to management in the years ahead will be to find ways to encourage and use the full creative potential of individuals. . . . We must create the atmosphere where the unique human capacity for innovation and judgment can be fully developed and employed. . . .” (Text)
usaf successfully launched Nike-Javelin combination carrying a payload of plume measurement instrumentation seconds after launch of its target—an Atlas-D icbm—from Vandenberg afb. Launch was first in High Altitude Background and Signal to Noise (Hitab) program in which data on infrared radiation and emission characteristics associated with missile exhaust plumes and other exhaust products were telemetered back to Vandenberg telemetry station, (upi, Chic. Trib., 3/20/66, 22; upi, NYT, 3/19/66, 82; upi, Chic. Trib., 3/25/66)
North American Aviation, Inc., was awarded a $1,550,000 initial increment to a $5,671,000 usaf contract for development work on vertical takeoff and landing (Vtol) aircraft. Contract would be managed by afsc’s Systems Engineering Group, (dod Release 760-66)
Blanche W. Noyes, faa air marking specialist and veteran pilot, was awarded the Brazilian Medal of Merit of Santos Dumont at the Brazilian chancery in Washington, D.C., for outstanding and meritorious services to Brazilian aviation. Mrs. Noyes was the first American avi-atrix to receive the award, (faa Release 66-8)
Federal mediators in San Francisco announced interim agreement in wage dispute between International Union of Electrical Workers and United Technology Center. Striking electricians would return to work by April 28; negotiations for a new contract would continue until May 20. AP dispatches from ksc reported union, which had limited picketing to one gate April 20, had resumed picketing all five gates, charging "bad faith on the part of utc.” (upi, Wash. Post, 4/26/66, A6; AP, NYT, 4/26/66, 14)
North American Air Defense Command (norad)—nerve center of North American air and space defense—took formal possession of new headquarters built 1,200-1,400 ft. into the solid granite of Cheyenne Mountain, Colo., to insure survival of a retaliatory capability in the event of nuclear attack. Eleven interlinked, steel-framed, steel-sheathed, three-story buildings constituting the command post were mounted on coil springs that would protect equipment from ground shock of nearby thermonuclear blast. (Eng. Opp., 2/66, 20-28)
Atlas F advanced ballistic reentry system icbm fired from Vandenberg AFB apparently exploded and fell into the Pacific, usaf was investigating causes of the failure, (upi, NYT, 8/9/66)
Comment in the Washington Sunday Star called U.S. Sst program a "dubious” venture moved by extraordinary pressures: "This is a project the taxpayer should view with more than a little interest, if not apprehension, for its cost is coming out of his pocketbook and the price tag is escalating. Industry may repay the cost some day, but no one is sure just when. The sst, in fact, has become a symbol of national prestige. If we do not produce such a plane, American leadership in the aircraft industry will sustain a loss of face from which it could not recover. Perhaps it is impossible to back away from the situation. But the American public is at least entitled to know what kind of mare’s nest this rivalry has got us into, and the hazards that must be faced.” (Wash. Sun, Star, 8/14/66, Cl)
Communist China conducted "a nuclear explosion that contained thermonuclear material” over its western areas, Hsinhua, Chinese Communist press agency, reported. U.S. officials in Washington, D.C., surmised that explosion indicated China was on the verge of developing a thermonuclear or hydrogen bomb. (AP, NYT, 5/10/66, 4; Topping, NYT, 5/10/66, 1)
Pan American World Airways, Inc. (Pan Am), would purchase 25 new Boeing 747 jet transports—including twenty-three 490-seat passenger models and two all-cargo models which would carry 214,000 lbs. freight—for over $525 million, announced Pan Am’s chairman and chief executive, Juan T. Trippe. Deliveries of order, reported to be largest and most expensive in airline history, would be made between September 1969 and May 1970. The 680,000-lb. aircraft would be powered by new Pratt & Whitney JT9D-1 fan-jet engine capable of delivering 41,000-lbs. thrust and would have 45,O0O-ft. cruise altitude— nearly one mile higher than current transports—and mach .90 cruise speed—compared with mach .82 for current models—and would provide "safety margins superior to any previous commercial airliner” with multi-gear landing system which would require only 9,150 ft. of takeoff runway. Trippe forecast lower passenger fares and reduced cargo tariffs because of 747’s large capacity and efficiency of operation. (Pan Am Release; Bedingfield, NYT, 4/14/66, 1; Edwards, Wash. Post, 4/14/66, Kl)
Rufus E. Miles, Jr., director of mid-career programs at Princeton Univ.’s Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and former hew Assistant Secretary for Administration, was sworn in as a NASA consultant on management operations, (nasa Release 66-277)
Boeing Co. awarded subcontracts totaling more than $25 million to Lockheed Aircraft Corp., General Precision Equipment Corp., Litton Industries, Inc., North American Aviation, Inc., General Telephone & Electronics Corp., and Universal Match Corp. for help in developing a short-range attack missile (Sram). Boeing had received $142.3-million usaf contract Oct. 31. (WSJ, 11/8/66, 13)
afsc awarded 12-mo. study contracts totaling $900,000 to LockheedCalifornia Co., North American Aviation, Inc., and McDonnell Aircraft Corp. to develop a high-altitude, hypersonic Scramjet-powered cruise vehicle with potential military applications, (afsc Release 188.66)
Juan T. Trippe, chairman and chief executive officer of Pan American World Airways, in remarks made when he received National Defense Transportation Assn. Award in Dallas, urged development of both Boeing and Lockheed supersonic transport prototypes: "Only further competition between these two manufacturers, during the three years required to build and flight-test the prototypes, can insure that the American supersonic transport ultimately selected will have the maximum attainable performance.” (Text; Av. Wk., 9/26/66, 21)
Commentary in New York Times on difficulty of allocating limited funds for scientific research: "The eminent Soviet physicist P. L. Kapitsa has published an article [see Jan. 20] acknowledging that American science is still contributing far more to mankind’s knowledge than its Soviet counterpart. He attributes the United States lead largely to the wiser American technique for Government subsidy of research.... Ironically, several months ago President Johnson . .. directed that Federal funds be more equally distributed among the nation’s universities and geographic areas and that a larger proportion of this money be allocated to universities for distribution as their administrators see fit, rather than directly to research scientists. "If the Kapitsa analysis is correct, the President’s order was a mistake and may lead to reduced productivity in American science.” (NYT, 1/26/66, 32)
NASA’s pioneer vi interplanetary probe, launched Dec. 16, 1965, passed near earth after 76 days of near-perfect operation in solar orbit. Probe was 84,190,800 mi. from the sun, passing 7,775,600 mi. closer than earth does, and in earth’s orbital plane on a course which would ultimately take it within 75.6 million mi. of the sun. Devised to study interplanetary space, pioneer vi had telemetered 250 million readings from its six scientific instruments covering 3,300 separate measurements and taken 2.5 million readings of 100 engineering measurements. It had also registered solar wind speed of 1,636,000 mph on Feb. 23, close to highest speed previously recorded of 1,675,000 mph by explorer xviii in earth orbit. Preliminary scientific findings would be presented to American Geophysical Union meeting in Washington, D.C., April 19-22. Pioneer project was managed by arc. (nasa Release 66-43,)
NASA awarded contracts totaling $825,000 for study of methods to explore the planets and to design advanced launch vehicles: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co., $200,000; Boeing Co., $150,000; Lockheed-California Co., $250,000; and North American Aviation, Inc., $225,000. Contract management would be performed by nasa Hq. Mission Analysis Div. (nasa Release 66-302)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown, testifying before Senate Armed Services Committee and Subcommittee on dod of Senate Appropriations Committee, said usaf was "working on” increasing procurements directly with prime contractors, but with Government-furnished equipment. He added: "There comes a point, however, where the trouble that the Government buys itself by furnishing equipment is more than the money it saves . . .” (Testimony; Senate, Military Procurement Auth. for FY 1967, 907)
Four-stage usaf Trailblazer was launched from nasa Wallops Station in second of a series of six Air Force Avionics Laboratory launches to study communications blackout during space vehicle reentry. (Tech. Wk., 11/7/66, 10)
Dr. Carl Schreiber, Procurement Specialist with NASA Hq. Office of Industry Affairs since Aug. 2, 1964, died in Washington, D.C. Dr. Schreiber, naca employee since 1939, had been Assistant Procurement and Supply Officer from 1958-64. (nasa Hq. Bull.)
gemini iv Astronaut Edward H. White II, first U.S. astronaut to walk in space, received the General Thomas D. White Space Trophy from Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown at National Geographic Society ceremony in Washington, D.C. Established in 1S61 by Dr. Thomas W. McKnew, chairman of the National Geographic’s Board of Trustees, trophy was awarded annually to the usaf officer or unit that made the foremost contribution to U.S. progress in aerospace. nasa Administrator James E. Webb said at the ceremony: "I think . . . that no factor has been more important in the advances made in aviation and in space than the continued and dedicated driving leadership of the officers of the Air Force and the personal willingness to take the risks involved of these outstanding test pilots and combat pilots and those who have done the intervening jobs from transportation to helicopter work. We have a great Air Force.” (Text; NYT, 7/12/66)
usaf announced Dr. J, Allen Hynek, chairman of Northwestern Univ.’s Dearborn Observatory and scientific consultant to usaf’s Project Blue Book, would investigate reported Ufo sightings in the Ann Arbor, Mich., area, (upi, NYT, 2/23/66, 22) March 22-25; Air Force Assn, held its 20th annual convention in Dallas, Tex. usaf Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell told the meeting that U.S. and U.S.S.R. had enough long-range nuclear weapons to make a nuclear war between them extremely costly for either side, but that a stalemate did not exist between them: "It follows that each country has its own nuclear threshold, that is, the point or level of restraint above which it may no longer be deterred from war. This threshold is by no means static but dynamic, as it is determined by a number of factors which are both variable and unpredictable.” McConnell said the strategic superiority of usaf during the past 20 yrs. had kept the nuclear threshold of all potential aggressors at a safe level. (Text) USAF’s first priority—continued maintenance of strategic superiority over any potential enemy—required a mixed force of missiles and manned bombers, Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown told the convention. "We will continue to need manned bombers in our strategic forces as far ahead as any of us can see, and I think that should include at least the entire decade of the 1970s. ". . . There is no doubt about the technical feasibility of advanced manned bombers of all sorts of designs. The questions which have to be answered . . . are how we propose to use such a weapon system and how it fits in to the missions of assured destruction and damage limitation. . . . This issue is under intensive study by the Air Staff. . . .” (Text) A Citation of Honor—Air Force Assn.’s highest award—was presented to B/G Joseph S. Bleymaier for "outstanding management achievements while directing the Air Force’s development program for the Titan III-C space booster,” and to ssd’s 655th Aerospace Test Wing, at Patrick AFB, for "successful missile and space launches, including six Gemini launches which placed ten astronauts in orbit and achieved the first manned rendezvous in space.” (afsc Release 48.66)
Dr. George P. Woollard, president of the American Geophysical Union and director of the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics, said in agu Transactions that there was a "crisis in science” requiring bold Government action. Stating that less and less of nsf’s budget was going into basic research, Dr. Woollard called on Congress to assess the overall scientific needs of the country, including "ambitious” programs in various fields proposed by NSF and NAS panels. "Research proposals that were good enough five years ago to obtain NSF support now would not stand a chance,” he said. "They would be turned down not because the projects lacked significance but because funds are short and only the most established and influential researchers win out.” (agu Transactions, 1/66)
Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown issued memorandum approving recommendations of panel appointed to investigate usaf relations with "not-for-profit” corporations and ordering that fees paid to the corporations be substantially reduced. In report, issued Feb. 1, panel had said that nonprofit corporations . . continue to be an indispensible factor in developing and acquiring complex aerospace systems and in assuring their function through command and control,” but that "guidelines . . . point to a fee substantially lower than at present.” (Text; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/17/66, A10; Wash. Post, 4/17/66, A14)
Twenty-one Long Tank Thors were purchased from Douglas Missile and Space Systems Div. by usaf for use in its programs at Vandenberg afb. Expected to succeed the present Thrust Augmented Thor (Tat), the Long Tank Thor would provide increased payload capability by enlarging the volume of Thor’s liquid propellant tanks; result would be a 20% increase in payload capability over Tat. Although its total thrust of 330,000 lbs. would be essentially the same as that for Tat, the Long Tank Thor would have a burn time of 216 sec. as compared to 146 sec. for Tat. (afsc Release 205.65)
U.S. embassy confirmed that West Germany was negotiating with several unidentified American aircraft companies for technical assistance in removgin flaws from the F-104G Starfighter jet aircraft. Since beginning of 1965, 29 Starfighters had been destroyed in accidents and 16 Luftwaffe pilots killed. (NYT, 2/20/66, 9)
Russian-born Igor I. Sikorsky, "father of the helicopter,” was honored as Air Force Man of the Year by the New York chapter of the Air Force Assn. He was cited especially for the outstanding work helicopters had done in the Vietnam war. (N.Y. News, 2/21/66)
Aeronautical exhibition tracing aviation’s history from supercharger to turbojet opened in new Hall of Aeronautical Propulsion at Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. (Wash. Post, 7/9/66, B2)
In a press interview, Capt. Charles Oglesby (usaf) of the North American Air Defense Command (norad) tracking center in Moorestown, N.J., said scanners were checking on 1,100 items in orbit, including functioning payloads and debris. 95% of items in orbit were from the U.S. Of payloads, the U.S. had 167; U.S.S.R., 43; U.K. and Canada, two each; and France, three. (AP, Balt. Sun, 5/26/66)
NASA-sponsored space science course—including lectures, demonstrations, and experiments—began at (Washington) D.C. Teachers College to help local elementary school teachers understand space-age fundamentals and interpret them to their pupils. (Wash. Eve. Star, 6/26/66, D9)
usaf announced it would award contracts to "individuals within the scientific community” to conduct "prompt, in depth investigation of selected Ufo reports.” Funds for study, which had been recommended by Air Force Scientific Advisory Board in March, would be requested from FY 1967 and FY 1968 budgets, (dod Release 388-66)
In unpublished letter to Science, Dr. J. Allen Hynek, head of Northwestern Univ.’s Dept, of Astronomy and usaf consultant on Ufo’s since 1948, criticized the "American scientific establishment” for failure to investigate persistent Ufo phenomena [see Oct. 21]. (Lewis, Wash. Post, 8/29/66, A12)
Successful 384-sec. captive firing of first flight model of Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II) was conducted at mtf by North American Aviation, Inc., prime contractor. State was powered by five Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-hydrogen-fueled engines capable of developing a total of 1 million lbs. thrust, (msfc Release 66-290; upi, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A4; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/1/66)
ERC appointed 0. Hugo Schuck Director of Office of Control Theory and Application. Schuck had been Visiting Professor of Aeronautics and Astronautics at Stanford Univ. while on leave as Director of Research at Honeywell, Inc. In his new position Schuck would supervise research on application of control theory to complex aeronautics and space vehicle systems. He had been President of the American Automatic Control Council, heading U.S. representation in the International Federation of Automatic Control, (erc Release 67-37)
Representatives of 62 nations signed space law treaty [see Dec. 8, 1966] at separate ceremonies in Washington, D.C., London, and Moscow. Notable absentees were Communist China, Albania, and Cuba. Representatives of France said they would sign after studying treaty further. At White House ceremony, attended by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, British Ambassador Sir Patrick Dean, and U.S. Ambassador to the U.N. Arthur Goldberg, President Johnson described treaty as the “first firm step toward keeping outer space free forever from the implements of war” and said it would assure that American and Soviet astronauts “will meet someday on the moon as brothers and not as warriors.” Treaty, which limited military activities in space, had been agreed upon by U.S. and U.S.S.R. Dec. 8, 1966, and unanimously approved by U.N. General Assembly Dec. 19. It would become effective when ratified by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., and two other countries. (Kilpatrick, W Post, 1/28/67, 1; Frankel, NYT, 1/28/67, 1)
U.S.S.R. preferred “to wait for technical reasons” until its 11-62 aircraft was ready and thus was postponing first direct Moscow-New York flights until “later this year,” U.S. State Dept, announced. Commercial service by Aeroflot and Pan American World Airways had been scheduled to begin in late spring under Nov. 4, 1966, agreement. (AP, NYT, 6/14/67, 47)
nae announced establishment of an Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board to advise nasa and other Federal agencies. Board would operate under contract with nasa that estimated expenditures of $186,500 during first year of operation. Chairman was Dr. H. Guyford Stever, President of Carnegie Institute of Technology. Col. Robert J. Burger, Executive Secretary of Scientific Advisory Board, usaf Hq., would become Executive Director Aug. 1, following his retirement from usaf. Board’s first meeting would be held in Washington, D.C., in mid-July, (nae Release)
The 64th anniversary of first powered flights by Orville and Wilbur Wright from Kitty Hawk, N.C. Proclamation issued by President Johnson to commemorate their achievements cited “their inventive genius [which] revolutionized transportation, and gave rise to great new industries that have strengthened America’s defense and economy.” Igor I. Sikorsky, consulting engineer at United Aircraft Corp.’s Sikorsky Aircraft Div., received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy at Aero Club’s annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA awarded 28 12-mo, $2,400 predoctoral training grants to Univ. of Pittsburgh for public administration and to Georgia Institute of Technology, Univ. of Kansas, Cornell Univ., Purdue Univ., and Stanford Univ. for engineering design, (nasa Special Releases)
France’s first variable-sweep-wing jet aircraft, the Mirage G, flew 1,500 mph in public debut at Istres, France, military airport. Dassault-built aircraft was world’s fourth variable-sweep-wing model and first built in Western Europe; others were American F—111, and Soviet Sukhoi and Mikoyan. {W Post, 12/21/67, A31)
The aerospace industry had a special responsibility to try to respond to the critical challenges posed by the Vietnam war and the urban riots, Robert Hotz suggested in Aviation Week. “Perhaps the aerospace industry has been so much absorbed in its traditional task of providing defense against external enemies that it has never given much thought to the contributions it can make to strengthen this nation internally. We submit that the events of this summer should stimulate the industry to take a long hard look in re-evaluating its role on the American scene and to make a bolder and more imaginative bid to offer its services to meet the new challenges of our times....” (Hotz, Av Wk, 7/31/67,11)
Rep. Theodore R. Kupferman (R-N.Y.), speaking on the House floor, expressed concern about the “noise pollution problem” [see Feb. 1]. He quoted from a speech which he had presented on Sept. 12 to a luncheon meeting of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, held in Washington, D.C.: “It is possible to have noise control and industrial development without penalty to each other. . . . The idea that noise is a necessary price of industrial and economic progress is as antiquated as is the belief that contaminated waters and a polluted atmosphere must also accompany civilization’s material advances. . . . Noise pollution, however, unlike water and air pollution, is only now beginning to receive a proper share of public attention.” (CR, 9/27/67, H12606-13)
North American Aviation, Inc., merged with Rockwell-Standard Corp. to create North American Rockwell Corp. (North American Rockwell Corp. Release 092267)
Fifteen outstanding young scientists received Air Force Office of Scientific Research (afosr) Postdoctoral Research Awards “for advanced study and fundamental research in the sciences.” Selections, made by a board of NAS-appointed senior scientists, were based on “demonstrated competence and creativity in original research and on the scientific merit of the proposed postdoctoral investigation.” (nas-NRC Release)
American Security Council (asc) released results of study prepared for House Armed Services Committee which concluded that U.S.S.R. would achieve a marked nuclear superiority over U.S. by 1971 unless steps were taken immediately to improve American strategic capabilities. Study, conducted by asc’s National Strategy Committee under chairmanship of former afsc Commander Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.), found that U.S. had “exchanged its goal of a war-winning strategic superiority for a strategy of mutual deterrence” while U.S.S.R. “is driving hard toward a goal of overwhelming superiority. . . .” Report predicted that by 1971 U.S.S.R. would have a 30,000- to 50,000-mt nuclear delivery capability, contrasting with 6,000- to 15,000-mt for U.S., and recommended a rapid arms buildup or development of an antiballistic missile system. It warned that “by placing our sole reliance for deterrence on iCBMs, POLARIS and POSEIDON missiles, and the remaining manned bomber force . . . [U.S.] places itself in the dangerous position of having only one option left if it is faced with a Soviet ultimatum to surrender. It must either fire its offensive nuclear weapons or give up its sovereignty. An abm [Antiballistic Missile System] would at least strengthen the hand of the President if he is confronted with such a fateful decision, and it might stay the hand of an enemy at a critical moment. . . .” (Text; asc News) did not produce a nuclear reaction, (nasa Proj Off; upi, NYT, 7/22/67, 11)
F-lll aircraft, under development by USAF and USN, was defended by Secretary of the Air Force Dr. Harold Brown in letter to Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.), ranking member of Senate Armed Services Committee’s Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee: “There has never been and will never be a major development program that does not provide grist for the critic’s mill, and I say this without questioning either the sincerity of the critics or the utility of the function they perform.” He professed confidence in “comprehensive testimony” before congressional committees and asserted “the F-lll is the aircraft we want and need.” (CR, 10/9/67, S14445)
Gen. Curtis E. LeMay (usaf, Ret.) resigned after two years as President of Air Force Historical Foundation. In accordance with Gen. LeMay’s recommendation, Gen. Bernard A. Schriever (usaf, Ret.) was unanimously elected to replace him. b/g Monro MacCloskey (usaf, Ret.) was appointed Executive Director. (AFHF Newsletter, 12/67, 1)
usaf and usn issued statements supporting development of F-lll fighter aircraft as an all-purpose military aircraft. Secretary of the Air Force Harold Brown: “The F—111A is designed to provide an all-weather strike potential superior to that of any tactical aircraft in the world today. It will fly faster, farther and carry a greater payload, nuclear or conventional, with an unexcelled capability to penetrate sophisticated enemy defenses. . . . We are confident from the level of performance already displayed in the very extensive flight tests performed on development aircraft that the operational F— 111 A will provide these vitally needed capabilities, and will meet the military requirements established for the aircraft at the inception of the program.” Secretary of the Navy Paul H. Nitze: “. . . development of a system as complex as the F—lllB/Phoenix has produced sizeable engineering problems. I continue to be impressed with the manner in which they have been met and overcome. I have confidence that changes proposed by the Navy, approved by the Secretary of Defense and now being implemented, will make the F-111B suitable for operation from our first-line attack carriers and will give it the capabilities to perform its mission.” (CR, 4/17/67, S5300)
Many building blocks of life, “and possibly life itself,” may exist on Jupiter, arc scientists Dr. Cyril S. Ponnamperuma and Fritz Woeller suggested at American Chemical Society meeting in Miami. Using electrical discharges as an energy source the scientists had simulated activity of Jupiter’s upper atmosphere and produced numerous building blocks common to life on earth. They concluded that energy transfer and resulting chemical processes in Jupiter’s turbulent atmosphere— similar to processes believed to have produced life on earth—“may produce organic chemicals such as the forerunner compounds of amino acids and of the living cell nucleus.” (NASA Release 67-79; arc Release 67-4)
Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Roman Smoluchowski told annual meeting of American Physical Society in New York that huge amounts of energy emitted by Jupiter—three times the amount it received from the sun—could be accounted for by a gradual shrinking of the planet. Dr. Smoluchowski said that Jupiter was losing gravitational energy because it was shrinking about l/50th of an inch a year, and that it was this lost energy that it was emitting. Shrinkage was occurring, he reported, because liquid and solid molecular forms of hydrogen, which comprise planet’s outermost layer, were gradually being compressed into metallic hydrogen, which comprises the next innermost layer. Rate of compression, according to Dr. Smoluchowski’s calculations, would yield just the right amount of shrinkage to account for the observed amount of energy Jupiter emits. {NYT, 1/31/67, C52)
North American Aviation, Inc., and Rockwell-Standard Corp. announced agreement on proposal to merge into new corporation called North American Rockwell Corp. Proposal was subject to approval by directors and stockholders of each company. {WSJ, 3/23/67)
NASA Office—Downey at North American Aviation’s Downey, Calif., plant was disestablished and its functions transferred to MSC and MSFC, (NN1136)
President Johnson addressed International Conference on World Crisis in Education, Williamsburg, Va.: “. . . I would like to suggest . . . these challenges: How can we use what we already know about educational television to accelerate the pace of basic education for all the children of the world? How can we use modern technology to economize on that most essential and that most needed educational resource: the good teacher?” He added: “If future historians . , . seek, a name for this period in America, I hope they will give consideration to calling it the age of education. If our children’s children want to measure what we tried to achieve, I hope they will remember one thing: The American Government in only 3 years multiplied its commitment to education and to health four times over. Congress passed more laws and committed more funds to education and health in the last 3 years than in all previous history.” (PD, 10/16/67, 1419-23)
naa announced that Igor I. Sikorsky, popularly known as the father of the helicopter, had been selected to receive the 1967 Wright 'Brothers Memorial Trophy. Presentation would be made at the Dec. 14,1967, annual memorial dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
NASA announced results from experiment with four “Yolo Wonder” pepper plants subjected to 45 hr of weightless flight aboard Biosatellite II (Sept. 7-9) to determine effects of space environment (weightlessness and radiation). Photographs made every 10 min (268 times) in 30 orbits appeared to demonstrate plants depend on gravity for their orientation. Plant leaves had failed to grow in normal, horizontal position, and stems had not held to the vertical position, even with supporting brackets. Disoriented condition of plants was observed when they were delivered to Dr. Samuel Johnson, principal investigator, North American Rockwell Corp. Further evidence of plants’ gravity dependence came from wheat seedlings aboard Biosatellite II; Dr. Charles Lyon of Dartmouth College experimented with 75 seedlings which, grown from seed in weightlessness, had roots curving upward toward seedling shoots and out to the side, (nasa Release 67—279)
United Air Lines President George E. Keck, in a speech before International Aviation Club in Washington, D.C., echoed similar pleas by executives of Pan Am and TWA in calling for “expeditious £ut orderly” advancement of U.S. sst program. Although sst “is a pretty real one on the drawing boards,” Keck said there were “certainly some important decisions and actions that have to be taken here to make it a reality.” Among these, determination of a “sound, reasonable” financing plan was of paramount importance. (NYT, 1/22/67,50)
Safety of combat air crews in Southeast Asia would be greatly improved by application of a new material (polyurethane foam) first used on the Indianapolis speedway, asfc’s engineers had successfully adapted the foam, which would be installed in the fuel tanks of combat aircraft in Vietnam. Under an Air Force contract, the Monsanto Research Corp., Dayton, Ohio, confirmed compatibility of the foam with military aircraft fuels. It would virtually prevent explosion in a direct hit on the fuel tank by machine gun tracer bullets or other incendiaries and would suppress slosh in the fuel tanks during flight, (afsc Release 158.67)
Sun’s illumination of a missile’s shock wave had caused strange aerial phenomenon seen throughout southwestern U.S. Jan. 17, usaf officials at Vandenberg afb reported. (AP, NYT, 1/19/67)
United Aircraft Corp. turbotrain, powered by gas turbine engine similar to those used in jet aircraft, reached 170 mph during test run in New Jersey, setting new speed record for passenger train in U.S. Train, designed for future passenger service between Boston and New York City, would be operated by New Haven Railroad under DOT contract. (W Post, 12/21/67, A7)
m/g Alvin R. Luedecke (usaf, Ret.), Deputy Director of JPL, resigned He had come to JPL on Aug. 1, 1964, after five years as general manager of the Atomic Energy Commission and 25 years as an Air Force officer. (JPL Lab-Oratory, Sept. 67)
l/g James H. Doolittle (AFRes., Ret.) received the Sixth Annual Thomas D. White National Defense Award at Air Force Academy ceremonies in Denver. An aviation pioneer and Medal of Honor holder, General Doolittle was cited for making “outstanding contributions to the national defense and security . . . [and giving] a lifetime of leadership to military and civil aviation.” (Denver Post, 5/14/67, 32)
Dr. Marshall L. Rosenbluth, Univ. of California at San Diego, was selected to receive Princeton Univ. Institute for Advanced Study’s $5,000 Albert Einstein Award for 1967 for his “outstanding contributions in the area of plasma physics.” Selection of Dr. Rosenbluth, who helped develop the hydrogen bomb, was announced by Dr. Carl Kaysen, Director of the Institute. (AP, W Post, 3/14/67, A9)
Designs of both American SST and Anglo-French Concorde would have to be modified to meet standards proposed by their potential customers, International Air Transport Assn, (lata) Director General Knut Ham-marskjold asserted. He advised that aircraft be modified to meet all of the organization’s requirements, even if it meant postponing delivery date. The Wall Street Journal later commented: “Since iata’s members include most of the world’s major airlines . . . Mr. Hammarskjold’s words plainly deserve attention. . . . [He] appears to have shot a large hole in the SST supporters’ main argument for haste. It is that the British and French are already well ahead of the U.S. . . . Calm consideration would appear even more mandatory for the Government, saddled as it is with a war and a budget whose income side long ago since has lost touch with outgo. ... A late blooming success is far better than a dismal early failure.” (upi, NYT, 1/11/67, 73; WSJ, 1/17/67, 18)
dod awarded General Dynamics Corp. a $1.8-billion fixed-price-incentive contract for production of 493 F-lll aircraft: 331 F-lllAs for usaf; 64 F-lll strategic bombers for sac; 24 F-lllBs for usn; 24 F-lllCs for Royal Australian Air Force; and 50 F-lllKs for British Royal Air Force. Contract included only costs of basic airframes and minor electronic equipment; additional costs for engines, major electronic equipment, and modifications had not yet been fully determined and were not included. There was speculation that congressional opposition to adaptation of F—111 (formerly tfx) as an all-purpose military aircraft—heightened by large increases in estimated costs and by January and April crashes of usaf and usn test models—might delay appropriation of production funds, (dod Release 427-67; Wilson, W Post, 5/11/ 67, Hll; Sheehan, NYT, 5/11/67,1)
U.S. should move its technology beyond the “building blocks” to break out of the “mental strait] acket which is confining the Nation to a stalemate of defeatism,” recommended a policy statement adopted by Air Force Assn., at meeting in San Francisco. Asserting that U.S.S.R. was “far ahead” of U.S. in a critical area of nuclear knowledge, afa called for a “sweeping re-examination of national strategy” to assess the impact of technology “on the world balance of power.” In a specific resolution, afa urged a full-scale U.S. SST program, claiming that U.S.S.R. had been secretly flying a supersonic aircraft prototype for “more than one year.” (Davies, NYT, 3/16/67,10; WPost, 3/17/67, A4) Dr. Harold Agnew, Weapons Div. Leader at aec’s Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory, said U.S. reluctance to deploy an antiballistic missile system reflected a new balance-of-power concept which was characterized by weapons judged on their contributions to world stability rather than their superiority. This philosophy was dangerous because it stifled innovation and placed the Nation continually on the defensive. “Whether we use our full technological advantage should be determined solely on whether it is to our advantage politically, militarily and economically as far as our adversary is concerned. I believe it has been a mistake to allow the fleeting opinions of every nation that has a vote in the U.N. to influence materially our actions. The inhibition of the use of our full technological advantage has hurt our technological future as well as prolonging whatever confrontation is at hand. The basis of advanced technology is innovation, and nothing is more stifling to innovation than seeing one’s product not used or ruled out of consideration on flimsy premises involving public or world opinion. . . .” (Av Wk, 3/27/67, n) . ..	.
usaf successfully launched experimental aerodynamically shaped warhead from Vandenberg afb aboard an Atlas icbm to test reentry characteristics. (AP, St. Louis PD, 2/14/67,17)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd received National Aviation Club’s Award for Achievement in Washington, D.C., for “leadership in the development and establishment of . . . [dot] and for his long and successful career in . . . air transportation and public utilities.” (nac; Av Wk, 6/12/67, 23)
Atlas-F carrying unidentified payload exploded shortly after launch by usaf from Vandenberg afb. (SBD, 10/30/67,316)
Washington Daily News editorial warned that U.S. eagerness to sign space law treaty—under consideration in Senate since Feb. 7—might be costly: “Since the risks of Soviet deception are so great, it seems unwise to have accepted the Russian-proposed no-inspection honor system. . . . Since there is no provision for a check on space activity, the Soviet Union could push ahead with a variety of secret military programs in space while publicly attacking the right of the U.S. to an American military defense program in space. . . . Since the U.S. is an open society, any U.S. space defense program would be known. Since the Soviet society is closed, Moscow might well be able to keep its programs secret. “The loose way in which this space treaty was written was due in part to the Administration’s eagerness to get a treaty in hand. But that looseness could lead the U.S. into a trap.” (Cromley, W News, 4/11/67, 12) Ford Foundation consultant Fred W. Friendly said he would oppose any long-range design that relied on Treasury Dept, appropriations to produce news and public affairs programming because such funds would be subject to annual review by Congress. Instead, he suggested, news and public affairs should be underwritten from private funds—preferably out of savings from a non-profit comsat system that would employ income from commercial programs to help meet educational television’s overhead. Dr. James R. Killian, Jr., chairman of Carnegie Commission on Educational Television, urged revision of the proposed legislation so that the Corporation would have continuing responsibility for program selection to ensure freedom “from the centralization and rigidity of a network system” and to protect autonomy of local stations. net President John R. White argued that the Corporation’s role should be limited to matters of “high policy” and that operational activities, including the choice of programs to be carried on a network, should he subcontracted to other entities. The Corporation, he said, would not be able to make informed decisions until the programs had been submitted for national distribution. (Gould, NYT, 4/12/67, 79 ; 4/13/67, 75; 4/14/67, 67)
Claude Witze, in Air Force and Space Digest, claimed that usaf pilots testing F—111 A were enthusiastic about the aircraft’s potential. “These . . . pilots consider the F-111A weapon system the greatest single technological jump designed for their mission since the wedding of the jet engine and modern avionics. The F-111A, they predict, will let them hit tactical targets harder, with greater accuracy, and at longer ranges than any other airplane. . . .” Accelerated F-lllA testing and training program begun at Nellis afb, Nev., in July had accumulated encouraging statistics, he said: “By September, the new wing had set an unprecedented record. During that month, the five planes flew a total of 304.1 hours, an average utilization rate of 60.8 hours per aircraft. In October, the month in which the first production model was delivered ... it was 59.7 hours per aircraft. The stated requirement for the F— 111 A is thirty hours per aircraft. The best previous records set at Nellis on other aircraft have been in the area of thirty-eight hours a month per aircraft... with systems far less complex than those of the F-lllA.” In addition, he noted, F-lllA had set “an extraordinary record for safety. Far fewer aircraft have been lost than usaf experienced in previous similar programs.” (AF/SD, 12/67,45-55; CR, 12/5/67, S1788-90)
France and U.K. did not believe Concorde supersonic aircraft, scheduled to enter commercial service in 1971, would be forced out of the world market by U.S. SST in 1974, Sir George Edwards, chairman of an Anglo-French management organization for the Concorde, told the Washington, D.C., Aero Club. One distinct selling advantage for the Concorde was its price—about $16,000,000, compared to an estimated $40,000,000 for sst. He predicted 150 Concordes would be sold by 1975 and about 40-50 per year after that date. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/26/67)
U.S.S.R. team to study UFO (unidentified flying object) sightings would consist of 18 scientists and Air Force officers supported by 1,000 field observers, Time reported [see Nov. 30]. Flurry of UFO sightings had been reported in recent weeks by presumably reliable Aeroflot and military pilots, who usually described them as sickle-shaped. {Time, 12/22/67,21)
usaf successfully launched Titan II icbm from Vandenberg afb toward target in the Pacific, (upi, W Post, 4/13/67, A22)
Soviet jet transport, 11-62, carrying delegation of Soviet aviation experts who would negotiate final technical details of proposed Moscow-New York'air link with faa, landed at Dulles International Airport after 11-hr flight from Moscow to Washington. As a result of increasing complaints about jet noise and faa’s lack of authority to regulate it, Port Authority of New York had insisted that noise measurement tests be made on 11-62 at Dulles before initiation of direct Moscow-to-New York flights. New York Port Authority had done pioneering work on noise problem. Operational safety of 11-62 and alternate landing sites at Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, and Boston had already been approved by faa for joint use by Pan American Airways and Aeroflot, official Soviet airline. (Hoffman, W Post, 11/21/67, A4; B Sun, 11/21/67, A8)
U.S. Government would receive in royalties more than the estimated $1.3 billion it was contributing to sst development, ata President Stuart G. Tipton told the Aero Club of Washington (D.C.): “The government ' investment is to be paid back with the 300th delivery. The manufacturer will thus pay royalties of 4.3 to 6.7 million dollars for each aircraft delivered. . . . Since these royalties are to continue for a 15-year period, they will go on well beyond the 300th delivery, and this phase of royalty payment will produce a return on the government investment comparable to levels normally received by industry.” (Text)
U.S. should develop a 5,000-mph commercial aircraft and a 8,000-mph bomber, Dr. Antonio Ferri, Director of New York Univ.’s Guggenheim Aerospace Laboratories, told aiaa luncheon meeting in Washington, D.C. “Civilization has grown with the speed of moving around. The history of civilization shows that gradually you want to get in contact with people further away.” Dr. Ferri noted that jet aircraft had made Europe accessible, and the next generation of aircraft would bring other parts of the world within equally easy reach. He concluded that the technology and the “tremendous opportunities” of hypersonic aircraft were near at hand, but that necessary decisions and funds were still lacking. (Clark, NYT, 3/3/67,16)
An Army Pershing ballistic missile fired from Utah by U.S. troops overshot the White Sands Missile Range and smashed into the Mexican countryside. The Mexican government gave permission for a U.S. helicopter to cross the Rio Grande to look for it. No injuries or property damage were reported. The test firings had been part of an annual training for West German Air Force personnel and U.S. troops based in Europe. The Utah-to-New Mexico range had been used because there was no range large enough in Europe. (W Post, 9/13/67)
Two ten-week programs for college faculty members—administered jointly by Auburn Univ., Univ. of Alabama, and msfc—opened at msfc. First program would be summer institute in space-related sciences, sponsored by NASA and American Society for Engineering Education (asee) , and would be conducted by Univ. of Alabama. (Five other summer institutes, sponsored by NASA and asee, would be conducted by NASA centers and nearby colleges at msc, GSFC, arc, LaRC, and LeRC.) Second ten-week program, administered by Auburn Univ., would be 1967 NASA Engineering Systems Design Summer Faculty Fellowship Program, (msfc Release 67-124)
The Washington Post commented on the death of Dr. Lloyd V. Berkner: “In every generation there are a few men whose personal careers reflect with precision the great changes that have come over the country in their lifetime. Lloyd Viel Berkner built his first radio transmitter as a schoolboy in Sleepy Eye, Minnesota, and in 1928 he joined an expedition to the South Pole. Three decades later he emerged as one of the most effective advocates of American exploration in space. “In those years American science had become a vast interwoven fabric of academic and Federal laboratories, foundations and private corporations, civilian operations and military operations. Mr. Berkner moved in this world, which he had signally helped to create, not only as a scientist of distinction but as an organizer and manager of extraordinary force and capacity. . . (W Post, 6/5/67)
Commercial applications of a miniaturized TV aerial developed by usaf after four years of research were being explored by at least 100 electronic companies, Jack Gould reported in the New York Times. Firms believed device, originally developed for military communications, might accommodate public preference for small antennas without sacrificing picture quality. Inventor Edwin M. Turner, attached to the Air Force at Wright-Patterson afb, told the press that the “heart” of the miniaturized antenna was the use of transistors. (Gould, NYT, 8/12/67, 27)
One-inch-diameter hollow steel spheres for use in aerospace ballbearing assemblies were being tested at Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory, Wright-Patterson AFB. Hollow spheres were half as heavy and equally as strong as solid ones currently used, had longer life expectancy, and could easily be mass produced, (afsc Release 44.67)
Negotiations were being conducted in Washington, D.C., to move Canada’s High Altitude Research Project (harp) from McGill Univ. to Univ. of Vermont, Jay Walz reported in the New York Times. Move was a result of Canada’s decision to cut off funding because it believed program should be self-supporting, harp, which maintained a launch site in Highwater, Quebec, near the Vermont border, used 16-in naval guns to launch payloads inexpensively into the ionosphere for scientific and meteorological experiments. Project, which received about $1.2 million annually from U.S. Army, employed 50 persons at McGill Univ., 70 at Highwater, and 60 at a launch site in Barbados, West Indies. (Walz, NYT, 8/20/67,20)
Cornell Univ. professor Hans A. Bethe, director of Los Alamos Atomic Weapons Laboratory’s theoretical physics section during development of atomic bomb and recipient of aec’s 1961 Enrico Fermi Award, was awarded the 1967 Nobel Prize in physics for proving that the sun and other stars produced energy through synthesis of helium from hydrogen. He was cited specifically for “his contributions to the theory of nuclear reaction, especially his discoveries concerning the energy production of stars.” Nobel Prize in chemistry was presented jointly to George Porter and Ronald G. W. Norrish of U.K. and Manfred Eigen of West Germany for their studies of extremely fast chemical reactions occurring at speeds of one-one-thousandth of a millionth of a second. Nobel Peace Prize was withheld for second consecutive year, (upi, W Star, 10/30/67, 1; Wiskari, NYT, 10/31/67,1)
Aquanauts diving to extremely low ocean depths should breathe almost pure hydrogen in their diving suits, Dr. R. W. Brauer of Wrightsville Marine Bio-Medical Laboratory suggested at Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology in Chicago. Dr. Brauer planned to subject himself to such an atmosphere—98% hydrogen and 2% oxygen—at a pressure equivalent to 700- or 800-ft depth within the next six months. Divers long ago passed the depth limits that were feasible with compressed air and were now approaching the probable safe limits with an atmosphere in which helium was the major ingredient, Dr. Brauer said. Yet oil drilling, prospecting operations, and other undersea activities were pushing divers to further depths which required new types of atmosphere and, possibly, drugs to modify the narcotic effects produced by the high pressure air. (Schmeck, NYT, 4/23/67, 60)
Continuing shortage of physicists was threatening the Nation’s scientific progress, American Institute of Physics warned in its biennial report on physics manpower. Study, prepared under an NSF grant, said U.S. colleges and universities were not producing enough graduates to meet growing demand of education, research, and industry. In recent years— during a time of rapid growth in total college enrollment—there had been a continuing decline in the number of physics majors and a leveling off of physics baccalaureate degrees awarded. (NYT, 1/29/67, 1)
F-5 supersonic fighter aircraft manufactured by Northrop Co. could be sold to Latin American governments, Covey T. Oliver, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, was reported to have told key members of Congress. Because of shortage of pilots, facilities, and financial resources, only five nations would be interested—Peru, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Venezuela. Initial congressional reaction was reported favorable, the decision being displayed as no change in U.S. policy. State Dept, informants, however, conceded that recent reports of Peru’s negotiations with France on purchase of 12 Mirage V jet fighters had a major effect in hastening DOD’s and State Dept.’s action. (Welles, NYT, 10/18/67, 1)
afosr Director of Information Sciences Dr. Harold Wooster, writing on “Basic Research and the Department of Defense,” presented his appraisal of what basic research is and why it is a benefit when Government funds support basic research. He stated that the Government had spent $2.1 billion on basic research in FY 1967 while American industry was spending $607 million. Wooster believed that basic research and its results transcend state and national boundaries, and that there were “certain large research tools and facilities” which were too expensive for private industry, or any state or combination of states to build. As an example, he pointed to the National Magnet Laboratory at mit: “This Laboratory is a national resource already making important direct applied contributions to the defense effort. It would have been impossible to build without Federal financing.” (afosr Res Rev, 10/67, 1-9)	.	.
Aircraft flown by pilots “lacking professional ability”—usually those in general aviation—were responsible for most air accidents, according to study by Cornell Univ-.’s Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Aviation Center. Fatalities involving general aviation aircraft in 1966 in U.S. totaled 1,069, compared with a loss of 59 passengers by scheduled domestic airlines, the. study noted. “It is apparently futile to try to persuade the majority of pilots to secure and maintain instrument proficiency. ... It would seem more effective to attack the problem of requiring manufacturers to incorporate better aircraft stability and controllability characteristics. . . .” Other methods suggested to improve air safety included: (1) raising airport standards by improving lighting and increasing landing aids, anti-collision devices, and weather data, accuracy; (2) reviewing pilot certification procedures and incorporating more “human factors” into aircraft design; and (3) intensifying methods of crash fire protection and reevaluating emergency evacuation procedures. (NYT, 6/15/67, 81)
NASA’s total procurement in FY 1967 fell to $4,651 billion—8% below FY 1966—and procurement actions dropped to 283,000—11% less than FY 1966—because of budget reductions, Aerospace Technology reported. NASA’s “Annual Procurement Report, Fiscal Year 1967” disclosed that 83% of net dollar value went directly to business firms; 4% to education and other nonprofit institutions; 5% to Cal Tech for operating jpl; and 8% to other Government agencies. NASA continued its policy of making greater use of incentive contracts, awarding 81 new incentive contracts and converting 11 cost-plus-fixed-fee contracts to incentive awards during FY 1967. North American Rockwell Corp. led in dollar amount of NASA awards, receiving 25.46% of total. (Aero Tech, 12/4/67, 46)
Current faa r&d programs were discussed by faa at its first annual “Report to Industry” meeting in Washington, D.C. Meeting was designed to keep aviation public informed of R&D programs which would result in new elements in the National Airspace System, (faa Release 67-8)
Number of mid-air aircraft collisions could be reduced “if pilots accept the idea that the plane can be quicker than the eye,” Lockheed Aircraft Co. aviation psychologist Dr. Earl J. Ends said in a Washington, D.C., interview. According to his calculations based on ideal conditions: “A pilot flying 600 miles an hour will travel 88 feet from the time his eye spots an oncoming plane until the message is relayed to the brain. By the time the brain interprets the message, the plane has flown 920 feet. When the pilot decides to climb, descend or turn, he has already covered 2,680 feet. And by the time he carries out his decision the plane has covered 4,792 feet. Put another way, one of the pilots would have to see the other plane 9,548 feet away before he could change course to avoid a collision, (upi, NYT, 4/13/67, 74)
U.S.S.R.’s May Day Parade was transmitted across U.S. for broadcast in Japan, but was not televised on American networks. The 1%-hr program, transmitted through the cooperation of ComSatCorp and U.S.S.R., originated live in Moscow and was picked up by Early Bird I over the Atlantic; relayed across U.S. by Andover, Me., and Brewster Flat, Wash., ground stations; and transmitted across Pacific via Intelsat II for viewing in Tokyo. Japan paid approximately $30,000 for broadcast and transmission services. (Birger, M News, 5/5/67; ComSatCorp)
Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.), Chairman, Senate Committee on Armed Services’ Nuclear Safeguards Subcommittee, reported from Senate floor that “Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty safeguards [were] being supported and implemented in a satisfactory manner.” He said that recent Soviet and Chinese missile and nuclear developments had formed “serious challenge to the strategic superiority of U.S. power on which our defense planners have counted to maintain political stability and to keep the peace.” Sen. Jackson listed two prime requirements to maintain U.S. strategic superiority. First would be strategic offensive capability to penetrate Soviet abm defenses using new generations of land-based icbms and nuclear submarines with better missiles and using MIRVs. Second requirement would be the best ABM defense to protect U.S. retaliatory second-strike force, to safeguard American people, and to account for allies’ needs. He cited seriousness of Soviet’s doubling icbms, developing orbital nuclear bombs, and deploying abm system around Moscow, especially when combined with growing Communist Chinese nuclear threat. (Text)
m/g Vincent G. Huston, former Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and recipient of NASA Leadership Medal, became Commander of afsc’s National Range Div. He succeeded l/g Leighton I. Davis, who became Commandant of the Industrial College of the Armed Forces in Washington, D.C. (afsc Release 103.67)
On presentation of Distinguished Service Medal to l/g Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commandant of Industrial College of the Armed Forces, Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. McConnell cited him for outstanding management of range support of U.S. ballistic missile and space vehicle programs and as dod Manager for Manned Space Flight Support Operations—specifically, Projects Mercury and Gemini. Davis had been Commander of Air Force Eastern Test Range (afetr) and National Range Div. from May 1960 through June 1967. (afsc Release 140.67)
Boeing Co. would spend $165 million and General Electric Co. $65 million in Phase III (prototype construction) of SST program, m/g J. C. Maxwell (usaf), faa Director of Supersonic Transport Development, told American Marketing Assn., in Los Angeles. Total cost of Phase III work was estimated at $1.1 billion; most of the difference would be supplied by Government and the small remainder by several U.S. airlines. Boeing and GE contracts would not be effective until President Johnson’s authorization to begin Phase III. (Reddig, Jr., W Star, 2/16/67, A17; WSI, 2/16/67,4)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at msc, received the Spirit of St. Louis medal from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (asme) meeting in Cocoa Beach, Fla. He was cited for his “meritorious service in the advancement of aeronautics.” (NYT, 7/19/ 67, 32)
Pilot performing with the French Patrol, the aerobatic team of the French Air Force, was killed when his jet aircraft crashed and burst into flames during final aerial display at the Paris International Air and Space Show. Aircraft failed to pull out of a dive, bounced along the airfield, and then exploded about 100 yds from the grandstand, injuring several spectators. (.NYT, 6/6/67, 77M)	_
Turbulence-measuring device developed at U.S. Weather Bureau’s National Storms Laboratory in Norman, Okla., might be used by U.S. airports in 1968 to guide commercial airline pilots through severe and moderate turbulence areas, Martin Waldron reported in New York Times. Device measured severity of thunderstorms by analyzing and averaging radar pulses reflected from cells within the storm and then registered cloud structure on a radar scope. Data were relayed to pilots by flight controllers on the ground. Chief of U.S. Weather Bureau’s radar systems section Stewart Bigler said a refined version of the device had been installed at Washington, D.C., National Airport in January and would be tested in June. If it performed satisfactorily, similar devices would be installed in other U.S. airports in 1968. (Waldron, NYT, 5/4/67,51)
m/g Benjamin D. Foulois (USA, Ret.), oldest U.S. military pilot and first American to fly in combat, died at age 87 at Andrews afb, Md. A member of USA since 1898, General Foulois had been first person to operate an Army dirigible; first military observer on a cross-country flight (with Orville Wright); first military man to teach himself to fly; first military test pilot; first man to fly more than 100 mi nonstop; first man to use an aircraft in combat; and first Chief of Staff of the Army Air Corps to be a military aviator. He had received five campaign badges for field services, in addition to the Distinguished Service Medal, the French Legion of Honor, the Crown of Italy, and the Congressional Medal of Recognition. (upi, NYT, 4/26/67, 43; Casey, W Post, 4/26/67, B8)
North American Air Defense Command (norad ) announced officially that no flying saucers, no extraterrestrial spacecraft, and no “unfriendly objects” had ever been identified by air forces over U.S. or Canada: “There have been thousands of reports about official air force stands on UFOs from the widest variety of sources over the years-—but so far as the command is aware, it never has been shown anything but natural atmospheric or astronomical phenomena or airborne objects—birds, insects, hardware—seen under unusual circumstances, or misinterpreted.” (Thomis, C Trib, 8/18/67,1)
Thomas O’Toole, writing in the Washington Post, reviewed nasa’s “growing role in the Vietnam war.” Both NASA and dod were reluctant to disclose the size of NASA’s defense effort, he charged, “but it’s known that [oart] is spending between $4 million and $5 million a year directing the efforts of 100 scientists and engineers to tasks vital to the Vietnam war.” Results of NASA research, he said, included a new acoustic detector able to locate mortars by measuring ground vibrations, a more-steerable parachute, aircraft engines too quiet to be heard during approach, a scissors-like sling for helicopter rescues, and a helicopter which did not make a chopper noise. Although NASA willingly participated in defense research, its authorization to do so was “fuzzy,” he said, based only on a section of the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act which directed NASA to make available to defense organizations “discoveries that have military value or significance.” NASA was “nervous” about its military role, he asserted, because of its unclear authorization, fear of congressional inquiry, and fear of international reaction. Sen. Strom Thurmond (R-S.C.) later attacked O’Toole’s article on the Senate floor: “One might expect that if ... a story of this sort were to be dug up, the article would express gratification that the taxpayer’s money was being used on behalf of the American people . . . [and not purport to be] shocked that NASA projects help our national objective. ... I am firmly of the conviction that anything that can be developed technically to save a single American life in Vietnam, especially by any individual or organization that is being paid by American taxpayers, belongs freely to our soldiers. . . . “The article is obviously a patently calculated leak. The informed details it provides on NASA’s research and technical work proves this. . . . This is a shocking thing, that is not a matter of press freedom, or even of press license, but plain aid and comfort to the enemy. . . . Publishers and editors should accept their responsibility to prevent such . . . news coverage and to prevent, too, the violation of security classifications on subjects that involve adversely the preservation of the lives of American fighting men.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/4/67, Al ; NASA lar VI/128)
The New York Times called for fuller and more open debate on cost and consequences of SST program: “The sst’s priority is debatable and so is its financing. The industry may be right in asserting that the costs of development are so huge that no company can afford to take the risk on its own. It points out that the backing of both Britain and France has been required to launch the Concorde. But if the combined efforts of two countries and their aircraft industries are needed for that much less ambitious project, the American sst might be more safely and soundly developed if it commanded the combined resources of the entire American industry and the Government. “What is at stake is not the commitment to proceed with the sst. That decision has been made and cannot—and should not—be reversed. But if the sst is to be sound economically as well as technologically, the Administration and the industry must be less secretive and indefinite about the costs and how they are to be financed. An open debate is needed on how to get the most for the taxpayers’ money.” (NYT, 1/2/67,18)
James Smith McDonnell, founder of McDonnell Aircraft Corp., received National Academy of Engineering’s second Founders Medal at NAE’s third Annual Meeting in Washington, D.C. Medal honored “outstanding contributions by an engineer both to his profession and to society.” (nae Release)
President Johnson, in a White House ceremony, presented m/g James W. Humphreys, Jr., of the Air Force Medical Corps, the Distinguished Service Medal for helping to develop “a national medical program for the Vietnamese people.” General Humphreys would become Director of Space Medicine, OMSF, June 1. (PD, 5/29/67, 778; W Post, 5/25/67)
Dr. Louis B. Amoldi, former Command Surgeon of Air Force Logistics Command, had been named nasa Director of Occupational Medicine, succeeding Dr. Harold H. Stoddard, who resigned, (nasa Release 67-45)
Soviet mathematician Dr. Alex M. Letov, visiting Huntsville for the Guidance, Control, and Flight Dynamics Conference sponsored by Alabama chapter of the aiaa, said he supported the exchange of technical information between U.S. and U.S.S.R. After delivering an important technical paper, Letov remarked: “I am hopeful that I may have initiated some steps in this area of exchange. I am completely satisfied with my presentation and the response of the American scientist. In my report I will reflect this.” One of the world’s leading authorities on spacecraft guidance and control, Letov outlined a complex theory for stabilizing a large manned spacecraft, which he considered a major problem. “You can’t consider die other problems of engineering if your system is not stable. It must be stable.” (KC Star, 8/15/67)
U.S. scientists’ interest in military research had declined substantially, Bryce Nelson wrote in Science: “Since the beginning of the Second World War, many American scientists have regarded it as a duty to work on military research in times of national emergency and have often done so with enthusiasm. However . . . many scientists now seem to show little feeling of obligation to do military research.” Suggested reasons for lack of interest: (1) disagreement with U.S. policy in Vietnam; (2) boredom with defense problems; (3) higher salaries in private industry than in dod; and (4) increased interest in civilian problems such as urban development, poverty, and transportation. (Nelson, Science, 4/21/61, 24)
Editorial comment on authorization for sst prototype construction [see April 29]: Washington Post: “President Johnson made the right decision in requesting that Congress appropriate Federal funds for the development of the supersonic transport plane. . . . But in proposing what it calls ‘a creative partnership between our Government and American industry,’ the Administration should provide more adequate protection for the taxpayer who will bear a substantial share of the development costs. “Why should not the taxpayers, who are to provide about 25 per cent of the capital required, be permitted to share proportionately in the enormous profits that would be earned by a successful SST? Although it is necessary to launch the sst project with the shortest possible delay, Congress should be concerned with a more adequate protection of the public interest.” (W Post, 5/1/67) World Journal Tribune: “Actually, the basis of the SST project is coldly commercial. At stake is not some vague blue ribbon of achievement but American leadership in the highly profitable business of supplying planes to the world’s airlines. “sst, by its size, speed and sonic boom, will cause a number of pro'blems which have not yet been solved. But it was inevitable that this country should enter the supersonic race—not for national pride or out of scientific curiosity, but as a matter of good business. “The international plane market is too good for America to let it go by default.” (WJT, 5/4/67,22) New York Times: “Mr. Johnson acknowledged that the building of an American sst ‘carries high technical and financial risks.’ Yet in his anxiety to get on with the job he has increased the potential hazards to the taxpayer. . . . “Congress has a responsibility to establish guidelines to keep the Administration’s investment in the sst from getting out of hand. It should see to it that the Government does not write any blank checks and become overly involved in what is supposed to he a commercial venture. And industry, too, should recognize that if it asks Washington to shoulder the costs, then Washington may well end up running the entire operation.” (NYT, 5/2/67,43)	_	_
American Helicopter Society, meeting in Washington, D.C., presented the Dr. Alexander Klemin Award to Avco Corp. executive Dr. Anselm Franz for “leading the development of a noteworthy series of gas turbine engines for helicopters and other VTOL aircraft. . . .” (Av Wk, 5/29/67, 55)	_
frc had awarded 15-mo, $8.9-million contract to North American Aviation, Inc. (naa), for maintenance and support of XB—70 supersonic research aircraft. As under previous support contracts, NAA would provide manpower, facilities, material, and equipment to support flight operations and would conduct data reduction. Overall management of XB—70 program was assigned to frc under March 15 NASA—usaf agreement, (nasa Release 67-75)
Secretary of Transportation Alan S. Boyd outlined major goals of Dept. of Transportation (dot) at ceremony in Washington, D.C., marking its first official operating day. DOT would (1) “insist that all forms of transportation become safer and more reliable for the user” and make increased effort to meet transportation needs of the physically handicapped; (2) strive for increased intermodal efficiency through promotion of integrated systems; (3) explore new possibilities to help transportation advance technologically and keep pace with progress of American industry; (4) encourage transportation industry in a selective expansion program for the domestic market; (5) seek ways for transportation to assist economic development of underdeveloped areas; and (6) make more positive contribution to urban development and quality of urban mass transit service. “At the very least, this Department must work to make transportation more efficient, more economical, more expeditious, and more socially responsible. . . . America, today, has the best transportation system of any nation in the world. But it does have its faults. It can be, it must be substantially improved.” (Text)
Special nsf panel to screen radio astronomy proposals advised nsf Director Leland J. Haworth to accept immediately only two of the six recommendations presented to the panel during July hearings: (1) Cornell
Single global time zone would be advantageous with the speed of communications and transportation in the space age, ossa Director of Space Applications Programs Leonard Jaffee told the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Assn, in Washington, D.C. “We are almost approaching the point where the remaining obstacle to global business, aside from the political problems, will be the zonal time differences. “At the moment time differences are aggravations to the total realization of our new-found communications and transportation capabilities, but not complete deterrents. . . . Today, if it is important enough, we make allowances for and tolerate time differences—tomorrow we may have to do something about [them] . . . because as our business and cultural patterns change in this space era, these time differences will become intolerable. “. . . the space age has already contributed the concept of ‘one world-one time.’ By creating a common time and acceptance of a day not geared to the rising and setting of the Sun, we may be able to extend this to an acceptance of ‘one day’ consisting of 24 hours . . . during which we will make optimum use of our roads, our schools, our factories, our communications and transportation facilities . . . [with] 3-shift use . . . [so that] current facilities could handle three times as many people.” (Text)
President Johnson called for more Inter-American cooperation at conference of Latin American leaders in Punta del Este, Uruguay. U.S., he said, would aid Latin American development by (1) helping to develop a new common market; (2) contributing additional funds to Inter-American Bank for “special operations” such as construction of comsat earth stations; (3) exploring possibility of temporary preferential tariff; (4) offering agricultural and educational assistance; (5) increasing food program for pre-school and school-age children and operating a nutrition demonstration project; (6) establishing Alliance for Progress centers at U.S. colleges and universities; and (7) aiding development of science and technology, especially in areas of educational broadcasting, marine science, and atomic energy. (PD, 4/24/67, 636)
The Soviet Anti-Ballistic Missile (abm) System: a Survey of Soviet Strategic Doctrine, Arguments on Deployment, Intentions and Fulfillment, American Reaction and Implications,” Library of Congress document F-239, evaluated the dangers for Soviet abm deployment. Author, Specialist in Soviet and Eastern Europe Affairs Joseph G. Whelan, summarized present state of affairs, noting Russia’s historic preoccupation with the defensive and her clear intent not to accept permanently a second position to the U.S. Whelan quoted from Feb. 23, 1967, speech of Presidential adviser Walt W. Rostow at Univ. of Leeds, Great Britain: “We are all actively trying to find the terms for a non-proliferation agreement; and the emergence of [abm defense] for Moscow has posed for the United States and the Soviet Union the question of whether the nuclear arms race shall be brought under control or go into a vast and expensive round of escalation on both sides with respect to both offensive and defensive weapons.” (Text)
New York Times editorial commented on failure of swing-wing design for SST: “More than ever now the burden of proof is on those who urge that billions of taxpayers’ dollars be spent on an American SST. The fallibility of their judgment has been demonstrated in the loss of the swing-wing gamble. Is there reason to suppose that their optimistic forecasts about the profits to be made from such an airplane are any sounder? The aerodynamics of different wing configurations is not the only thing that needs to be assessed in the current re-examination of the sst.” (NYT, 10/25/68, 46)
Fiftieth anniversary of U.S. Airmail Service was celebrated in Washington, D.C., with gathering at National Air and Space Museum of pioneer airmail pilots and presentation by Postmaster General W. Marvin Watson of commemorative 10-cent postage stamp. Watson observed that, from small beginning, “virtually all first class mail which can be effectively airlifted is now so moved and almost 80 per cent of all letter mail now travels by air.” (Text; Lidman, NYT, 5/16/68, 30; Aerospace, Spring 68)
Dept, of Commerce announced that “the exploration of Antarctica has now been virtually completed,” with conclusion of two-month, 815-mi scientific journey led by C&GS geophysicist Norman W. Peddie. “There are now no major areas [of Antarctica] which have not been explored,” Peddie said. Expedition, which started Dec. 5 and ended Jan. 30, was made by nine-man party of Belgian, Norwegian, and American scientists. Trip covered region in Queen Maud Land between South Pole and Princess Ragnhild Coast in direction of Africa (W Post, 4/21/68, A12)
At Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner, Washington, D.C., sponsored by NAA, Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) received Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “assuring United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world.” (naa pao)
usaf launched experimental Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) vehicle from Vandenberg afb. (AP, W Post, 11/25/68, 9)
Secretary of Defense Clark M. Clifford wrote in Air Force and Space Digest: “Not too many years ago, the War and Navy Departments were concerned almost exclusively with men and simple machines. Defense industries were regarded as mere munitions-makers. ... We now have a military-industrial team with unique resources of experience, engineering talent, management and problem-solving capacities, [and it] must be used to help find the answers to complex domestic problems as it has found the answers to complex weapon systems. Those answers can be put to good use by our cities and our states, by our schools, by large and small businesses alike. The nation will be the better and the stronger.” (AF/SD, 11/68, 76—7)
nasa announced that North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. injector would be used in Bell Aerosystems Co. engine of first manned lunar module. Decision on whether to use Bell or nar injector for lunar mission had not yet been made, (msc Release 68-41)
New York Times editorial on F— 111 A aircraft: “The difficulties that have beset the controversial F—111 swing-wing plane recently provide new evidence of the folly of allowing political factors to veto Or dilute technical judgment. “These additional blows to a plane that still has great potential promise emphasize what most experts have been saying for seven years —the F— 111 has been built the wrong way from the beginning. It reflected former Secretary of Defense McNamara’s insistence, in the name of ‘commonality’ and savings, that the Navy and the Air Force buy one plane for two entirely different missions. “But, though the Navy’s version may never—as Congress believes— meet the Navy’s needs, the Air Force model has great potential capabilities as a supersonic high- and low-level all-weather fighter-bomber . . . [and] must be developed, tested and utilized to its fullest capability.” (NYT, 4/1/68)
World’s largest commercial jet—360- to 490-passenger Boeing 747 with mach 0.84 to 0.90 cruising speed—was rolled from factory for first time in ceremony at Everett, Wash. The $20-million aircraft was scheduled for first flight in December 1968 and first passenger service, with Pan American World Airways, Inc., one year later. (Boeing pio; AP, W Post, 9/30/68, A22; 10/1/68, A9; Witkin, NYT, 10/1/68, upi, W Star, 10/1/68, A6)
usaf announced launch of 200th Minuteman ICBM from Vandenberg afb. Since September 1962, Vandenberg had been launch site for missiles fired over Pacific Ocean for crew training, reliability tests, and developmental work. (Boeing Release)
Australian Air Force was sending technical team to U.S. to investigate airworthiness of F—111 aircraft. Australian government had ordered 24 F—Ills in 1963 for estimated $112 million. Cost had already increased to $266 million, and additional increases were expected. Delivery would be refused until Australia was satisfied mechanical faults had been eliminated. (NY Post, 5/20/68,21)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched largest research balloon—28.7-million-cu-ft polyethylene sphere—to record 158,000-ft altitude from wsmr. Flight carried instruments for atmospheric measurements near stratopause and terminated near Needles, Calif., after 18 hr. Previous record size for polyethylene balloon was 13.5 million cu ft. Previous balloon record, 26 million cu ft, was held by five fiber-reinforced Mylar balloons flown by AFCRL for NASA in 1966 and 1967. (oar Research Review, 1—2/69, 8—9)
nasa successfully launched Stratoscope II, Princeton Univ.’s balloonborne telescope, from Scientific Balloon Flight Station, Palestine, Tex., to altitude of 80,000 ft. Purpose was to photograph sky from altitude above 95% of earth’s atmosphere, (nasa Release 68—93)
edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., independent concern providing technical support in computer use and technology, had announced it would purchase Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Buffalo, N.Y., from Cornell Univ. for $25 million, (nyt, 9/26/68)
nas released Space Applications Summer Study, 1967 Interim Report, Volume I, Central Review Committee Conclusions and Recommendations and Summaries of Panel Reports. Chaired by Dr. W. Dem-ing Lewis, study treated aspects of space technology “likely to produce practical benefits to large segments of the American and world economies.” Report urged extensive and coherent program and said NASA should double $100 million it currently spent to develop technology of space applications. (Text; Clark, NYT, 2/9/68, 6)
Flight of Soviet heavy turboprop Bear aircraft had made most southern penetration over North American waters, coming close to Newfoundland coast in early February, Charles W. Corddry reported in Baltimore Sun. According to DOD officials, flight was closest to date but was not first; several Soviet aircraft had been detected 75—100 mi from Newfoundland coast since January. (Corddry, B Sun, 2/17/68,1)
In answer to queries [see Nov. 16] DOD issued statement on increased cost of C—5A, world’s largest aircraft. “At the beginning of this program over three years ago, the Air Force estimated that the cost of development and production of the first 58 airplanes would be $2.3 billion. The corresponding estimate for the 120 airplanes ultimately contemplated was $3.1 billion. Current estimates, including economic escalation and all other factors, are $3.25 billion and $4.3 billion, indicating increases of 41% and 39% respectively.” Additional costs had resulted from increased labor and materials costs due to Vietnam war and “unprecedented demand for civilian aircraft,” introduction of new technology, and modifications to overcome technical difficulties. (Text; WSJ, 11/20/18, 2; AP, W Post, 11/20/68, A3; Kelly, W Star, 11/20/68, All)	_
Prototype four-engine turboprop stol aircraft built in France as Breguet III and in U-S. as McDonnell Douglas 188 was demonstrated for press in flight over Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Eastern Airlines, McDonnell Douglas, and faa were testing aircraft as possible replacement for jet aircraft on Eastern’s crowded shuttle service between Washington, New York, and Boston. When fully developed, aircraft would carry 100 passengers at 400 mph with all-weather capability. It would take off and land on less than 800-ft runway and operate on more direct routes closed to conventional aircraft under noise-abatement rules. Airline spokesman had said aircraft could be operational in “early 1970.” (Yarborough, W Star, 9/18/68, Al; Valentine, W Post, 9/19/68, Bl)
MIT physicist Dr. Irwin I. Shapiro, speaking at American Physical Society meeting in Boston, said he and associates had successfully tested refined radar technique that might prove validity of Einstein’s general theory of relativity. Using 20-ft-dia Haystack, Mass,, dish antenna, scientists observed impulses which they bounced off of Venus and Mercury as planets passed behind sun. Results, which confirmed theory’s prediction that signals would be slowed down slightly by gravitational pull, were more precise than those from previous tests but were not clear enough to resolve completely debate on theory’s validity. Dr. Shapiro believed greater precision could be achieved. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/28/68, 22; O’Toole, W Post, 2/28/68, 1)
USAF Space and Missile Systems Organization awarded North American Rockwell Corp. $1-million initial increment to $4-million fixed-price contract for production of Thor propulsion systems, (dod Release 215-68)
dod announced usaf scientists, in study conducted by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, would fly KC—135 flying ionospheric laboratory around auroral oval in Arctic during seven-day series of first flights attempted along this route. Purpose was to obtain data on spatial extent and intensity of optical and radio auroras in midwinter and define relationships between them, usaf was interested in influence of auroras on radio communication and navigation and on radar surveillance. afcrl scientists hoped, eventually, to predict occurrence and severity of auroral activity, (dod Release 1065—68)
German scientist Dr. Otto Hahn, who had won 1944 Nobel Prize for chemistry for his 1938 discovery of nuclear fission, died at Goettingen, Germany, of heart failure at age 89. He had been consistent opponent of use of atomic weapons, urging scientists to concentrate on peaceful uses of nuclear energy, (upi, W Post, 7/29/68, B4) July 28—August 3: Australian astronomers using Mills Cross antenna array at Univ. of Sydney had detected first two pulsars to be found in southern sky. They brought to nine total pulsars discovered to date. Pulse rates of once every 0.56 and 1.96 sec were similar to all others, which ranged between 0.25 and 2 sec. Cornell Univ. astronomer, Dr. Yervent Terzian, had observed that two-second pulse rate made it appear unlikely that pulsating neutron stars could account for the signals. Calculations indicated that, if they were quivering, or “ringing” like bell, it should be at much shorter intervals than those observed. Pulse rates were more compatible, he said, with proposal that they emanated from white dwarfs, “cinders” of stars that had consumed their nuclear fuel but were larger and less dense than neutron stars. (Sullivan, NYT, 8/8/68, 30)
naa selected Sen. Warren G. Magnuson (D-Wash.) to receive its 1968 Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for “more than two decades of dynamic leadership in developing national and international policy that has assured United States preeminence in aeronautics throughout the world and has contributed immeasurably to the health and vitality of America’s economic structure.” Trophy would be presented Dec. 17 at Annual Wright Brothers Memorial Dinner in Washington, D.C. (naa Release)
Wall Street Journal reported interview with Prof. Edwin L. Resler, Jr., Director of Cornell Univ. Graduate School of Aerospace Engineering, on possibility of reducing sonic boom created by supersonic transports to tolerable level by changing design of engines for big aircraft to slow down expansion of exhaust stream. “We can . . . reduce the shock wave effect and its consequent boom to a tolerable level so that overland flights of supersonic transports would be feasible,” Prof. Resler said. (WSJ, 6/28/68)
faa awarded $3.8-million contract to IBM’s Federal Systems Div. to modernize air traffic control at 100 U.S. facilities by installing printers and keyboards for faster coordination and reduction of controllers’ oral and manual workload. Delivery of equipment, to begin April 15, would be coordinated with delivery of other automation components for National Airspace System, (faa Release 68—24) U.S. Public Health Service in Washington, D.C., and Univ. of Texas. Demonstration was directed by itt World Communications, Inc., with cooperation of ComSatCorp and Kokusai Denshin Denwa Co., Ltd., Japan. (ComSatCorp Release 68—17: AP, W Star, 4/10/68, A18; dpi, W Post, 4/12/68, A15)	'
At signing in Washington, D.C., of nuclear nonproliferation treaty, President Johnson said: “The conclusion of this treaty encourages the hope that other steps may be taken toward a peaceful world. And ... I have described this treaty as the most important international agreement since the beginning of the nuclear age. . . . After long seasons of patient and painstaking negotiation, we have concluded just within the past five years, the limited test ban treaty, the outer space treaty, the treaty creating a nuclear-free zone in Latin America. And the march of mankind is toward the summit and not the chasm.” Agreement had also been reached between TJ.S. and U.S.S.R., President Johnson announced, “to enter in the nearest future into discussions on the limitation and the reduction of both offensive strategic nuclear weapons delivery systems and systems of defense against ballistic missiles.” At Moscow signing of treaty, Soviet Premier Alexey N. Kosygin called agreement a “major success for the cause of peace.” He disclosed contents of U.S.S.R. memorandum to all nations proposing nine-point disarmament and arms control program and called on 18-nation Geneva disarmament conference to take up proposal. (PD, 6/8/68; Sherman, W Star, 7/1/68, Al; upi, 7/1/68; Grose, NYT, 7/2/68, 1, 2)
Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. received $5,700,000 usaf contract for Agena launch services at Vandenberg afb from Oct 1, 1967, through Sept. 30,1968. (dod Release 64—68)
Ralph Hazlett Upson, aeronautical engineer who won James Gordon Trophy in 1913 International Balloon Race from Paris to England and American National Balloon Races in 1913, 1919, and 1921, died in Burien, Wash., at age 80. (NYT, 8/15/68, 35)
Cal Tech trustees announced choice of Dr. Harold Brown, Air Force Secretary, to replace Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who resigned effective Jan. 20 to become Science Adviser to President-elect Richard M. Nixon. (upi, W Star, 12/14/68, A3; W Post, 12/15/68, A6)
President Johnson announced resignation of Leonard H. Marks as Director of U.S. Information Agency in time to head U.S. delegation to negotiate permanent arrangements for INTELSAT at February 1969 conference in Washington, D.C. (PD, 10/7/68, 1433; Halloran, W Post, 10/2/68, A8; AP, NYT, 10/2/68,23)
Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) said on Senate floor: “I am now confident . . . serious consideration should be given to canceling the entire Air Force F—111 series. ... If the plane is fundamentally unsound—and that would now appear to be the case—its termination would prevent the loss of additional billions of dollars—and what is more important, save the lives of many pilots.” He said October report of Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee of Senate Committee on Armed Services “points up the grave security deficiencies that have resuited from the Department of Defense forcing the Air Force and Navy to put all the eggs of their aircraft development into one unfortunate basket.” (Text; CR, 10/7/68, S12148-51; Witkin, NYT, 10/8/68, 18; W Post, 10/8/68, All)
arc Director H. Julian Allen had been elected Fellow of U.K.’s Royal Aeronautical Society for outstanding contributions to aeronautics, ARC Astrogram announced. Allen, who had served naca and its successor NASA since 1936, had received naca Distinguished Service Medal for originating concept of bluntness as aerodynamic technique for avoiding severe reentry heating, aiaa Sylvanus A. Reed Award, Air Force Assn.’s Air Power Trophy, and NASA Exceptional Scientific Achievement Medal, (arc Astrogram, 3/28/68, 1)
New York Times editorial said first flight tests of Multiple Independently Targetable Reentry Vehicle (mirv) and prototype missile carriers Poseidon and Minuteman III had taken U.S. “into a new nuclear arms race—with itself. The critical question now is whether the Soviet Union will feel sufficiently challenged to run along. Future generations undoubtedly will look back with disbelief at the way the United States again has invented, publicized and tested a deadly new weapon which, instead of improving American security, creates an added threat to it by putting the Soviet Union under pressure to produce the same weapon and aim it at the United States.” (NYT, 8/17/68, 26)
Approximately 36 Soviet Air Force flights with more than 85 bombers had been identified off northern coasts of North America during first half of 1968, six times scale of operations reported during last half of 1967, according to Charles W. Corddry in Baltimore Sun. Soviet aircraft had cruised over international waters, dod reportedly considered flights routine. (B Sun, 6/9/68, 1)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Abraham N. Geller issued temporary order blocking sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to edp Technology, Inc., Washington, D.C., for $25 million. Order had been requested by State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz, who alleged alteration of Laboratory from public purposes to profit-making organization would be a “major change detrimental to the national interest, to the quality and effectiveness of the laboratory and to the . . . public.” New York State had sought to purchase facility but was reportedly unable to match edp Technology, Inc., offer. (AP, NYT, 11/13/68, 11) Day preceding conference, eldo meeting had resolved, with U.K. abstaining, to proceed with launcher development on scale designed to hold down costs. U.K. had proposed European nations abandon project, rely on U.S. boosters, and concentrate on space applications, particularly communications. U.K. agreed, however, to fulfill commitment to support launcher program until 1971. (W Post, 11/15/68, A20; Greenberg, Science, 12/6/68, 1108-9)
Inauguration of direct air service between New York and Moscow had been set for “on or after July 15” by letters between U.S. Moscow Embassy and U.S.S.R. Foreign Ministry. Soviet airline Aeroflot announced 11—62 jet aircraft service would start from Moscow July 15. U.S. carrier Pan American World Airways expected to start Boeing 707 service from New York same date. Bilateral air agreement of Nov. 4, 1966, had stipulated once-weekly return flights over 4,700-mi route. May 6, 1968, agreement added intermediate stop at Montreal, Copenhagen, Stockholm, or London, (cab Docket 6489; State Dept Release 94; AP, NYT, 7/9/68, 65; Ward, B Sun, 7/9/68,1; AP, W Post, 7/9/68, A15) First had interfered with short-wave transmissions worldwide, according to ESSA Chief of Forecast Services, Robert Doeker; second had seemed weaker. Scientists were watching for effect of cloud of electrons spawned by first solar flare, biggest and brightest since 1966. (AP, LA Her-Exam, 7/10/68; AP, NYT, 7/10/68, 17)
Long-nosed USAF C—131 research aircraft was being developed for Air Force Systems Command by Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., as unique flying simulator to test controls, instruments, and aircraft configurations of advanced aircraft such as Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa), military C—5A cargo and passenger aircraft, and SST. Total In-Flight Simulator (tifs) configuration—with nose length varying to simulate advanced aircraft and with second cockpit below and ahead of main cockpit and six independent controls—would realistically reproduce handling conditions of modeled aircraft and enable USAF to determine inexpensively in advance correct design and instrumentation for advanced aircraft, (afsc Release 45.68)
aec Chairman, Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, was named 1968 winner of Arches of Science Award presented annually by Pacific Science Center of Seattle, Wash., to American who had contributed to public understanding of science. Award of $25,000 would be presented Oct. 16 to Dr. Seaborg, who won Nobel Prize in chemistry in 1951 and was codiscoverer of plutonium. (W Post, 9/18/68, B5; AP, NYT, 9/18/68, 12)
DOD announced second $1 -million installment on contracts for design of Navy vfx, substitute aircraft for F—111B, held by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., General Dynamics Corp., LTV Aerospace Corp., McDonnell Douglas Corp., and North American Rockwell Corp. [see July 19]. Five contractors would eventually get $3 million each under contract definition phase to end Oct. 1. (dod Press Off; W Post, 8/14/68, D9)
Dr. Harold Brown, Secretary of the Air Force, told Los Angeles Junior Chamber of Commerce that if U.S.S.R.’s long-range bomber force improved, U.S. might need new 2,000-mph F—12 interceptor rejected by Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara in 1967. Although U.S.S.R. had about 155 long-range bombers and U.S. had 680, USAF officials feared U.S.S.R. might build advanced manned aircraft to overpower what McNamara had acknowledged to be an obsolete conventional air shield. DOD had announced major cutbacks in existing air defense units May 13. (Text; Omaha W—H, 5/15/68, 21)
Cornell Univ.’s association with Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory had been ended by Univ.’s Board of Trustees on recommendation of special committee headed by Univ.’s law professor W. David Curtiss. Reasons cited included overlap and potential conflict between Laboratory’s overseas research projects and Univ.’s expanding program of international studies. {Science, 2/2/68, 515)
Sen. Karl E. Mundt (R-S.D.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Government Operations, praised March 28 decision of Senate Committee on Armed Services to disapprove additional funds for F—111B aircraft and urged that F—lllAs in combat zone “be brought back immediately . . . and not returned to combat until they are fully tested and ready.” He said it was “imperative that the production line be held up until the design of the airplane number 160 configuration is completed and tested and can be incorporated into the very next plane the Air Force buys. If this drastic step is not taken, then we will truly be committing another billion dollar blunder in this tfx program which already has cost the American taxpayers many, many fruitless billions of dollars.” (CR, 3/29/68, S3657-60)
New York Times editorial commented on NAS report on status and needs of American mathematics [see Nov. 22]: “. . . this era—often called the age of the computer—is really the time of the most widespread and fruitful application of mathematics ever known. . . . The cost of supporting American mathematics is so slight in relation to the vast potential benefits that even the most economy-minded Congressman should be chary of using his ax” on Federal support. (NYT, 11/25/68, 46)
National Sporting Aviation Council, formed Feb. 16, adopted official charter at first meeting held in Washington, D.C., affirming its original mission to promote progress and development of all forms of sport aviation in U.S. through National Aeronautic Assn, and worldwide through Federation Aeronautique Internationale, (naa News)
New subdivision of Air Force Systems Command, Air Force Human Resources Laboratory (afhrl), became operational at Brooks afb, Tex., as focal point for USAF R&D effort to satisfy technology needs in human resources education, training, and management. It would also provide technical and management assistance in support of studies, analyses, development planning activities, acquisition, test evaluation, modification, or operation of aerospace systems and related equipment, (afsc Release 93.68)
NASA awarded North American Rockwell Corp. 12.575-million contract modification to continue Saturn V (S—II) “battleship” or ground test program at Santa Susana, Calif., test center through July. Modification increased total contract for S—II stage development testing and facility maintenance planning to $1,281 billion, (msfc Release 68—109)
USN awarded five Sl-million contracts for preliminary design and engineering work on FB—11 IB replacement to Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., ltv Aerospace Corp., General Dynamics Corp., North American Rockwell Corp., and McDonnell Douglas Aircraft Corp. Substitute for F—111B, designated VFX—1, would have vertical sweep wings and same jet engine. (AP, NYT, 7/20/68, 27; W Post, 7/21/68)
U.S. patent No. 3,390,853 was issued to North American Rockwell Corp. mechanical engineer Raymond P. Wykes for inflatable drag balloon (ballute) to be released behind reentry vehicle or lifting-body vehicle at end of a cable which pulled spacecraft’s wings out from its body on reentry and slowed it down for landing. Patent No. 3,390,492 was issued to General Electric Co. engineer Edwin T. Myskowski for glass deep-submergence module in titanium alloy frame usable as laboratory or living quarters on ocean floor in anchored or mobile form. (Patent Off pio ; Jones, NYT, 7/6/68,25)	_
Dr. Walter Haeussermann was selected to Fellowship in American Astronautical Society for “direct and significant contribution to the field of astronautics,” as Director of Astrionics Laboratory, msfc. (msfc Release 68—102)
First short-takeoff-and-landing strip for commercial aircraft in U.S. opened at La Guardia Airport in New York. Called STOLport, it was 1,095 ft long. Shortest regular runway at La Guardia was 4,000 ft. FAA said STOLport would be used for visual flying only, stol aircraft landed and took off at 60 mph, rather than regular commercial aircraft’s 105 mph. Three more stolports were to open Sept. 1 to provide taxi service between National and Dulles Airports in Washington, D.C., and Friendship Airport in Baltimore. (Shipler. NYT, 8/6/68, 1; AP, W Star, 8/6/68, A5; W Post, 8/14/68,1)
McDonnell Douglas Corp. received $9,666,800 NASA contract for 10 additional Improved (Long-Tank) Delta launch vehicles for use in variety of launches, including TOS—E for ESSA in August, Intelsat III for Com-SatCorp in September, idscp/a for dod in May 1969, heos (Highly Eccentric Orbiting Satellite) for esro in late 1968, and ISIS—A (International Satellite for Ionospheric Studies) in late 1968. North American Rockwell Corp. was awarded $6,968,038 contract extension for material, facilities, manpower and equipment for XB—70 flight operations, and General Electric Co. was awarded $1,957,323 extension for maintenance of XB—70 engines. Both extensions covered July 1, 1968, through June 30,1969. (nasa Release 68-116; FRC Release 19—68)
At Fort Worth, Tex., ceremonies, Australian Minister for Defence Allen Fairhall accepted first of Australia’s 24 F—111C aircraft on order from General Dynamics Corp. U.S. Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Harold Brown, told assembled dignitaries F—111 “institutes a new generation of aircraft. ... We have discovered . . . that when compared to fixed-wing aircraft, the variable geometry wing requires far fewer compromises to obtain the desired performance.” (dod Releases 779—68, 812—68; afsc Newsreview, 9/68,1)
U.S.S.R.’s leading geneticist, Prof. Nikolay P. Dubinin, told International Symposium on Genetic Effects of Space Environment^ in Tokyo biological experiments on various Soviet satellites beginning with Sputnik I had disclosed that space flight caused higher frequency of mutation, chromosome damage, and disruptions in normal cell division mechanisms. “Dynamic flight factors,” he said, were responsible; doses of cosmic radiation registered were too small to account for all . genetic changes observed. Symposium was held in conjunction with 12th International Congress of Genetics. American scientists also suggested “dynamic flight factors” of vibrations, acceleration, and weightlessness might be factors in genetic damage observed aboard American spacecraft. (Reinhold, NYT, 8/26/68)
NASA announced it had terminated production of 60 H—1 engines for post-Apollo Saturn IB missions under contract with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. Delivery of 32 engines to msfc had already been completed. Of remaining 28 engines, 1 would be complete; 1, complete without firing; 6, assembled; and hardware for 20, delivered in present production state, (nasa Release 68—154; msc Roundup, 9/13/68, 1)
New York Times editorial urged congressional passage of legislation to ban sonic booms: “While technical and budgetary difficulties have slowed development of an American supersonic aircraft, the British and French are progressing with their joint-venture model. It is important to have some protection on the law books before the booms come crashing down on the nation’s ears. . . . Developers . . . say they ‘assume’ it will fly at supersonic speed only over water but this is too important an issue to be left to anyone’s assumption.” (NYT, 5/16/68, 46; 5/25/68, 32)
Jet flying belt designed to propel wearer for minutes over multimile range at speeds from hovering to 70 mph and at varying altitudes was described by manufacturer, Bell Aerosystems Co., at Washington, D.C., press briefing. Miniature turbojet engine using kerosene fuel was designed by Williams Research Corp. for dod Advanced Research Projects Agency. (Schmeck, NYT, 6/28/68, 18)
Drone aircraft was reportedly impaled with spear of light from experimental laser and destroyed in three milliseconds at Air Force Special Weapons Laboratory, Kirtland afb, N. Mex. Account in Aviation Week & Space Technology was later denied by usaf officials. Tri-service laser weapon research programs, principally sponsored by arpa, were studying number of military applications of lasers, according to magazine, usaf had increased planned funding of high-energy gas laser development in FY 1969 from $0.5 million to $2.5 million to make use of power output increase achieved by United Aircraft Corp. in 1968. And $1.5 million had been given to exploratory development of high-power solid-state lasers. For FY 1970 usaf had asked $8 million to exploit United Aircraft development. (Av Wlc, 1/12/70, 16-7; usaf pio; A&A, 4/70, 16-21)
Smithsonian Institution celebrated 50th anniversary of May 8, 1919, takeoff of first aircraft to cross Atlantic Ocean with display on Washington, D.C., mall of original NC-4 (restored by Smithsonian Air Museum Curator Paul Garber) and with presentation to Institution of Plaque and aircraft’s log. Glenn Curtiss-built, long-range seaplane ordered by usn as bomber during World War I but completed too late to see service had been flown by usn crew from Rockaway Beach, N.Y., to Plymouth, England, with two sister aircraft which crashed in Azores. NC—4, known as “Nancy,” made journey in 53 hrs 58 min flying time and 23 days elapsed time. (Lydon, NYT, 5/1/69, 22; Durbin, W Post, 5/8/69, Cl)
North American Rockwell Corp. announced it had reduced its activity on usaf’s Advanced Manned Strategic Aircraft (amsa) but was maintaining team effort in connection with program. Reduction was made to permit maximum attention to F—15 fighter weapon system competition. (nar Release NN—28; Wilson, W Post, 5/31/69, Al)
At international airline conference in Dublin, U.S.S.R.’s First Deputy Minister of Civil Aviation, Gen. Leonid V. Zholudev, denied Tu-144 supersonic transport had been in accident, American Aviation said. It was “undergoing tests according to our program,” Gen. Zholudev said. He declined to speculate when Soviet aircraft would go into service and said “many complex problems must be solved.” Tu-154, 170-passenger trijet, would enter service “in near future”; An-22 turboprop, with reported maximum takeoff weight of 551,160 lbs, was being used exclusively as cargo carrier. (Amer Av, 4/28/69, 17)
Research to improve materials and lubricants for aerospace might aid in replacement of human hip joint with prosthesis better than any yet developed, LeRC scientist Robert L. Johnson announced. Bearing properties of materials—like cobalt alloy—used in commercial hip joints could be improved by changing crystal structure of metal to hexagonal form, Johnson had found in NASA studies. Interest in these alloys had led to cooperative program with Cornell Medical Center in New York. (LeRC Release 69-66)
Termination of Project Blue Book—usaf investigation of UFOs—was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. Project’s continuation could not be justified “on the ground of national security or in the interest of science.” Decision was based on evaluation of Jan. 9 report by Univ. of Colorado, NAS review of Univ. of Colorado report, and usaf investigations of UFO reports since 1948. usaf had concluded: no UFO reported, investigated, and evaluated by usaf had threatened U.S. security; there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings represented technological developments or principles beyond range of scientific knowledge; and there had been no evidence that “unidentified” sightings were extraterrestrial vehicles. Project Blue Book records would be retired to usaf archives at Maxwell afb, Ala. (dod Release 1077—69)
New York State Supreme Court Justice Frederick M. Marshall issued temporary injunction to block sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to edp Technology, Inc., of Washington, D.C., for $25 million. He directed case be given preference on trial calendar. {NYT, 1/4/69, 23)
faa Government-industry conference in Washington, D.C., discussed faa role in stol development, stol noise sources, stol operational considerations related to noise abatement, noise source reduction techniques, and review of existing aircraft certification concepts and considerations for stol noise certification, (faa Release 69—5)
President Nixon announced decision to continue development of SST. “The supersonic transport is going to be built. The question is whether in the years ahead the people of the world will be flying in American supersonic transports or in the transports of other nations . . . whether the United States, after starting and stopping this program . . . finally decides to go ahead. ... I have made the decision that we should go ahead . . . because I want the United States to continue to lead the world in air transport. And it is essential to build this plane if we are to maintain that leadership. ... I have made the decision, also, because . . . through this plane we are going to be able to bring the world closer together in a true physical and time sense. . . . This is a massive stride forward in the field of transport.” President said prototype would be flown in 1972. (PD, 9/29/69, 1309)
Strategic threat to U.S. security was rapidly increasing, Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., told Chamber of Commerce Armed Forces Day luncheon in New Orleans. U.S.S.R. had built intercontinental missile force from 250 in 1966 to 1,150 operational or under construction. “With their large SS—9 missiles, the Soviets will soon have about twice as much missile payload ... as our missile force, even including our advantage in submarine launched missiles. In addition, the Soviets have already deployed an antiballistic missile system that includes some 60 long-range ABM missiles.” (Text)
President Nixon addressed 2,000 American Field Service students from 60 countries on White House lawn: “. . . in the year 2000 we will, on this earth, have visited new worlds where there will be a form of life. I know this will happen, and I want to tell you as I look forward and dream about that future . . . this is the kind of world I would like to see and the kind of exploration of that new world that I know all Americans want. I hope that when the next great venture into space takes place that it will be one in which Americans will be joined by representatives of other countries.” (PD, 7/28/69, 1016—7)
In $100,000 experiment to evaluate claims that jet noise had caused female minks to panic and eat their young, usaf planned to send jet aircraft through sound barrier over Univ. of Alaska’s experimental mink farm near Petersburg. On ground, observers from Dept, of Agriculture and Cornell Univ. would study mink reaction to sonic boom. Since 1962 usaf had paid 25 claims totaling $67,000 for mink problems alleged to have been caused by supersonic aircraft. (Pinto, W Star, 10/26/69, A22)
Sir George Edwards, Chairman and Managing Director of British Aircraft Corp., told American Newcomen Society meeting in New York that Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport had completed 75 flights and approximately 128 flying hrs. (bac Release 42/69)
West German ambassadors in Moscow, Washington, D.C., and London signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty sponsored by U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Morgan, W Post, 11/29/69, Al)
American Security Council published The ABM and the Changed Strategic Military Balance, U.S.A. vs. U.S.S.R. Although U.S. GNP ran almost twice that of U.S.S.R., latter was investing two to three times more in strategic military forces annually. Report concluded: “Antiballistic missile defense is not a cure-all for the security of the United States. It is not the ultimate defense system, for technology knows no limits and each decade produces fresh challenges and fresh need for response on the part of free nations. But anti-missile defense is an essential component in the network of military systems designed to give the American people a seamless garment of security in an age of acute danger. . . . We firmly believe that an American abm system is the soundest insurance for peace and against war that the United States can buy in 1969, for the 1970s. ... It may well be . . . the single most important step the United States can take toward a real and lasting peace at this moment in history.” (Text)
Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin Feoktistov spent half hour riding into Grand Canyon on mules after arriving in Arizona from San Francisco during two-week U.S. tour, (upi, W Star, 10/30/69, A3)
msfc announced two contract awards. Definitive $38,340,000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for J—2 engine operational and flight support Jan. 1, 1969, to June 30, 1970, replaced letter contract which earlier authorized $9 million. Contract modification of $15,253,945 was given to Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for extending delivery schedule of Saturn IB boosters and stage storage. (msfc Releases 69—97, 69—96)
Soviet Embassy Second Secretary Oleg M. Sokolov said in Washington, D.C., that U.S.S.R. definitely would display supersonic Tu-144 airliner at 28th Paris Air Show, May 29—June 8. He said aircraft would beat Anglo-French Concorde into operation and plans were under way to set up worldwide logistics support for Tu-144. dot officials said West would be watching closely to see whether U.S.S.R. could fulfill pledge and, if so, would take good look at Tu-144, which could hurt commercial market for sst if it had worldwide logistics backup, (Bentley, B Sun, 5/19/69, A5)
FAA announced proposal to extend hourly flight quotas in effect at five high-density airports serving New York, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., for 9-12 mos beyond Dec. 31 expiration date. Experience with quota system since June 1 inception indicated it had relieved congestion and reduced delays, (faa Release 69—125)
Pan American World Airways took delivery of first Boeing 747 to be turned over to commercial line in ceremony at Boeing Field in Seattle, Wash. Later in day, 362-passenger transport left on six-hour flight to Nassau, Bahamas. It was scheduled to fly to New York same day. (AP, W Star, 12/14/69, A25)
Robert E. Bernier, former ComSatCorp systems engineer for Intelsat III program, became NASA European Representative in Office of International Affairs. He replaced Clotaire Wood, who would return to Office of Advanced Research and Technology at nasa Hq. Bernier would begin his duties at American Embassy in Paris in early October. (nasa Release 69—125)
Rep. Emilio Q. Daddario (D-Conn.) told House Dr. Franklin A. Long of Cornell Univ. had been asked to withdraw from nomination as nsf Director after refusing to support Administration’s abm system. “It is unfortunate that the Nixon administration is sacrificing the National Science Foundation on the altar of the abm, and, by so doing, seriously affecting its unique capability to be of service to our country.” (CR, 4/17/69, H2759)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of McDonnell Douglas Corp. as prime contractor for development and production of F—15 advanced tactical fighter aircraft. Initial award would be $1,146,385,000 fixed-price contract for engineering, design, and fabrication of 20 aircraft. First wing of 107 aircraft would be produced under later contract, not to exceed $936,591,000. (dod Release 1095—69)
In Astrophysical Journal, Princeton Univ. astronomers Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn predicted few pulsars should be found with periods more than 1.5 secs, from results of their quarantine exploration of pulsar model. (Astro Journ, 9/69, 1395—1417)
Four contract modifications totaling nearly $10 million, for- change orders issued in connection with Saturn Y 2nd stage, had been awarded to North American Rockwell Corp., MSFC announced, (msfc Release 69-127)
U.S.S.R. was testing 150-ton, 250-passenger “compound” helicopter, American Broadcasting Co. reported. Largest helicopter in Western world was 19-ton Sikorsky CH-54H Flying Crane. Soviet 47-ton Mi-10 was world’s largest. New compound helicopter had wings that assumed lifting function from rotors at cruising speed; it obtained most of its thrust from conventional propulsion when it converted from vertical to cruising flight. Sikorsky had proposed 32.5-ton compound helicopter to dod and U.S. civilian transportation authorities. (NYT, 1/12/69, S23)
White House announced President Nixon had established interdepartmental ad hoc committee to review SST program’s technology, commercial potential, schedule and costs, and environmental side-effects, particularly sonic boom phenomenon. Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs was designated chairman of 11-member committee, which also included Presidential Science Adviser, Dr. Lee A. Du-Bridge; Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr.; and NASA. Deputy Associate Administrator Charles W. Harper. (PD, 3/3/69, 329-30)
Walter Sullivan described mystery of cosmic rays in New York Times. “No natural phenomena with which we have intimate contact are more awesome.” Scores of these high-energy particles flashed through human body every second with energy capable of piercing six feet of lead. Some believed them accountable for aging process. Recent Australian observations had shown some particles (mostly protons) hit atmosphere with 100-billion-bev energy. Princeton Univ. physicists Dr. Jeremiah P. Ostriker and Dr. James E. Gunn had suggested pulsars might be superaccelerators of cosmic ray particles. (NYT, 10/12/69,8)
msfc announced resignation of m/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf), Director of Program Management, would be effective July 31. Gen. O’Connor, on loan to NASA from USAF for past five years, would become Vice Commander of Air Force Aeronautical Systems Div. He would be succeeded by Lee B. James, Saturn V Manager, msfc. (msfc Release 69—166)
Senate confirmed nomination of Philip N. Whittaker, former NASA Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, to be an Assistant Secretary of the Air Force. (CR, 5/5/69, S4668)
At American Cancer Society Seminar in New Orleans, La., Clarence D. Cone, Jr., head of LaRc’s Molecular Biophysics Laboratory, discussed his discovery of intercellular linkages and its application to understanding behavior of certain cancer types. His basic research into effects of space radiation on body cells had enabled him to observe phenomenon in which dividing cancer cell appeared able to induce connected cells to divide by transmitting chain-reaction stimulation through thin linkage of cytoplasm. Networks of these stimulus-transmission bridges permitted continued division of cells and, in human body, might constitute basic mechanism for cancer spread, (nasa Release 69—45) During March: NSF published Scientific Activities of Nonprofit Institutions, 1966	(nsf 69—16). Full-time equivalent number of r&d scientists and engineers employed by independent nonprofit institutions in January 1967	totaled 24,300, annual increase of 12.4% from 1954 to 1967. In 1966 expenditure for R&D in independent nonprofit institutions was $800 million—about seven times the $100 million in 1953. Federal r&d expenditures contracted to nonprofit institutions reached $540 million in 1966, nine times 1953’s $60 million. (Text)
Five-year program to improve detection of clear air turbulence (cat) — with cooperation of NASA, dot, dod, and ESSA—was announced in Washington, D.C., by ESSA Administrator, Dr. Robert M. White. Project would seek improvement of long-range weather forecasting and development of onboard portable detection devices for aircraft to locate cat in time to permit pilot to take evasive action or prepare for penetration, (upi, NYT, 12/29/69, 57)
George J. Vecchietti, NASA Director of Procurement, would serve as Acting Assistant Administrator for Industry Affairs, replacing Philip N. Whittaker, who had assumed new duties as Assistant Secretary of the Air Force, NASA announced, (nasa Ann)
Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, mit Dean of Engineering, received faa’s highest honor—Extraordinary Service Award—in Washington, D.C., ceremony for service as technical adviser on SST program. Gold medal, lapel ribbon, and citation for exceptional contribution were presented by Under Secretary of Transportation James M. Beggs. He noted Dr. Bisplinghoif’s extraordinary competence and knowledge of aeronautics had played significant role in analyzing complex technical aspects of SST development program. Dr. Bisplinghoff had served as technical adviser to faa Administrator on SST program since April 1966, had held key scientific posts with NASA since 1962, and was member of NASA Historical Advisory Committee, (faa Release 69—69)
World’s largest passenger airliner, 629,000-lb Boeing 747, landed at Dulles Airport, Washington, D.C., en route from Paris Air Show. Pan American World Airways would take delivery of its first 747 in September and inaugurate passenger service shortly after first of year. (W Star, 6/8/69, A23)
USAF released Air Force Review of the C—5A Program. Total cost of 120 Lockheed C—5A aircraft had increased from $3,369 billion at 1965 contract award to total $5,125 billion, overrun of $1,756 billion. At dod press conference Air Force Secretary Robert C. Seamans, Jr., criticized “ambiguities and deficiencies” in original contract and hinted remaining 39 aircraft in 120-plane package might not be purchased unless revisions were made in contract. (Text; Phillips, W Post, 7/29/69, Al)
Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories launched 997-ft-tall, 34-miIIion-cu-ft helium balloon—largest ever built—from Holloman AFB, N. Mex. Balloon, part of NASA’s cosmic ray ionization program (crisp), was to have provided high-altitude platform for 13,800-lb payload to measure cosmic radiation in upper atmosphere. It had been scheduled to drift eastward at 108,000-ft altitude for 24 hrs, but descended 3 hrs after launch because of leak, (msc Roundup, 11/14/69, 2; msc Release 69—70)
nsf published American Science Manpower, 1968, report of National Register of Scientific and Technical Personnel: Almost 298,000 scientists—nine percent of whom were women—reported to National Register in 1968. Of these, three-fifths were in physical and mathematical sciences, one-fifth in life sciences, remainder in behavioral and social sciences. Registration was up 23% over 242,800 in 1966. Industry employed 32% of 1968 registrants, down from 34% in 1966. Scientists employed in educational institutions increased from 36% to 40%. Those in Federal Government remained at 10% both years. Federal Government provided funds for at least some of work of 127,400 scientists, or 43% of total registrants. (Text)
Gen. James Ferguson (usaf), AFSC Commander, said in keynote address before Air Force Fatigue and Fracture Conference at Miami Beach, Fla.: “Our potential adversaries are pushing on all frontiers of technology. We cannot safely do less, and yet we must achieve our technological goals with less in the way of money, manpower, and facilities.” Each aircraft “will have to be better, more capable, stronger, more durable, and preferably less costly.” (Text)
American Embassy science attache in New Delhi reported completion of India-U.S. project to erect 48-in telescope at Hyderabad. Project was started in 1955 and completed just before U.S. lunar landing. (O’Neill, W Post, 8/31/69, D5)
Smithsonian Institution Curator of Meteorites, Dr. Kurt Fredriksson, arrived in Washington, D.C., carrying 10 gr of lunar material from lrl in nitrogen-filled plastic bag inside steel briefcase. One of six men in U.S. who had studied lunar samples, he later said Smithsonian scientist Dr. Bryan H. Mason would receive another 10-gr set. (Conroy, W News, 9/16/69, 5)
National Aviation Club’s highest honor, Award for Achievement, was presented at Washington, D.C., ceremony to m/g Jewell C. Maxwell (usaf), Director of Supersonic Transport Development for faa, for “laboring so magnificently and conscientiously in the public and national service.” (faa Release T 69—25)
fa A, Air Transport Assn., and manufacturers McDonnell Douglas Corp., Bendix Corp., and Wilcox-Sierra Div. of American Standard, Inc., successfully flight-tested three separate but compatible devices composing aircraft collision avoidance system (cas) capable of issuing microsecond warning. Tests were held at Martin-Marietta Airport, Baltimore. cas included cesium atomic clock so precise that watch of similar construction would lose only one second in 67 yrs. System operated like balloon around aircraft which, when penetrated by similarly equipped plane, provided pilots with command to make evasive maneuver. All aircraft would need system for it to be effective. Product of $12-million, 13-yr r&d, system could be operational by 1971. (Yarborough, W Star, 9/24/69, A7)
aiaa announced former arc director H. Julian Allen had been named to receive 1969 Daniel Guggenheim Medal. Medal—presented annually by aiaa, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and Society of Automotive Engineers for achievement in advancement of aeronautics —would be awarded Oct. 21 during aiaa Sixth Annual Meeting and Technical Display in Anaheim, Calif, (aiaa Release)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—7) was successfully captive fired for full flight duration, 369 secs, by North American Rockwell Corp. personnel at Mississippi Test Facility. Stage developed thrust equivalent to 1 million lbs at operating altitude, (msfc Release 69—25)
At American Chemical Society meeting in Minneapolis, Univ. of California at Berkeley nuclear scientist Albert Ghiorso reported discovery of element 104 isotopes 104-257 and 104-259 and possibly 104-258. Discoveries, made by bombarding target in heavy ion linear accelerator (hilac), were announced by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, operated at Univ. of California for aec. (aec Release M—87)
New York Times editorial said: “The Administration’s action in ordering production started on MIRV multiple warhead missiles before opening negotiations for a moratorium with Moscow touches the most sensitive point in the projected missile-curb talks. Equally grave is the manner in which the Air Force quietly awarded the $88-million contract to General Electric, on the day President Nixon spoke favorably of proposals for a Soviet-American moratorium on mirv flight testing to head off production and deployment of the weapon by either side. Given this situation, the country is entitled to an explanation from the President of his intentions in the Soviet-American missile-control talks, which he has personally held up for more than seven months.” (NYT, 6/29/69, 10) .
Lunar rock sample weighing 34.1 gm left Lisbon, Portugal, for Washington, D.C., after eight-day exhibit that attracted some 60,000 persons, including 400 leaders of Portuguese scientific, military, and educational world. Rock, shown on Portuguese TV to estimated 9 million viewers, would be sent to Prague. {NYT, 12/21/69, 22)
msfc announced $8,391,052 modification to contract with North American Rockwell Corp. Rocketdyne Div. for support services to J—2 rocket-engine program from June 1, 1969, through April 30, 1970. (msfc Release 69—104)
President Nixon signed nuclear nonproliferation treaty in Washington, D.C. Presidium of the Supreme Soviet ratified treaty simultaneously in Moscow, with President Nikolay V. Podgorny signing document. U.S. and U.S.S.R. were 23rd and 24th nations to ratify treaty, which would become effective after ratification by 43 countries. (PD, 12/1/69, 1658; NYT, 11/25/69, 1)
Rise of costs of Mark II electronic equipment for F—111 aircraft of more than 100% above original contract with Autonetics Div. of North American Rockwell Corp. were described by Bernard D. Nossiter in Washington Post article based largely on memo from dod official. Memo had warned, “If it fails to enforce the contract, the Air Force and the entire Department of Defense can count on many more years of misleading promises from contractors and failures to meet contractual requirements.” (W Post, 5/11/69, Al)
msfc announced it had signed agreement with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for extension of J—2 engine production through April 30, 1970, at reduced rate of one engine per month instead of three. Engines would not be used as rapidly as originally planned because of overall extension of launch vehicle production schedule. Modifications amounted to $8,423,454. (msfc Release 69-70)
National Transportation Safety Board opened hearings in Washington, D.C., on midair collisions. In last 31 yrs of recorded aviation history there had been only 12 midair collisions with passenger fatalities, Clifton F. von Kann, Vice President for Operations and Engineering of Air Transport Assn., testified. “Even with the explosive growth of airline service during the last ten years, there have been just four collisions with airline passenger fatalities.” (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 11/5/69, A9)
Dr. Harold Brown, former Secretary of the Air Force, was inaugurated as president of Cal Tech during day-long ceremonies on campus. He succeeded Dr. Lee A. DuBridge, who had become Presidential Science Adviser. (LA Times, 9/4/69)
NASA sources quoted by New York Times said Soyuz IX Cosmonauts Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov—due in Washington, D.C., Oct. 18 for 10-day NASA tour—had not yet accepted NASA invitation to visit ksc. Acceptance would signify thaw in U.S.-U.S.S.R. space relations, since there was tacit understanding that U.S.S.R. would have to reciprocate with invitation to tour Soviet launch facilities. (NYT, 10/14/70)
Structural failure of left wing stemming from “preexisting defect in the steel used in a pivot fitting where the wheel joins the fuselage” was cause of Dec. 22, 1969, crash of usaf F-lll, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced. USAF would inspect remaining F-llls for similar defects. (Wieghart, NYT, 1/13/ 70, 16)
President Nixon issued Proclamation 4024 to Observe Dec. 17 as Wright Brothers Day: “The names of Orville and Wilbur Wright symbolize American ingenuity and courage.” Their Dec. 17, 1903, flight was “forerunner of the aviation and space technology which today strengthens America’s defense and contributes to better understanding throughout the world by promoting commerce and encouraging travel.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1649)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced selection of Boeing Co. as prime contractor for Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs). Boeing was issued $16 500 000 initial increment of $169 982 522 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for Phase I, which required modification of Boeing 707 aircraft to accommodate 30-ft-wide, mushroom-shaped radome on top of fuselage aft of wings, (dod Release 564-70)
nas panel headed by physicist Dr. Thomas F. Malone of Univ. of Connecticut warned that large-scale deployment of SST might increase incidence of skin cancer if exhaust from aircraft thinned protective layer that separated earth’s atmosphere from solar rays. Warning was issued during meeting with dot’s Office of SST Development in Washington, D.C. (Randal, W Star, 12/1/70, All)
dod Deputy Secretary for Public Affairs Jerry W. Friedheim said in Washington, D.C., that deployment of Minuteman III missiles had begun in North Dakota on April 18 but their MIRVs would not be installed until June. (Roberts, WPost, 5/27/70, 3)
Mrs. Richard M. Nixon christened Clipper Young America, Pan American World Airways’ first operational Boeing 747, in Dulles International Airport ceremony. Aircraft was parked alongside Boeing 707 and 40-yr old Ford Trimotor, first aircraft flown by Pan Am. (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, 14)
intelsat international planetary conference convened in Washington, D.C. U.S. Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs U. Alexis Johnson welcomed 100 delegates to meeting, which was to work out definitive arrangements for establishment of single global commercial comsat system with control apportioned among members. (UPI, W Post, 2/17/70)
Discovery that blazing stars collided at rate of one every four months in heart of at least-one kind of galaxy was reported from evidence obtained by Stratoscope II balloon-borne optical telescope March 26-27. Princeton Univ. physicist Dr. Martin Schwarzchild said collisions might be source of brightness fluctuations in Seyfert galaxies —rare heavenly masses with small, dense nuclei that radiated light and radio energy and bright lines produced by hot gases in motion. Stratoscope II had observed Seyfert galaxy at range of 30 light years from earth. (Lannan, W Star, 6/2/70)
North American Rockwell Corp. would lay off 8000 employees between April 1 and Nov. 1, Wall Street Journal quoted NR Chairman Willard F. Rockwell as saying in interview. Most reductions would be in aerospace operations at Southern California facilities. About 30% of workers to be laid off were engineers and 10% were management employees. (James, WSJ, 3/23/70)
dod announced usaf contract awards: $1 800 000 supplemental agreement to mit for basic research on properties of matter in intense magnetic fields, managed by Office of Scientific Research; and $354 000 initial increment to $1 062 000 cost-reimbursement contract to Trustees of Princeton Univ. for basic research on hypersonic flow, managed by Aeronautical Systems Div. (dod Release 54-70)
First inflight interception of ICBM by ABM was successfully conducted by dod, demonstrating use of Safeguard ABM system to defend U.S. offensive missile sites. Minuteman I test vehicle, launched from Vandenberg AFB, was detected by prototype missile site radar at Kwajalein Atoll in Pacific, which controlled launch of Spartan missile and flight of Spartan to intercept point outside atmosphere. Range instrumentation, which determined successful intercept, indicated Spartan’s final stage (which in operational situation would carry nuclear warhead) had flown close enough to nosecone to have caused its destruction. (DODPIO; NYT, 9/1/70,18)
Chicago Daily News said student antiwar demonstrations at Univ. of Illinois in Urbana might have caused dod to reevaluate decision to locate world’s largest computer—Illiac IV—on University campus. Sources in Washington, D.C., had said dod was reevaluating whether to locate computer center in Urbana. Computer, being funded by dod at cost of more than $24 million, would be used two thirds time for military work, such as plotting operations of U.S. missile defense systems under enemy attack. During remaining time, computer would be available for academic work by university scientists. Computer had been target of student and faculty protests at Urbana since Nov. 15, 1969, when university newspaper revealed it would be built on campus. (C Daily News, 5/14/70,5)
Air Line Pilots Assn, had asked U.S. District Court of Appeals for District of Columbia to stop simultaneous landings on intersecting runways at National Airport in Washington, D.C., Friendship Airport in Baltimore, and other airports around U.S., Washington Evening Star reported, alpa said procedures authorized by faa in April lowered safety standards. (Kadis, W Star, 8/5/70, F9)
Aircraft arresting system of barrier net linked to energy absorbers to prevent transport aircraft from taxiing off runway was undergoing final tests at Edwards afb, Calif., AP reported. Net developed by Aerazur Constructions Aeronautique of Paris and energy absorbers developed by All American Engineering Co. could be available to airports in one year. Installation sufficient to stop aircraft of DC-8 size would cost $500 000 to $600 000; tandem system durable enough to stop Boeing 747 at end of runway would cost about $800 000. Major airports could require 10 such devices—one at each end of runway. (Huntsville News, 12/2/70)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird and Australian Minister for Defence Malcolm Fraser reached accord in Washington, D.C., on Australian purchase of F-111C aircraft. Delivery of aircraft would be delayed until technical difficulties were fully evaluated and corrected; Australia would be provided on lease or other reimburseable basis up to 24 F-4E Phantom aircraft in interim; alternative Australian actions to meet strike aircraft requirements remained as options. (dod Release 301-70)
At annual meeting of American Physical Society in Chicago, symposium on cosmic physics suggested stellar explosion could have precipitated condensation of dust and gas to form sun and planets. Analysis of meteorite discovered several years earlier at St. Sever-in, France, had led to suggestion by Cal Tech physicist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg that great stellar explosion had accompanied or immediately preceded formation of solar system, Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Meteorite had contained calcium phosphate crystals in tiny tracks of particles ejected by radioactive atoms. Suspected source was plutonium 244—element manufactured in laboratory but not found in nature. Because plutonium 244’s mean lifetime was only 118 million yrs, any plutonium in earth rocks or meteorites, both more than 4.5 billion yrs old, would have decayed radioactively unless something occurred just before or during solar system’s formation that synthesized this substance. According to Wasserburg hypothesis, material was incorporated into meteorite where, during solar system’s infancy, it decayed possibly into neutron-rich forms, or isotopes, of xenon found in meteorite, leaving radiation tracks. (NYT, 1/30/70, 23)
U.S.S.R. had made first tests of warheads on SS-11 icbm, Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird reported at Washington, D.C., press conference. Laird also announced decision to establish all-service Blue Ribbon Action Commission to assist in implementing dod decisions in response to recommendations of Blue Ribbon Defense Panel [see July 1]. (Transcript)
Harry Schwartz commented in New York Times on Aug. 17 launch of Venus VJIby U.S.S.R.: “Some of the space age’s richest scientific dividends have been the surprising findings of Soviet and American instrument-carrying rockets sent to Venus in the past decade. The excitement generated by this new information explains the widespread approval from the world’s scientific community of the news last week that Moscow had launched still another unmanned spaceship toward Earth’s nearest planetary neighbor.” (NYT, 8/23/70, 4:5)
President Nixon commented on SST during Washington, D.C., press conference: “I have satisfied myself, after long deliberation. . .that the arguments with regard to the environment could be met, that this prototype should be built. What is involved here is not just 150,000 jobs which will be lost if we don’t build it, not just the fact that billions of dollars in foreign exchange will be lost if we do not build it; but what is lost here is the fact that the United States of America which has been first in the world in commercial aviation from the time of the Wright Brothers decides not just to be second but not even to show.” (PD, 12/14/70, 1652)
afsc announced senior staff changes: Gen. James Ferguson, afsc Commander, would retire Sept. 1. Gen. George S. Brown, Deputy Commander, Seventh Air Force (pacaf), would succeed Gen. Ferguson. L/G James T. Stewart, afsc Deputy Chief of Staff for Systems, had been reassigned as Commander, Aeronautical Systems Div. (asd), Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, effective June 1, replacing m/g Lee V. Gossick who assumed Gen. Stewart’s previous duties. m/g Clifford J. Kronauer, Jr., Commander, Space and Missile Test Center, would become afsc Chief of Staff on Aug. 1. m/g Louis L. Wilson, Jr., Vice Commander, Armament Development and Test Center, Eglin afb, Fla., would become Vice Commander, Ninth Air Force on Aug. 1. b/g Jack Bollerud, Deputy Chief of Staff, Bioastronautics and Medicine, had announced retirement effective July 31. (afsc Release 156.70)
USAF K-30, one of largest aerial reconnaissance cameras, had been retired to Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, AFSC announced. Camera, which had more than 20 yrs service, measured 0.9 by 1.4 by 1.5 m (3 by 414 by 5 ft), weighed 300 kg (665 lbs), and used 254-cm (100-in) focal-length optical system, (afsc Release 153.70)
Test flights of Anglo-French supersonic transport Concorde had gone well and protests against its sonic boom had been “less than expected,” AP article reported. Big hurdle would come in spring when U.K. and France .would decide whether to go into full production. Decision would depend on number of aircraft ordered by then. To date, 16 airlines had taken options on 74 Concordes, with first batch going to Pan American World Airways, Air France, and British Overseas Airways Corp. None had made firm commitment to buy and U.K. and France had assured foreign airlines they could revoke their options if Air France and boac backed out. AP said major airlines doubted Concorde would be profitable. It would carry 130 passengers, against Boeing 747’s 490, and require more fuel than conventional jets. At possibly $52.8 million, its cost would be about five times that of conventional airliner. Concorde’s only selling point was speed. It would halve flying time across Atlantic to IVi hrs. (Pinder, WPost, 12/5/70, A13)
Subcommittee on Space Science and Applications submitted to House Committee on Science and Astronautics Assessment of Space Communications Technology: NASA program of r&d in comsats and associated equipment during past decade had been “remarkably successful.” ComSatCorp also had made “significant strides.” As result, U.S. was “undisputed leader in this new technology.” State of the art was sufficiently advanced to “make important contributions to the improvement of the American domestic telecommunications system, particularly in Alaska. . .largest and most remote State of the Union.” Committee urged expansion of NASA space applications program. It should be “principle purpose of the U.S. Government.. .to bring to the American people the best, the most effective, the least expensive communications services. It is the clear responsibility of the Government to develop and implement public policies, and improve the effectiveness of its regulatory functions, so as to promote the improvement of the Nation’s telecommunications at a rate which reflects the progress of technology. To the extent that governmental indecision has delayed the efficient integration of innovation and invention, the Government must be considered to have failed in this responsibility.” (Text)
Edgar M. Cortright, LaRC Director, addressed National Space Club in Washington, D.C., on NASA’s time for decision: “We in NASA recognize that our program no longer enjoys the number one priority but is now but one of a number of priority areas competing for scarce funds. But we also recognize that our program, in addition to its intrinsic value, sets the pace for much of the technological development of this country and promises to do so for the foreseeable future. ... We do not believe that we could long survive and prosper without this preeminent technological position. Therefore, we have to stand and fight off the stampede by other groups to acquire funds now being channeled into our national technology through NASA and the Department of Defense. It is a veritable ‘run on the bank.’ The withdrawal slips carry such catch terms as relevancy, poverty, pollution, and housing, and are designed to shame us into sacrificing our space program and national technology in the name of ‘humanity.’ I would reverse the logic and say—in the name of humanity we should maintain our national technology.” Cortright also described nasa-dot-dod experimental program to introduce v/stol aircraft into commercial use: “We have chosen the externally blown flap and augmentor wing jet stol airplanes for initial attention. Jet vtol aircraft will come later. . . . We envision a combination of v/stol and high-speed ground transportation as offering the best hope for continued mobility as the megalopolis continues to spread. We are also preparing a program to develop an Advanced Technology Experimental Transport using Whitcomb’s [Dr. Richar.d T. Whitcomb, Jr., Head of LaRC’s 8-Foot Tunnels Branch] supercritical aerodynamic concepts to explore the problems of efficient cruise at Mach numbers approaching one.” (Text)
L/G John W. O’Neill, AFSC Vice Commander, delivered keynote address at afsc Air Force Materials Symposium in Miami Beach, Fla.: usaf was finding it “essential to push harder against the material and structural limits” of knowledge than at any time in its history. “We are forced to look over and beyond the horizon for new materials; new combinations; new structural concepts; and new methods of fabricating, testing, inspecting—and predicting.” New aircraft had to “fly higher and faster than ever before—in some cases at the fringes of space—and still be large enough to carry an effective combat payload over extended ranges.” Missiles had to “do incredible things under even worse conditions, with the added proviso that no humans will be aboard to make in-flight corrections. . . . With our spacecraft. . .we simply combine the harshest requirements imposed on both aircraft and missiles. And the difficulties will be compounded as the Air Force and NASA jointly develop reusable boosters, shuttles and tugs for the space transportation system.” (Text)
FAA and Eastern Air Lines demonstrated “smokeless jet” at National Airport in Washington, D.C. Boeing 727 with JT8d engines modified to reduce carbon particulates by 75% took off with thin trail of smoke. Pratt & Whitney engineer Gerald R. Daly, who designed pollution-fighting equipment, explained that modified engines reduced smoke but did not eliminate it. (Latham, WPost, 9/10/70, A27)
At NAS annual meeting in Washington, D.C., Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institute geophysical laboratory and editor Of Science, said cutbacks in Government research funds during last five years had dealt devasting blow to U.S. colleges and reduced Nation’s total scientific research effort by at least 30%. If cutbacks continued, U.S. would become “second-class nation in science.” Harvard Univ. scientist Dr. Harvey Brooks said surge of science funding in Japan, Western Europe, and U.S.S.R. had cost U.S. its research lead in astronomy, radioastronomy, biology, and physical and organic chemistry. It was doubtful U.S. would ever regain supremacy it once enjoyed in virtually every scientific field. (Kirkman, W News, 4/28/70,20)
World’s largest tuna fishing boat was launched in San Diego, Calif. It was insulated with polyurethane foam which had been developed for use as insulation in Saturn V 2nd-stage fuel tank. North American Rockwell Corp. had used foam in 61-m (200-ft) clipper, (msfc Release 70-23)
One hundred twenty-fifth anniversary of ScientiGc American. Magazine had been founded in New York by Rufus Porter, New England electroplater, who had invested $100 in venture. It now had circulation of 450 000—90 000 of it overseas, including Italian language edition. Soviet Academy of Sciences distributed facsimile. Magazine had published works of 45 Nobel Prize winners, 25 of them before they became laureates. (Lipman, WPost, 8/30/70, C5)
President Nixon signed E.O. 11523 establishing National Industrial Pollution Control Council to advise on industry programs on environmental quality. He announced appointments of Bert S. Cross, board chairman of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Co., and Willard F. Rockwell, board chairman of North American Rockwell Corp., as Chairman and Vice Chairman and appointments of 53 members to Council. Council would submit, through Secretary of Commerce, specific recommendations for further action on industrial environmental pollution and consider “role it can play in helping to implement the Nation’s environmental protection program." (PD, 4/13/70, 502-4) *	Senate, by vote of 72 to 6, adopted S.R. 211, which sought agreement with U.S.S.R. on limiting offensive and defensive strategic weapons and suspension of test flights of reentry vehicles. (CP, 4/9/70, S5479-508)
naa President Frederick B. Lee announced selection of C. R. Smith, former Secretary of Commerce and President of American Airlines, to receive Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy. Smith would be honored at annual memorial dinner Dec. 17 for outstanding contributions to aviation over four decades. (W Star, 9/16/70, A2)
Development of Airplane Stability and Control Technology,” 1970 von Karm&n Lecture by Courtland D. Perkins, Associate Dean of Princeton Univ. School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, was published by Journal of Aircraft: “As the airplane becomes larger, faster, and as a result, more complex, the balance between inherent aerodynamic stability and stability provided through automatic sys-terns must be made on an overall aircraft performance judgment. There is much yet to be done with the technology....” (JA, 7-8/70, 290-301)
Discovery by radar astronomers at jpl’s Goldstone Tracking Station of several nearly continent-sized rough areas on Mercury’s surface was reported by Dr. Richard M. Goldstein, head of jpl Communications Research Section, at meeting of U.S. National Committee of International Scientific Radio Union in Washington, D.C. Areas were similar to ones observed on Venus but “larger relative to the size of the disk,” and had much less contrast to the surrounding areas, (jplRelease 550)
Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead in New York Times Magazine discussed prefigurative society in which young became mentors of elders. “A scientist friend of mine was having a conversation with his son and wasn’t getting anywhere until he realized that he was standing on the earth looking at the moon, and the boy was standing on the moon looking at tne earth.” (NYTMagazine, 4/26/70, 102) Dr. Reuven Ramaty of gsfc reported measurements of low-energy cosmic-ray positrons by Ogo II satellite (launched June 6, 1966) had indicated that relatively young and close cosmic-ray source—a supernova explosion—might have occured 100 000 yrs ago and 300 light years from earth. (Crab Nebula, closest known remnant of any supernova previously discovered, was 5000 light years from earth.) (Press Coni Summary; Text; AP, CSM, 5/2/70) During meeting, 32 APS members marched on dod to oppose Vietnam War, abm and mirv missile systems, and dod ties with American universities. (WPost, 4/30/70, A35)
At meeting of American College of Cardiology in New Orleans, La., ARC-Stanford Univ. team of scientists reported successful use of sonar to provide data on heartbeat and blood circulation formerly unobtainable from cardiac patients without cardiac catherization, blood sampling, or x-rays. Stanford work—supported by arc, nih and American Heart Assn.—used commercially available machine which emitted and received high-frequency sound waves. As sonic impulses were bounced against walls of heart, they were recorded and converted into electrical signals which were displayed on TV screen. Sonar also was being used at Stanford to detect heart changes that led to early rejection in heart transplant patients. (NASA Release 70-32)
USAF science policy was outlined by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Science, Research, and Development: “Air Force will still support long-range, fundamental research, but in fewer areas than previously.” Research “in aerodynamics, aeropropulsion, and structures will always be directly related to the Air Force missions.” Research “in solid state physics and chemistry will be directly related to the Air Force mission as long as we need new electronic systems and lighter, higher temperature materials. But research in fields such as astrophysics (other than solar phenomena that do affect our operations) is probably permanently removed from the Air Force program.” (Testimony)
F-14, “first completely new American fighter plane. . .since the XF4H1—prototype of the F4 Phantom,” would “skim down the runway” at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. before end of January 1971, Washington Sunday Star said, usn would attempt to buy 710 F-14s over next decade at $8 billion including r&d costs. Aircraft would have titanium wings. It was first time any manufacturer had used as much as 2700 kg (6000 lbs) of titanium in aircraft production. (Kelly, W Star, 4/26/70, A7)
dod announced General Dynamics Corp. was being awarded $1 098 000, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for operation, maintenance, and improvement of radar-target-scatter facility to obtain characteristic radar data of signal return from various aerospace vehicles. Work would be managed by Air Force Missile Development Center and would be conducted at wsmr. (dod Release 561-70)
vtol Dynastat, helium-filled airship that could carry 100 passengers 300-800 km (200-500 mi) in 30- by 9-m (100- by 30-ft) car, was described at symposium of American Helium Society in Washington, D.C. Goodyear Aerospace Corp. scientists Dr. Robert S. Ross and Philip F. Myers said airship would be powered by four to six engines driving propellers with forward and vertical thrust. (Goodyear Profile, 5/70, 9-10; Huntsville Times, 3/29/70)
Theory that helped to explain source of uncontrolled malignant growth and indicated short cuts to development of chemical countermeasures against cancer was described by LaRC biophysicist Clarence D. Cone, Jr., at 12th Annual Science Writers Seminar of American Cancer Society in San Antonio, Tex. Theory proposed that division of body cells was controlled precisely by pattern of ion concentrations on surface tissue of cells. Pattern was formed by electrical voltage that normally existed across cellular surfaces and varied from one part of body to another. Theory provided explanation of functional connection between two major pathological features of cancer—uncontrolled growth of cells and spread of disease in body—and implied that basic functional aberrancy producing both conditions lay in alteration of molecular structure of cell surface. Theory proposed central mechanism for control of body cell division, which, if proved valid, would provide new basis for research progress on key biomedical problems, such as human conception, birth defects, growth, aging, and cancer. (Text; NASA Release 70-43)
Staran IV system to reduce midair collisions—by computer performing more than 40 million mathematical operations per second to predict collision courses and determine evasive maneuvers—was introduced at Washington, D.C., press conference by developer, Goodyear Aerospace Corp. System could single out aircraft on collision course and show them to air traffic controllers on viewing screen as though they were only aircraft in air. faa was studying proposal for adoption of system. (Goodyear Aerospace Corp Release)
Treasury Dept, graduated first class of 46 customs security officers to replace temporary sky marshals serving aboard U.S. international and domestic flights to combat skyjacking. Washington, D.C., ceremony marked transition of sky marshal program from multiagency to permanent single-agency status. Treasury Dept, would graduate about 50 officers a week until complement of 2100 was qualified for duty. (Av Wk, 1/4/71,22)
Washington Airways, Inc., had told CAB it was abandoning its application for helicopter route approval between downtown Washington, D.C:, and Washington’s three major airports, Washington Post reported. District zoning commission had refused to act on request by consortium of nine airlines to amend zoning law to permit rooftop helipads. (WPost,9/22/70, Cl)
Consumer adviser and safety advocate Ralph Nader released report in Washington, D.C., to Government agencies and industry spokesmen. It charged that travel by light aircraft was most dangerous form of transportation in U.S. and that general-aviation industry had neglected simple remedies which could save hundreds of lives annually. (AP, W Star, 1/22/70, A4)
U.S. intention to begin deployment of mirv missiles in June was disclosed by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., at closed session of Senate Armed Services Committee, AP reported. (CTrib, 3/11/70,18)	_
USMC Sikorsky S-65 helicopter set record for intercity travel in 1-hr 17-min 11-sec flight between Wall Street heliport in New York and Washington Hospital Center in Washington, D. C. Flight was organized by Pan American World Airways and Sikorsky Aircraft Corp. to demonstrate feasibility of inter-inner-city helicopter transportation. (Cushing, WPost, 6/10/70, D10)
AP interview of Dr. Charles H. Townes, Univ. of California at Berkeley physicist and Nobel laureate, on possibility of life in outer space was published in Washington Evening Star: “It is clear that we already have found most of the molecules that biologists have postulated are necessary for the beginning of life.” Scientists were also finding particles of dust in “interstellar smog” that were similar to earth rocks. “.. .we can see in space many of the materials from which planets are made and which life needs to begin.” (W Star, 11/ 4/70, A2) political terms. Delegation would visit Washington, D.C., at undecided date for further talks. (Reuters, NYT, 11/6/70, C9)
Inter-Academy Exchange program of nas and Soviet Academy of Sciences, renewed and broadened for 1970 and 1971, was signed. Agreement, negotiated in Washington, D.C., was latest in series of two-year agreements begun in 1959. It was retroactive to Jan. 1, 1970. Pact provided for 180 man-months of study in U.S. by scientists designated by Soviet Academy and for 180 man-months of research in U.S.S.R. by scientists selected by nas. It also contained
N.Y. State Supreme Court Appellate Div. ruled unanimously that Cornell Univ. had right to sell Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory to private, profit-making company, Edp Technology, Inc. Decision upset 1969 State Supreme Court ruling that laboratory had been created as public trust and therefore could not be sold to private company. Appellate Div. held that laboratory had been transferred to Cornell as gift without any restrictions. (AP, NYT, 11/6/70)
Propeller-driven XC-142 v/stol aircraft on loan to NASA by USAF ended experiments in support of research into v/stol techniques at LaRC and was flown by NASA pilots to Air Force Museum at Dayton, Ohio. Built by Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., four-engine tilt-wing aircraft had evolved from wind-tunnel models tested at LaRC and other NASA centers starting in 1956. (NASA Special Release)
Four-man crew successfully completed 159-day, 11 000-km (7000-mi) journey from Guayaquil, Ecuador, to Mooloolaba, Australia, in 7.9m (26-ft) raft to prove South American Indians could have sailed to Australia centuries ago. Expedition was headed by Prof. Vital Alzar of Spain, who was making second attempt to cross Pacific on raft. Others were Marco Modena of France, Norman Terenault of Canada, and Gabriel Salas of Chile, (upi, WPost, 11/6/70, A18)
Authorization to proceed with B-l Advanced Strategic Bomber development programs was issued by Deputy Secretary of Defense David M. Packard in memo to Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. It would be “several years” before production decision would be made. “Factors to be considered . . . will include the progress and success of the engineering development program, the progress of the salt talks, and the relationship of the program to these talks.” Dr. Seamans announced selection of North American Rockwell Corp. and General Electric Co. as airframe and propulsion contractors for engineering development of bomber. Total estimated cost of airframe contract was $1 350 814 739 exclusive of avionics. Total estimated propulsion cost was $406 654000. (Text; dod Release 47970)
Washington Post editorial commented on July 13 death of Manhattan Project head, L/G Leslie R. Groves: “The ultimate appraisal of Leslie Groves’ contribution to his country and to mankind must await a future judgment—perhaps a Judgment Day. He was a superb soldier. The talents for organization and administration, the daring and imagination he brought to his mammoth assignment were peculiarly American, reflective in a sense of the genius of America. Their imprint on the world is, in any event, indelible.” (W Post, 7/16/70, A22)
Charles Scribner’s Sons published first two volumes of 13-volume Dictionary of Scientific Biography, first comprehensive biographical reference work covering science exclusively. Project was under auspices of American Council of Learned Societies and had nsf financial support. (Whitman, NYT, 7/11/70; Charles Scribner’s Sons)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., news conference he was limiting F-111 procurement to four wings. “In order to have four wings of the F-l 11, it would be necessary to purchase an additional 40 aircraft. The decision as to whether those 40 aircraft will be purchased or not is dependent upon the scientific review that we are making now and the Air Force has set up a special committee of outstanding scientists and technical advisors” to make review. (Transcript)
afsc announced that afwtr at Vandenberg afb, Calif., and samsO’s aerospace test wings at Vandenberg and Patrick afb, Fla., would be combined to form Space and Missile Test Center (samtec) under SAM so command, (afsc Release 65.70)
SoyuzIXCosmonautsi Andrian G. Nikolayev and Vitaly I. Sevastyanov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin 10-day goodwill tour in U.S. as NASA guests. (WPost, 10/19/70; NASA Release 70-170)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. had reached tentative agreement to expand commercial airline service between New York and Moscow to permit s Pan Am and Aeroflot to land at Leningrad and Washington, D.C., AP reported. Agreement also would increase flights from two to six weekly. Diplomatic sources had reported U.S. rejection of Soviet bid to permit transcontinental flights over both nations. {NYT, 8/11/ 70,55)	.
Dr. James F. Danielli, Univ. of Buffalo biologist, in Washington, D.C., press conference called for “watchdog agency” to steer scientists clear of experiments in germ warfare or genetic engineering that might change fundamental nature of man for the worst. Dr. Danielli was head of Buffalo Univ. team that synthesized single-celled organisms from component parts of other similar organisms [see Nov. 12]. (Randal, W Star, 12/9/70, A21)
North American Rockwell Corp. received applications from more than 1000 unemployed aerospace workers during week following June 5 announcement that NR had been awarded $1.35-billion USAF B-l bomber contract. (Wright, NYT, 6/10/70,63)
MSFC announced award of $4 435 275 contract modification to North American Rockwell Corp. for changes in seven Saturn V 2nd stages, S-II-9 through S-II-15. Work, which included testing and replacing components that caused corrosion, would be completed by March 31, 1973. (MSFC Release 70-79)
President Nixon delivered State of the Union Message before Joint Session of Congress: “The moment has arrived to harness the vast energies and abundance of this land to the creation of a new American experience. . .more truly a reflection of the goodness and grace of the human spirit. The seventies will be a time of new beginnings, a time of exploring both on the earth and in the heavens, a time of discovery.” gnp would increase by $500 billion in next 10 yrs—increase greater than entire growth of U.S. economy from 1790 to 1950. “Our purpose in this period should not be simply better management of the programs of the past. The time has come for a new quest—a quest not for a greater quantity of what we have had but for a new quality of life in America.” President proposed total reform of welfare system; assessment and reform of institutions of government at Federal, state, and local level; and “reforms which will expand the range of opportunities for all Americans.” Greatest question of seventies was “shall we surrender to our surroundings or shall we make our peace with nature and begin to make reparations for the damage we have done to our air, to our land, and to our water?” President would propose to Congress $10 billion nationwide clean waters program “to put modern municipal waste treatment plants in every place in America where they are needed to make our waters clean again.. .now.” He called for further advances in engine design and fuel composition for automobile, “our worst polluter of the air,” and new rural environment to reverse migration to urban centers. He also planned balanced FY 1971 budget to help stop rise of cost of living. . I see a new America as we celebrate our 200th anniversary 6 years from now. I see an America in which we have abolished hunger, provided the means for every family in the nation to obtain a minimum income, made enormous progress in providing better housing, faster transportation, improved health, and superior education. . . . I see an America in which we have made great strides in stopping pollution of our air, cleaning up our water, opening up our parks, continuing to explore in space. Most important, I see an America at peace with all the nations of the world. “This is not an impossible dream. The goals are within our reach. . . . Let it not be recorded that we were the first American generation that had the means but not the vision to make this dream come true.” (PD, 1/26/70,58-66)	.
Permanent injunction to bar sale of Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Cornell Univ. to EDP Technology, Inc., private research company, was issued by Justice Harold P. Kelly of New York State Supreme Court. He ruled Cornell should continue to operate laboratory and its work should be restricted to public research projects. (.NYT, 3/5/70, 40C)
LeRC and Northern Ohio section of American Nuclear Society held combined meeting at LeRC. Dr. Abe Silverstein, Director of Environmental Planning for Republic Steel Corp. and of Lake Erie International Jetport Project, discussed technology and society. Dr. Silverstein had retired as LeRC Director in 1969. (LeRC Release 70-69)
Gen. George S. Brown—former Commander of Seventh Air Force and Deputy Commander for Air Operations, U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (macv)—assumed command of afsc. He succeeded Gen. James Ferguson, who retired Aug. 31. (afsc Release 246.70)
Twenty-third anniversary of usaf. Official anniversary was established Sept. 18, 1947, with swearing-in of first secretary of the Air Force W. Stuart Symington. Gen. Carl Spaatz was sworn in as first usaf Chief of Staff on Sept. 26, 1947). (Airman, 9/70, 15)
Exhibit of 23 paintings of space subjects by Chesley Bonestell opened at American Museum-Hayden Planetarium in New York. (Am Mu-seum-Hayden Planetarium Release)
Last test model of usaf Minuteman III missile was launched from underground silo at etr toward South Atlantic target, ending 28-mo development program. Missile was 17th Minuteman III launched from etr since Aug. 16, 1968; 15 had been launched under simulated operational conditions at Vandenberg afb, Calif. Tests at Vanden-berg would continue, (upi, W Star, 12/14/70, A6) December 15:	U.S.S.R.’s Venus VII, launched Aug. 17, reached atmosphere of Venus. At 8:02 am Moscow time (12:02 am est) orbital module and descent package separated, Tass announced. After aerodynamic braking of descent package, parachute system was deployed, antennas unfolded, and transmission begun. Data was transmitted for 35 min during descent. Soviet scientists later reported surface of Venus had been calculated to have temperature of 773 K (500° C; 932°F) and pressure of 100 atmospheres. On Jan. 26, 1971, Tass announced Venus VII had landed and had continued transmitting data from surface fpr 23 min. Longest survival time of three previous Venus landing missions attempted by U.S.S.R. had been 94 min, recorded for Venus IVOct. 18, 1967. (Sov Rpt, 12/20/ 70; 2/2/71; SBD, 12/21/70; 204; O’Toole, WPost, 12/16/70, A25)
Nuclear nonproliferation treaty went into effect. President Nixon in Washington, D.C., and Soviet Premier Aleksey N. Kosygin in Moscow presided in ceremonies at which last of 47 nations deposited instruments of ratification. (Finney, NYT, 3/6/70, 1)
Status of C-5 Galaxy aircraft program funding was described by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, before Senate Armed Services Committee during hearings on usaf FY 1971 budget request: In 1969 it had appeared “that the 120 aircraft program would cost about $4,831 million, including initial spares. As we interpreted the contract, the contractor would lose some $285 million on 120 aircraft, and any smaller buy the contractor’s loss would be higher. The contractor disagreed. By his interpretation. . .he expected to make a small profit on the total program. As a consequence of budget restraints, rising costs, and an overall reappraisal of defense requirements, we have now limited the program to 81 aircraft. The program’s final cost to the Government, however, depends on resolution of the issues between the Air Force and contractor over the contract. We are still trying to work these out with Lockheed but.. .litigation may be required. If the Air Force wins all the arguments, the 81 aircraft program will cost about $4 billion. If the contractor wins all his points, the cost will be. . .on the order of $500 million more.” It might be “several years before we know the exact outcome of this program.” (Testimony)
Presidential Management Improvement Award was presented to Van A.Wente of NASA Information Systems and Development Branch for conception, planning, design, and implementation of NASA recon computer system for on-line retrieval of scientific, technical, and management information. Presentation was made at Presidential Awards Dinner in Washington, D.C. (NASA Org & Mgmt Off)
Coalition Against the SST—23 groups including Sierra Club, Friends of the Earth, and United Auto Workers Union—urged Federal law banning SST sonic booms over U.S. Coalition spokesman, Dr. Karl M. Ruppenthal of Stanford Univ., told Washington, D.C., news conference Government officials ‘‘state that no annoying overland flights are contemplated, but they refuse to cooperate when meaningful noise legislation is proposed.” (Cohn, WPost, 7/21/70, A2)
MSC announced award to North American Rockwell Corp. Space Div. of $250 000 contract for lunar orbit station study to define configuration, refine functions of station, detail feasible scientific investigations, and develop rescue capabilities. Station would operate in zero gravity but would be modifiable to artificial-gravity environment. (MSC Release 70-60)
Our World in Space—Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow,” illustrated lecture by artist Robert McCall, was presented by Smithsonian Associates in Washington, D.C. (Program)
Dr. James G. Allen, professor of history at Univ. of Colorado, authority on history of space, and NASA consultant, died of heart ailment at age 69. He had authored several books and articles on space history and had received special citation from American Astronautical Society for work on historical and philosophical background of space age. (Boulder Daily Camera, 9/19/70)
Agreement to reduce jet aircraft air pollution by 1972 was reached in Washington, D.C., by Nixon Administration and representatives from 31 scheduled and charter U.S. airlines. Airlines agreed to install pollution control devices on 1000 Boeing 727 and 737 and DC-9 aircraft during regular maintenance overhauls. Devices, called burner cans, would eliminate 70%-80% of solid particles spewed into air by jets. (Curry, WPost, 1/21/70, A2)
usaf Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio, was described in Christian Science Monitor article: “Oldest and largest military aviation museum in the world, the display.. .portrays the history of the United States Air Force in such away as to interest all ages. Nearly half of the aircraft and missiles have to be exhibited outdoors, so construction is under way on a new $6 million facility. . .to contain the collection of 8,000 planes and other items.” (CSM, 8/4/70)
First total solar eclipse seen over heavily populated areas of U.S. since 1925 was greeted by millions of viewers who crowded beaches, towns, and islands where viewing was most favorable. Eclipse was total along path 137-161 km (85-100 mi) wide through Mexico, Florida, Georgia, the Carolinas, Virginia, and Nantucket Island, Mass. It was 96% total in New York City and 95% in Washington, D.C. (Wilford, NYT, 3/8/70,1)
Three engine control assemblies were removed from XB-70 research aircraft on exhibition at Air Force Museum atWright-Patterson afb. Ohio, to be used for F-15 engine/inlet compatibility tests in 5-m (16-ft) wind tunnels at Arnold Engineering Development Center at Tullahoma, Tenn. Equipment would be on loan through June 1972. (afsc Release 333.70)
usaf launched experimental reentry vehicle down afwtr from Vandenberg afb. Launch was part of Advanced Ballistic Reentry System (abres) program, (upi, NYT, 6/10/70, 6)
noaa said scientific team that studied 23 310 000-hectare (90 000-sq-mi) region east of Barbados in summer of 1969 had reached preliminary conclusion that dust blown off North African deserts into upper air ended in atmosphere over South Atlantic and influenced North American weather. Scientists, who had hoped to find atmosphere relatively free of particulate matter, had discovered instead African dust in Barbados air at levels to 5000 m (16 000 ft). (O’Toole, W Post, 1/7/71, A15)
First two DC—10 jet transport aircraft were delivered by manufacturer McDonnell Douglas Corp. to American Airlines and United Airlines at Long Beach, Calif. (Bedingfield, NYT, 7/30/71, 54)
Australia’s decision to accept delivery of 24 U.S. F—111C aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, at USAF news briefing. Matter had “been under discussion” for some time, Seamans said. “I am very gratified that the decision has finally been made and we can put the aircraft in shape for them and get them over to Australia.” (Transcript) , indoor exhibits, (ksc Release 273-71)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew from San Francisco International Airport to Fairbanks, Alaska, in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft on first sector of 32 000-km (20 000-mi), month-long journey over North and South Poles and prime and 180th meridians at Equator—geographic crossroads of world. If successful, UPI said, Long would establish eight aviation records, including first flight around the world landing on all seven continents, first solo flight across Antarctica, and first solo from Antarctica to Australia. (W Star, 11/6/71, A2)
President Nixon addressed Nation by radio upon transmitting foreign policy report for 1970s to Congress: “Over the past two years in some fields the Soviet Union and the United States have moved ahead together. We have taken the first step toward cooperation in outer space. We have both ratified the treaty limiting the spread of nuclear weapons. Just 2 weeks ago, we signed a treaty to prohibit nuclear weapons from the seabeds.” Most significant result of negotiations between U.S. and U.S.S.R. in past year “could be in the field of arms control.” salt had produced “most searching examination of the nature of strategic competition ever conducted between our nations.” If talks continued in cooperative vein there was “reason to hope that specific agreements will be reached to curb the arms race.” (PD, 3/1/71, 298-304) *	President Nixon transmitted to Congress second annual report on foreign policy, United, States Foreign Policy for the 1970’s: Building for Peace: Space was “clearest example of the necessity for international scientific cooperation and the benefits that accrue from it. The world community has already determined and agreed that space is open to all and can be made the special province of none. Space is the new frontier of man, both a physical and an intellectual frontier. ... As mutual help and cooperation were essential to life on the American frontier, so it is on the frontier of space. It is with that sense that we approach the sharing of both the burdens and the fruits of our space activity. . . . We have some 250 agreements with 74 countries covering space cooperation.” Space was “the only area of which it can be literally said that the potential for cooperation is infinite. . . . We have opened virtually all of our NASA space projects to international participation.” President said he would submit to Senate shortly ICAO treaty which “recognizes aircraft hijacking as a crime . . . and ensures that hijackers will be subject to prosecution or extradition if apprehended on the territory of contracting states.” U.S. intended “to exert every effort to ensure the widest possible international acceptance of this convention.” President’s report said it was “settled U.S. policy to encourage international cooperation in basic science.” Closely allied was national policy on technology exchange. U.S. preeminence in both fields posed question as to extent of its sharing scientific and technological knowledge. “There are obvious security implications in many technological developments, for example in the nuclear and space fields.” U.S. policy, however, “is to keep those areas as circumscribed as possible, and to take the leadership in encouraging the exchange of scientific and technological information.” (PD, 3/1/71, 305-77)
NASA announced receipt of three proposals for design and fabrication of two experimental, transport, STOL research aircraft with propulsive lift—from McDonnell Douglas Corp., from Boeing Co. with Grumman Corp., and from Lockheed Aircraft Corp. with North American Rockwell Corp., Bell Aerospace Co. Div of Textron, Inc., and Cornell Aeronautical Laboratories, Inc. Aircraft would provide data and experience for developing environmentally acceptable, economical, and safe fan-jet stol transport systems in joint nasa—dot—faa—usaf program to relieve noise and congestion at busy airports. (NASA Release 71—207)
First commercial flight of McDonnell Douglas DC—10 jet transport aircraft was flown by American Airlines between Los Angeles and Chicago. More than 80% of seats were occupied during 3 hr 18 min flight. (CR, 8/6/71, E9096-7; Yarborough, W Star, 8/18/71, DIO; aal pro)
President Nixon sent message to Nikolay V. Podgorny, Chairman of Presidium of Supreme Soviet, on death of Soyuz 11 cosmonauts: “The American people join me in expressing to you and the Soviet people our deepest sympathy on the tragic death of the three Soviet cosmonauts. The whole world followed the exploits of these courageous explorers of the unknown and shares the anguish of their tragedy. But the achievement of cosmonauts Dobrovolsky, Volkov and Patsayev remains. It will, I am sure, prove to have contributed greatly to the future of space and thus to the widening of man’s horizons.” (PD, 7/5/71,1010)
Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, AEC Chairman, was formally presented with membership in Soviet Academy of Sciences by Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F.	Dobrynin in ceremony at Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C. (aec Release 0-120)
faa, American Airlines, and Aeronautical Radio, Inc., in October would begin three- to-six-month operational test and evaluation of automatic data link communications techniques, faa announced. American Airlines 747 aircraft equipped with data link system that would print out air traffic control clearances, terminal advisories, and other information in cockpit and automatically process pilot position and weather reports to ground would test whether techniques could reduce communications workload on pilots and controllers, (faa Release 71—152)
faa announced award of $390 000 contract to Saphier, Lerner, Schindler —Environetics (Div. of Litton Industries) for proposed two-phased study of offshore jetport [see May 21] to serve metropolitan New York City, (faa Release 71-99)
Commercial pilot Elgin L. Long flew over South Pole in twin-engine Piper Navajo aircraft to become first man to make solo flight over both North and South Poles during one journey. Long, who left San Francisco Nov. 5, had flown over North Pole to Stockholm, then to London, Africa, Brazil, and Chile before crossing South Pole. (W Post, 11/23/71, B3)
President Nixon formally changed name of Presidential Boeing 707 aircraft from Air Force One to The Spirit of ’76. Change was made at request of David J. Mahoney, Chairman of American Revolution Bicentennial Commission. Air Force Two would retain its name. (AP, W Post, 7/31/71, A2)
U.K. government and Lockheed Aircraft Corp. agreed on terms for perpetuating Rolls-Royce engine developed for Lockheed’s L-1011 TriStar jet transport after two-day meetings in Washington, D.C. Terms would be submitted to airlines that had ordered aircraft and to banks financing sales. (Witkin, NYT, 3/31/71,1)
Appointment of Robert E. Bower, Director of Advanced Development for Grumman Aerospace Corp., as Director for Aeronautics at Lane had been announced by LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Langley Researcher reported. Bower succeeded Laurence K. Loftin, Jr., who had become Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for R&D [see July 1]. (Langley Researcher,	1)
msfc announced award of $325 000 contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for 12-month study of inspace propellant logistics and safety, (msfc Release 71—116)
Senate by vote of 49 to 48 passed and cleared for President’s approval H.R. 8432, authorizing $250 million for emergency loan guarantees to major business enterprises. Legislation ended immediate threat of bankruptcy to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. and assured Lockheed adequate funds to complete construction of L-1011 TriStar jet transport aircraft, Washington Post later said. President Nixon issued statement following Senate action: “The Senate’s decision to approve a government loan to the Lockheed Corporation is in the best interests of all the American people. I greet this vote—as I greeted the vote in the House of Representatives last week—with gratitude and deep satisfaction. This action will save tens of thousands of jobs that would otherwise have been eliminated. It will have a major impact on the economy of California, and will contribute greatly to the economic strength of the country as a whole. It will help ensure that the Nation’s largest defense contractor, and its largest airframe manufacturer, will continue serving the Nation’s needs. It will also help ensure that this country will continue to play a leading role in the development of aerospace technology.” {CR, 8/2/71, S12823-63; Samuelson, W Post, 8/3/71, Al; PD, 8/9/71, 116-7)
Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird told Washington, D.C., press conference that Soviet buildup of land- and sea-based missiles was “far outdistancing” estimates he had offered to Congress seven months previously. He confirmed report that U.S.S.R. was expected to match U.S. strength by deploying 41 Polaris-class missile submarines by 1973. (Beecher, ATT, 10/14/71, 5)
Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Space Theater at American MuseumHayden Planetarium was dedicated at ceremonies in New York. (Invitation )
Newspaper editorials commented on Salyut 1—Soyuz 11 missions: New York Times: “It must be recognized that Salyut and its successors raise important new problems for international law and international relations. Back in 1960, during the celebrated case of the American U—2 plane shot down over the Urals, Soviet leaders became very indignant about a manned American vehicle flying over their country. There have been no similar protests about the manned and unmanned satellites of the space era, but uneasiness must grow as political leaders in many countries contemplate the potential military uses of large semipermanent manned space stations such as Salyut.” (.NYT, 6/9/71) Baltimore Sun: “One point the achievement demonstrates is the intensity of Russian concentration on a definite program. As repeatedly defined, and demonstrated in practice, it is a program which sees orbital endeavor as the logical next step, with deeper explorations limited for the time to automatic systems.” (B Sun, 6/9/71)
After more than quarter century of dominating international aviation scene, U.S. was “well on its way to becoming, if not an also-ran, just another contender for the trophies of the world’s aviation markets,” John F. Loosbrock said in Air Force Magazine article. “For indicators, one only had to stroll the display line, watch the flying demonstrations, and eavesdrop at the chalets” at Paris Air Show. Bitterest pill was “lack of American presence in the supersonic-transport competition, while the Soviet TU—144. and the Anglo-French Concorde were impressing customers, the press, the public. . . .” Equally important was “dazzling array of commercial and military aviation products” displayed by European suppliers. For U.S. to forge ahead again in aviation and advanced technology generally it was going to require “new ways of looking at the problem, new ways of doing things. We are pricing ourselves out of the market, not only for what we hope to sell abroad, but even for what we would like to sell to ourselves.” (AF Mag, 7/7, 6)
Discovery of “first incontrovertible evidence” of existence of natural plutonium 244 by team of Univ. of California at Berkeley scientists was described by Dr. Calvin Alexander in Washington, D.C., press interview. Dr. Alexander and team had baked 15 mg of Pu 244—two thirds of world’s supply—in vacuum system at 2144.3 K (3400°F). Pu 244 had been made expressly for experiment by Oak Ridge National Laboratory. It survived experiment almost intact, having lost only “a hundred milliom atoms of mass” in form of rare gas, xenon. Those atoms had provided “fingerprint” for Pu 244 similar to fingerprint found in certain meteorites. Scientists had suspected meteorite fingerprint had been remnant of completely decayed Pu 244, but until Berkeley experiment they had had no “file” against which to check it. (Lannan, W Star, 4/15/71, A6)
Shift in aec’s role from promoting atomic energy to protecting public interest in nuclear affairs was announced by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Aec Chairman, at annual meeting of Atomic Industrial Forum and American Nuclear Society in Bal Harbour, Fla. It was aec’s responsibility to “develop new technical options and to bring those options to the point of commercial application,” not to “solve industry’s problems which may crop up in the course of commercial exploitation. That is industry’s responsibility, to be settled among industry, Congress, and the public.” aec’s role was “primarily to perform as a referee serving the public interest.” (Text)
Two prototype x-ray devices for detecting weapons and explosives in carry-on luggage of air passengers had been successfully tested at Dulles International Airport in Virginia, faa announced. Low radiation x-ray units—Flying Spot developed by American Science and Engineering, Inc., and Bendix Ray Inspectoscope developed by Bendix Aerospace Systems Div.—sent x-ray pulse through luggage to obtain shadowgraph, which was displayed on TV screen. Devices did not affect photographic film or recording tape, (faa Release 71-162)
President Nixon in Caneel Bay, Virgin Islands, issued statement following successful Apolio 14 launch: “Today, we take the most amazing things almost for granted. It is difficult to imagine, but some day the discovery of the New World will seem almost inconsequential alongside the explorations of our own time. In a way we are like the people who must have stood on the dock at Palos, Spain, and watched Columbus’ ships disappear, believing they were watching the end of a great event, when they were watching the beginning. But where they watched the world being opened, and did not know it, we are watching the heavens being opened and we do know it. While those men went under the patronage of individual monarchs, our men go for the American people and, in a larger sense, for all mankind." {PD, 2/8/71, 151-2)
usaf commanders believed usaf had entered “critical period in which American strategic and tactical air power is declining” while U.S.S.R.’s “is expanding,” New York Times reported. Chief elements of problem were that usaf’s basic weapon systems, B-52 bomber and F—4 fighter-bomber, were nearing obsolescence and needed to be replaced at “high cost” by B-l and F—15; satellite-gathered intelligence indicated U.S.S.R. had established lead over U.S. in land-based icbms, was building emplacements for larger missiles, and had deployed FOBS to bring missiles on target from any direction; and developments were taking place against “background of budgetary stringency” in U.S. (Middleton, NYT, 10/31/71, 95)
Nomination of Sen. Howard W. Cannon (D-Nev.) for Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy for outstanding service to aviation was announced by NAA. Citation was “for his continuing energetic advocacy of and lasting contribution to the development and use of aviation both as a viable national transportation system and as an essential element in maintaining a strong military posture.” Trophy would be presented in Washington, D.C., Dec. 17. (naa Release)
NASA announced appointment of Dr. Charles A. Berry, Director of Medical Research and Operations at MSC, as NASA Director for Life Sciences. Appointment would become effective when successor for Dr. Berry was found. Dr. Berry would succeed Dr. James W. Humphreys, Jr., who became Secretary-Treasurer of American Board of Surgery. (nasa Ann, 9/1/71; NASA Release 71—166; Am Bd of Surgery pio)
General Dynamics Corp. demonstrated CL-215 Air Tanker over Anacostia River in Washington, D.C. Amphibious aircraft scooped up 5.5 cu m (1440 gal) of water from river, took off, and released water from two 2.7-cu-m (720-gal) tanks to show what it could do to forest fire. General Dynamics was interested in selling three CL-215s at $1.4 million each to U.S. Forest Service, Washington Post reported. (Barnes, W Post, 5/12/71, Bl)
dod spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim told press in Washington, D.C., that cost increase for USN F-14 fighter aircraft was about $2 billion. If tentative plans to produce more than 700 aircraft materialized, cost would increase $2.8 million per aircraft, from $11.5 million to $14.3 million. Earlier, manufacturer Grumman Aerospace Corp. had blamed cost increase on inflation and other factors contributing to poor business conditions. (Witkin, NYT, 6/3/71, 15)
Soviet computer had calculated total weight of atmosphere at 5 quadrillion, 157 trillion tons, Tass reported. News agency said calculation was “essential for research in cosmonautics, space geodesy and gravimetry.” Computer had, for first time, taken into account “all the peculiarities of the earth’s relief and the distribution of temperatures on its surface,” Tass said, (upi, San Francisco Examiner, 11/5/71)
Spokesman for Army Corps of Engineers announced personnel at KSC District Office would be cut from 30 to 15, effective June 30. Change was “result of a greatly diminished workload for NASA and the Air Force in the Cape Kennedy area.” (Cocoa, Fla, Today, 5/5/71, Bl)
Federal Government had filed $3 690 290 suit against Bechtel Corp. in Federal District Court in San Francisco, Wall Street Journal reported. Suit charged that Bechtel’s designs for space environment simulation chamber for Msc were “inadequate, improper and unsuited for the purpose intended.” Chamber had failed in 1964 NASA test, Government said. (WSJ, 11/2/71)
Discovery of rarest nuclear particle anti-omega-minus baryon in photo of nuclear interaction was reported by physicist Dr. Gerson Goldhaber of Univ. of California at Berkeley at American Physical Society meeting in New York. Particle’s track had been found in search of more than 500 000 photos and further confirmed that baryon particles had antiparticles. Photos of particle collisions were taken in heavy-hydrogen-filled bubble chamber of particle accelerator at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center (AP, NYT, 2/2/71, 19)
First transatlantic picture telephone call was made successfully between U.S. and Sweden via Intelsat-IV F—2 orbiting over Atlantic. One-hour transmission was part of ceremonies in Sweden and at ComSatCorp headquarters in Washington, D.C., formally inaugurating new Nordic earth station at Tanum, Sweden, jointly owned by Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden. (ComSatCorp Release 71-67)
Gen. Thomas D. White Space Trophy for 1970 was presented to b/g Robert A. Duffy (usaf), Vice Commander of samso, in Washington, D.C., ceremony. Citation was for efforts bringing “dramatic improvements in the effectiveness and maneuverability of advanced re-entry systems, and in both the effectiveness and variety of penetration aids designed to compound the difficulties of an enemy in intercepting reentry systems.” (W Star, 6/29/71, A4)
Tass reported arrival in Moscow of Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, and group of NASA experts “in connection with the forthcoming technical conference of Soviet and American experts in ensuring compatibility of means of approach and docking of spaceships and stations.” Conference would take place Nov. 29 to Dec. 7. (fbis-Sov-71-230, 11/30/71, LI)
The short and uneventful flight of Soyuz 10 suggested . . . that the Soviet Union ran into technical difficulties in its first attempt at establishing a manned workshop in earth orbit,” Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. “Just what the difficulties might have been is unclear, but the landing of Soyuz 10 after only two days in space, the brief time Soyuz spent docked with the Salute workshop and the apparent failure to transfer crew members ... all added up in American minds to a bungled mission.” (W Post, 4/26/71, A21)
MSFC announced plans to launch 914-mm (36-in) Stratoscope II balloonborne astronomical telescope from msfc in August. Objective of mission was to study Galaxies M31 and M32, Planetary Nebula (NGC 7662), Orion Nebula, and planet Saturn. Stratoscope II project management, previously directed by Princeton Univ., had been recently assigned to msfc as part of project reorganization. Seven previous launches had been from National Center for Atmospheric Research’s Scientific Balloon Flight Station at Palestine, Tex. (msfc Release 71—78)
Joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. editorial board for preparation and publication of review of space biology and medicine held second meeting in Washington, D.C. Cochairmen were Professor Melvin Calvin of Univ. of California and Professor Oleg G. Gazenko, Director of Institute of Medical Biological Problems of Soviet Ministry of Health. (nasa Release 71-16)
Soviet Embassy in Washington, D.C., was opened to public for signing of condolence book for Soyuz 11 cosmonauts. (W Post, 7/3/71, A12)
Tenth anniversary of Air Force Systems Command, afsc—in charge of planning, developing, and acquiring all usaf weapon and space systems and supporting technologies—administered annual contracts worth about $48 billion. Annual expenditures accounted for more than one fourth of total usaf budget, afsc was staffed by 9600 officers, 18 500 airmen, and 31000 civilians, (afsc Release 94.71; AFM, 4/71, 43)
Soviet Aviation Industry Minister Pavel Dementyev told Paris press conference Soviet supersonic transport Tu-144 was expected to go into commercial service in late 1973 or early 1974, about same time as Anglo-French Concorde. Only one Tu-144 was operational; two other prototypes under construction were expected to fly at year’s end. Tu-144 had logged several hundred flying hours and flown at 2458 km per hr (1528 mph) at 6100 m (20 000 ft). Aleksey N. Tupolev, designer of Tu-144, said at press conference that Pan American World Airways President Najeeb E. Halaby was interested in aircraft, “but it is too soon to speak about markets or negotiations with international airlines until the Tu-144 has completed its test program.” (Reuters, W Post, 5/29/71)
European Space Conference President Tbeo Lefevre, Belgian Minister for Scientific Policy and Planning, told Brussels press conference that U.S. had refused at Feb. 11—12 conference in Washington, D.C., to sell U.S. launch vehicles for European comsats. Lefevre said State Dept, had told him, however, that if two thirds of Intelsat’s 72 members agreed that launch vehicles should be sold* U.S. would sell. (NYT, 2/17/71, 14; WPost, 2/17/71, A13)
Exhibits at new $6-million Air Force Museum near Dayton, Ohio, were described by New York Times: DC-6 Independence used by President Truman; Constellation Columbine HI and 47J Sioux helicopter used by President Eisenhower; reproduction of Wright 1909 Military Flyer; B-70, only remaining ultrasonic bomber; Douglas World Cruiser New Orleans, which flew around world in 1924; Soviet MiG-15; and relics of Wright brothers’ Kitty Hawk. Museum, “first permanent repository of Air Force memorabilia,” was 244 m (800 ft) long, 91 m (300 ft) wide, and 24 m (80 ft) tall and housed 150 aircraft. It was built with funds provided by private gifts. NYT, 9/5/71, 28; nasa Hist Off)
Selection of National Science Teachers Assn., Washington, D.C., for negotiation of $39 000, 19-mo, cost-reimbursement contract for management and operation of Skylab Student Project was announced by NASA. Purpose of project was to stimulate interest in science and technology by directly involving students in space research, nsta would notify student and educational community of opportunity and method of participation, develop procedures for evaluation of proposals based on educational value, and develop certificates of participation and awards system for entrants, nsta also would develop plans for entrants whose proposal ideas had been selected by NASA and conduct Skylab Student Education Conference at Ksc in conjunction with Skylab launch, (nasa Release 71—183)
Government-industry program for development of experimental jet STOL aircraft was proposed by nasa and dot at meeting of nae Aeronautics and Space Engineering Board in Washington, D.C. Program would pool Government and industry funds in partnership to develop low-noise-level jet STOL technology. Development of prototype and operational aircraft for commercial use would be left to competitive industry decision and financing, nasa later said development of experimental aircraft was necessary to complete technology and proof-of-concept work for production of economically and environmentally acceptable stol air transport system. Roy P. Jackson, nasa Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, estimated that research aircraft could be flight-tested in approximately two years from inception of cooperative program, (nasa Release 71-20; nae pio)
President Nixon released statement on dedication of new USAF Museum at Wright-Patterson afb, Ohio: “The United States Air Force Museum demonstrates in a most compelling fashion the tremendous progress which American aviation has made in a remarkably brief time. It will afford a valuable opportunity for future generations of Americans to learn about the dedication and courage and skill which have made that progress possible.” At dedication ceremonies President said, “. . . the United States intends, and we resolve today, that having been first in aviation from the beginning, we will attempt to be first in aviation for the time to come. This should be our goal, and one that we can achieve.” (PD, 9/13/71, 1240-2)	.
NASA Wallops Station participation in Cornell Univ. experiment to obtain data on importance of celestial, magnetic, topographic, and meteorological cues in guidance systems of nocturnally migrating birds was announced by NASA. Station would provide support in tracking birds with 18-m (60-ft) dish on space range antenna (spandar). Birds would be captured in nets, examined, and small magnets would be attached. They would then be released by weather balloon to continue flight under varying cloud conditions. Each bird would be tracked by radar as it made orientational decision and departed in migration. (NASA Release 71—98)
MSFC announced award of $1197 000 incentive contract to American Science and Engineering, Inc., for support services in Skylab atm project. Contract would run from Aug. 22, 1971, through June 30, 1972. (msfc Release 71-176)
faa announced award of $530 125 contract to Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory, Inc., for analytical and experimental program to develop new microwave landing system (mls) for civil-military common use, to replace vhf/uhf instrument landing system (ils) developed in early 1940s. Microwave system would provide more precise electronic guidance to aircraft on approaches and landings than current system; selectable flight paths to permit greater number of aircraft operations at airports; closer spacing of parallel runways; and procedures to ease noise over surrounding communities, (faa Release 71—109)
Full-size plywood model of B-l strategic bomber, designed as replacement for USAF B-52, was displayed for first time by North American Rockwell Corp. in Los Angeles. (W Post, 11/5/71, 3)
International Institute for Strategic Studies was quoted as saying in London that 30 to 70 new Soviet Sukhoi Su-11 delta-wing advanced fighter aircraft had been delivered to Soviet Air Force in Egypt. Aircraft were believed to be capable of mach 2.5 speed and were armed with air-to-air missiles. (Reuters, CSM, 12/28/71, 2)
Economic impact of end of sst subsidy was described by Frank C. Porter in Washington Post: While move could idle 13 000 workers across U.S., “it is unlikely immediately to cause more than a ripple in the $1 trillion American economy.” Some experts had suggested that continued sst development could cost more jobs ultimately than it would create. Meanwhile, it would cost U.S. Government extra $97 million to scrap program: contract termination costs of $52 million to Boeing Co., $33 million to General Electric Co., $10 million in miscellaneous termination costs, and $2 million to close sst project office at dot. Government also would have to return $22.4 million in downpayments made by airlines. (W Post, 3/25/71, A23)
LaRC Director of Aeronautics Laurence K. Loftin assumed for one year post of Special Assistant for Aeronautics to Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for r&d Grant L. Hansen. (Av Wk, 5/31/71, 23)
mit—“probably the world’s greatest technological university”—had committed itself to seeking change in current U.S. attitude of hostility toward technology, Washington Post reported. In series of statements that “can be taken jointly as a new scientists’ manifesto,” MIT leaders had urged change in national attitude toward “harnessing technology while not bowing to it,” urged end to scientists disclaiming responsibility for the effects of their work, and pledged to make profound changes in their own teaching and research, mit led U.S. universities in obtaining Federal research funding, with $92 million in FY 1970, more than double that of its nearest rival, Stanford Univ., which had Received $39 million. (Cohn, W Post, 9/5/71, D2) by U.S. and Soviet Academies of Science and organized by Soviet astronomer Dr. Yosif S. Shklovsky and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl Sagan. Later Dr. Sagan and Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Frank D. Drake reported conference conclusions to NAS. Group of scientists had concluded that civilization in another solar system “a few hundred light years away” might be trying to communicate with other bodies, including earth. Man had acknowledged existence of other universes and scientific evidence had shown that amino acids —building blocks of life—could be made from materials and energy sources in space. Scientists had recommended coordinated worldwide effort to intercept messages by searching sky with powerful radiotelescopes. (Sullivan, NYT, 9/19/71, 4:8, Auerbach, W Post, 9/23/71, A4; nas pio)
Federation of American Scientists issued report Is There an R&D Gap? Report examined DOD charges that U.S.S.R. R&D expenditures exceeded those of U.S. and would result in Soviet assumption of technological superiority. Conclusion reached was: “This entire episode has been a classical numbers game featuring selective disclosure, questionable assumptions, exaggeratedly precise estimates, misleading language, and alarmist nonsequiter conclusionsThere was “no claim, much less any evidence” that U.S.S.R. was spending more than U.S. on military technological advances as measured by “military technology base—research, exploratory development and a fraction of advanced development.” No one had claimed to be able to measure Soviet expenditures in this category. “These expenditures would amount to a few billion at most and be most difficult to estimate. Necessary expenditures become progressively larger as one moves from research on basic technological discoveries to development of weapons. This shows the extreme difficulty in making meaningful comparisons on a financial basis of efforts to protect against technological surprise. Neither the funding nor numbers of personnel involved are a sensible measure of original technological advance. Of far greater importance is the organization and application of available intellectual and other resources.” (Senate Com on Armed Services, Hearings on FY 1972 Auth; Science, 8/29/71, 707-9)
Stanford Univ. and MIT experiments to determine internal structure of protons and neutrons by use of 21-bev beam at Stanford’s Linear Accelerator Center were described in Scientific American by Dr. Henry W. Kendall of mit and Dr. Wolfgang K. H. Panofsky of Stanford Univ. Scientific team had smashed what they thought were basic atom particles, to find that “the way ultrahigh-energy electrons are scattered by protons and neutrons suggests that these ‘elementary’ nuclear particles have a complex internal structure consisting of pointlike entities.” New entities had been named “partons” because they seemed to be parts within parts. Scientists had concluded, “It is still too early to say whether the parton model will lead to an understanding of the nucleon’s structure or whether entirely new ideas may be required.” (Scientific American, 6/71, 61—77)
President Nixon had asked Congress for $9.1 million to purchase new presidential backup aircraft to replace 13-yr-old Boeing 707 used as Backup aircraft for Spirit of ’76, Washington Post reported. President’s aircraft, formerly known as Air Force One, was Boeing 707-320-B delivered to usaf in 1962. (W Post, 11/19/71, B7)
Mrs. Betty J. Baldwin, arc computer programmer, had been selected one of top 10 business women of the year by American Business Women’s Assn., for progress as NASA civil service employee and interests in educational and character-building programs, arc Astrogram announced, (arc Astrogram, 11/11/71, 1)
Two Sprint missiles successfully intercepted icbm nosecone over Pacific in latest test of Safeguard defense system. It was first time two missiles were used in Safeguard test. Target was launched from Vanden-berg afb, Calif., 6700-km (4200-mi) distance. (Reuters, C Trib, 2/23/71, 8)
New U.S.—U.S.S.R. missile gap was described by Sen. Henry M. Jackson (D-Wash.) in speech before American Society of Newspaper Editors: “Today the United States bomber force is less than 600, our sublaunched missiles have numbered 656 for four years, and our land-based missiles have totaled 1,054 for four years. During this time the Soviet bomber force has remained almost constant, but their submarine missile force has grown to almost 400 launchers and is expected to overtake ours in two to three years. And the Soviet land-based intercontinental force has risen to over 1,440 operational launchers—with more on the way. Thus, while the Soviets are gaining and will soon exceed us in missile weaponry at sea, we have already fallen distinctly behind them on land. “Over the same period, the actual destructive power of the U.S. forcesvhas continually decreased, while the Soviet’s destructive power has greatly increased, until the total megatonnage that the Soviets could deliver against U.S. targets is several times our own. “The only strategic area in which we are staying ahead is in the number of individual warheads, and we are doing that only by going to small-yield nmltiples. Even here, the Soviets could in time overtake us, since their missile forces have considerably greater payloads than ours.” (Text) '
faa announced start of major program to criss-cross U.S. with area navigation airways. Four transcontinental routes would link New York City with San Francisco and Los Angeles, effective April 29. faa would announce additional 115 area navigation routes within next two months. Shorter interim area navigation routes had already been established to test and develop air traffic control and piloting techniques. Area navigation used airborne computers that permitted pilots to extrapolate signals from existing ground navaids, allowing greater choice and flexibility in route selection, (faa Release 71—33)
dod Project mast (military assistance to safety and traffic) was example of “major role” of transfer of technical knowledge from DOD laboratories to civilian scientific community in “technological revolution,” Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird said at meeting of Domestic Action Council in Washington, D.C. Since July 1970 inception of program, military helicopters had flown 767 missions and evacuated 983 civilian patients for civilian agencies. (Text)
Tenth anniversary of Mercury-Redstone mission that carried chimpanzee Ham up to 253-km (157-mi) altitude on suborbital flight. Ham was recovered in good health. He was now ward of National Zoo in Washington, D.C. (AP, W Post, 1/31/71, A4; Natl Zoo Pio)
Plans for establishment of International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis by U.S., U.S.S.R., U.K., France, Italy, Poland, and East and West Germany were described in New York Times by Walter Sullivan: Project, “fruit of four years of private Soviet-American negotiations” had culminated in eight-nation conference in Paris. Prominent among principals had been nas President, Dr. Philip Handler, and Dzherman M. Gvishiani, Soviet specialist in American management techniques. {NYT, 10/14/71, 1)
Dr. Wernher von Braun, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, said significance of man’s movement into space with both “automated, unmanned spacecraft and manned vehicles,” ought to be grasped by every nation and every individual. Speaking at “Report on America” dinner sponsored in Washington, D.C., by Time magazine for group of European businessmen, he added: “Man has left Earth. There is as great an awesome potential in that simple statement as there is in the fact, man appeared on Earth. Human destiny now has another door opened to it that previously was firmly locked.” Satellite investigations and space probes had advanced human knowledge about earth, moon, and planets. “Astronomers now are able to view across the entire electromagnetic spectrum to obtain information about the birth, evolution, and extinction of celestial objects previously beyond reach of the most powerful telescope. Space is, in fact, a vast laboratory in which to experiment with weightlessness, hard vacuum, solar plasmas, and extremely high cosmic ray particles. “The potential value of space technology for Earth applications alone, including long-range weather forecasting, earth resources surveys, and communications, has been estimated ... at billions of dollars annually to the world.” (NASA Activities, 11/15/71, 182)
Award of $361 494 contract to egng Inc. Bedford (Mass.) Div. for production and testing of prototype cold fog dissipation (cfd) system was announced by Air Force Systems Command, cfd system, designed by Air Force Air Weather Service for global use, would be deployed to U.S.-operated bases in United Kingdom, Germany, Alaska, and Netherlands. CFD system used liquid-propane spray vaporized from tanks at preselected sites upwind of runway complex to disperse fog affecting aircraft at airports, (afsc Release 023.72)
F—5E international fighter aircraft was unveiled in ceremony at Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div. in Hawthorne, Calif. Aircraft, not part of Air Force inventory, would be available to U.S. allies through Military Assistance Service funding program. Aircraft was powered by J—85-21 engines and had greater maneuverability, speed, payload, and range than previous F-5s, with new fire control system that included search-and-track radar. F-5E was scheduled for delivery in 1973. (afsc Newsreview, 8/72, 1)
Membership in National Academy of Sciences ranked “second only to the Nobel Prize as recognition of achievement in American science,” Univ. of Oklahoma political scientist Dr. Don E. Kash and team said in Science article. Striking aspect of composite picture of NAS membership was “extent to which members are educated in, elected from, and employed by a relatively small number of universities.” Academicians from top 10 universities made up 54.8% of NAS membership, averaged 48 yrs at election time, and were nearly 3 yrs younger on election to NAS than those with degrees from other universities. (Kash et al., Science, 3/10/72, 1076-83)
Environmental Action, group of 31 scientists and professionals, issued statement in Washington, D.C., urging Congress to deny Administration’s request for $500 million to build demonstration model of nuclear breeder reactor to generate electricity. Group, which included Nobel Prize winners Dr. Harold C. Urey (physicist) and Dr. Linus C. Pauling (chemist), questioned safety of nuclear reactors and favored concentration of coal to generate power. (Cowan, NYT, 4/26/72, 7) April 26:	Air Force SR-71 reconnaissance jet aircraft set record for sustained speed at high altitudes in lO^-hr flight from Beale Air Force Base, Calif. Aircraft, piloted by l/c Thomas B. Estes (usaf), flew 24 100 km (15 000 mi) at speeds over mach 3 and altitudes above 24 400 m (80 000 ft). Flight plan included two round trips across northern and central U.S. and complete circle of western states, equivalent to nonstop flight from San Francisco to Paris and return. (Haughland, AP, W Post, 7/17/72, A3)
Space technology had become “forcing function to bring nations together in mutual undertakings with a common purpose,” Dr. Allen E. Puckett, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics President, said in Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial. U.S.—U.S.S.R. space agreement “expresses our intention to cooperate in various fields of space activity, and in particular proposes a joint experimental flight of U.S. and Soviet manned spacecraft in 1975. We may debate the immediate technical values of this experiment, but the overriding consideration is the fact that we will be working together. Regardless of the technological outcome we will be communicating and collaborating, getting to know each other better, in a common enterprise. On such small beginnings, a new era of mutual understanding and cooperation might evolve.” (A&A, 9/72, 19)
Rep. Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), said in Washington, D.C., that he would carry his efforts to restore original name of Cape Canaveral to Cape Kennedy to courts if Congress refused to cooperate. If courts also refused, he would try to persuade Florida Gov. Reubin Askew and Florida residents to “ignore Federal name.” (upi, NYT, 10/6/72)
Delegation of Soviet scientists headed by Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh flew from Moscow to New York. Scientists would participate in general meeting of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., and visit U.S. scientific institutes. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 10/17/72, LI)
Expansion of environmental and resource base beyond earth was urged by North American Rockwell Corp. scientist Dr. Krafft A. Ehricke in New York Times article. Great crisis of the time was fact “man’s nature is attuned to anr infinite, indestructible world” but earth had ceased to be indestructible. Global development, therefore, “must be based on an open-world concept and include both the development of extraterrestrial resources and the wiser management of our terrestrial resources.” Extraterrestrial imperative was “indivisibility of Earth and space.” (NYT, 3/31/72)
United Auto Workers filed suit in U.S. District Court in Washington, D.C., in attempt to recoup part of first-year wage increase denied 30 000 aerospace workers by Federal Pay Board Jan. 13. UAW contended portion of wage increase requested represented cost-of-living agreement made in 1968. (Rowe, W Post, 2/8/72, A7) February 8:	Apollo 16 spacecraft, returned to Vehicle Assembly Building Jan. 27 for replacement of command module fuel tank damaged during testing, was rolled out to Kennedy Space Center Launch Complex 39, Pad A. Spacecraft would be mated with Saturn V booster Feb. 11 and was to begin flight readiness test Feb. 29 in preparation for April 16 launch toward moon, (ksc Release 26-72)
Soviet officials in Washington, D.C., said they would be prepared to begin next round of Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (salt) in September to maintain momentum generated by May 22-26 summit talks. (Berger, NYT, 6/2/72, Al)
Democratic presidential candidate Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) said during campaign visit to Manned Spacecraft Center that “future American space effort should focus on unmanned exploration.” In statement released to press before his msc tour, Sen. McGovern said he favored going ahead with earth resources experiment package (erep). He accused Nixon Administration of eliminating some 500 000 aerospace jobs and 1.8 million positions in defense-related industries “without even thinking about new jobs to replace the ones destroyed.” (Knee-land, NYT, 9/8/72, 20)
NASA announced initiation of cooperative program with Air Force to establish technology base needed by USAF and industry for development of military and civil short takeoff and landing (stol) aircraft. Memorandum of Understanding signed by Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, and Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, called for close coordination of USAF advanced, medium STOL transport (amst) program and NASA quiet, experimental stol (questol) program to ensure that “the stol technology developed will . . . serve both areas of interest without undue compromise to either.” Program would be managed by new Air Force/NASA stol Coordinating Council, cochaired by Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development Grant L. Hansen and NASA Associate Administrator for Aeronautics and Space Technology Roy P. Jackson, (nasa Release 72-44)
Air Force announced award of $1 353 205 firm-fixed-price contract to Space Data Corp. for production of meteorological probes and launch support equipment, (dod Release 204^-72)
Soviet Politburo member Mikhail A. Suslov, in speech before foreign affairs commissions of Supreme Soviet, endorsed formal ratification of U.S.-U.S.S.R. antiballistic missile treaty, but warned against U.S. attempts “to distort the spirit and letter of the treaty and interim agreement.” He said U.S.S.R. would “take into consideration in its policy all changes that may appear in the position of the American side.” (NYT, 8/24/72, 6)
Air Force HC-130H piloted by l/c Ed Allison established world record for nonstop, unrefueled flight by turboprop aircraft of 14 052.94 km (8732.09 mi) in flight from Ching Chuan Kang Air Base on Taiwan to Scott Air Force Base, 111. (Airman, 7/72, 2-8)
U.S. was moving towards conversion to metric system despite opposition from some industries concerned about resultant confusion and cost, Now York Times reported. American chemical and pharmaceutical industries were now largely on metric system, as were NASA and “important parts” of weapon and aircraft industries. General Electric Co., whose products for foreign consumption were already made to metric dimensions, had come out for conversion. In “carefully timed manner,” each industry was following pace suited to its needs. (Sullivan, NYT, 5/14/72, 4:6)
Inauguration of Traffic Control and Landing System (tracals, 404L Program) at Air Force System Command’s Electronic Systems Div. at Hanscom Field, Mass., was announced by afsc. Program would update management and control of Air Force aircraft takeoffs, en route flights, and landings in U.S. and overseas. Effort included development and acquisition of solid-state, low-cost, reliable electronic components and systems to replace outdated tube equipment in use for more than two decades, (afsc Release 112.72)
Radar-guided usaf Sprint missile launched from Kwajalein Atoll intercepted multiple-warhead missile launched from Vandenberg Air Force Base over Pacific in second successful test of antiballistic missile against multiple targets, (upi, NYT, 5/9/72, 33)
Air Force F—111 fighter bomber aircraft plunged in Choctawhatchee Bay after takeoff from Eglin Air Force Base, Fla., killing both crew members. Cause of accident was being investigated. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
nasa Technology Utilization Office representatives met in San Francisco with Public Technology Inc. officials and representatives of cities to review two-year joint effort to apply new technology to selected city problems. Discussed were improved protective clothing and equipment, improved detection and locating equipment for underground piping, equipment to determine presence of illegal drugs in human blood, and improved pavement patching materials that used waste matter. Meeting also discussed civil cooperation to form mass market for goods and services produced by application of new technology. Meeting prefaced July 24—26 second annual Urban Technology Conference at which nasa, other Federal agencies, and business and industry exhibited contributions to new technology, (nasa Release 72-154)
Air Force F-15 fighter aircraft completed first supersonic flight, reaching mach 1.5 during 45-min test at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif. Flight test program was scheduled to end March 1, 1973, when decision on production of first 30 of 729 aircraft would be made. (SBD, 8/7/72, 188)
Benjamin 0. Davis, Jr., Assistant Secretary of Transportation for Safety and Consumer Affairs, met with aviation representatives in Washington, D.C., to discuss joint Government and industry action to combat aircraft hijacking and extortion which were threatening civil aviation. At press conference following meeting he said: “The success rate for the hijacker has been dropping sharply over the past 3years—from 85 percent in 1969 to 37 percent thus far this year.” Government would “continue to press for full compliance with aviation security relations . . . , for increased resistance to hijack demands, and for full cooperation with the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].” (Text) June 8:	Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, in secret testimony before Senate Committee on Armed Services, had disclosed that U.S.S.R. was flight-testing multiple independently targetable reentry vehicle (mirv). Dept, of Defense spokesman Jerry W. Friedheim later confirmed that Laird had made statement. To date, mirvs had remained a U.S. monopoly. (Gwertzman, NYT, 6/9/72, 1)
U.S. Patent No. 3 677 502 was issued to Soviet aircraft designer Aleksey A. Tupolev and seven associates for Tu-144 Soviet supersonic aircraft. Tupolev had carried on Work of his father Andrey N. Tupolev on Tu—144. Earlier applications had been filed for Soviet patents and other American patents were pending on specific features of aircraft. Patent indicated that aircraft design was intended to prevent engine exhaust from contacting tail portion of fuselage. (Jones, NYT, 7/22/72, 33; Pat Off pio)
Unidentified senior analysts said in Washington, D.C., that People’s Republic of China had deployed “handful” of ballistic missiles with estimated 2400- to 4000-km (1500- to 2500-mi) range. Missiles used storable liquid propellant that permitted underground installation in concrete and steel silos. (Beecher, NYT, 2/1/72, 1)
Dept, of Defense spokesmen told press in Washington, D.C., that swingwing F-lll jet fighter-bombers had been withdrawn from combat service in North Vietnam after Sept. 28 loss of one F—111 but aircraft had since returned to action. (AP, W Post, 10/5/72, A29)
U.S. sources quoted in Washington Post said U.S.S.R. had begun building modified class of missile-firing submarines to carry fewer but longer range missiles than current Soviet undersea fleet. New submarines would each carry 12 new SSN-8 missiles with estimated range about 5600 km (3500 mi), or more than twice that of missile currently installed on “Y” class Soviet submarines. (Getler, W Post, 5/31/72, A12) During May:	Air Force Materials Laboratory (afml) was preparing experiment to determine stability of thermal-control coatings or paints and thin films of polymeric materials in space environment. Samples of materials and films would be carried in trays on discs 25 mm (1 in) in diameter on NASA Skylab mission in 1973. After exposure to space, samples would be returned to earth for evaluation of degradation. (afsc Newsreview, 5/12, 14)
Soviet Academy of Sciences President Mstislav V. Keldysh and five members of Soviet Academy began 21-day coast-to-coast tour of U.S. scientific and space installations. Academician Keldysh addressed unpublicized session of U.S. National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C., from which even NAS staff members were banned. NAS had withheld announcement of Keldysh visit to discourage anti-Soviet demonstrations. He had been invited to U.S. by nas President, Dr. Philip Handler. (W Post, 10/18/72)
Society of Air Safety Engineers presented Distinguished Service Award to Dr. Janies J. Ryan, Jr., professor emeritus of Univ. of Minnesota, for pioneering development of flight data recorder. Plaque was awarded during Society seminar in Washington, D.C. (Soc Air Safety Engineers; Av Wk, 10/23/72, 13)
Air Force grounded entire fleet of U.S.-based F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft “as a precautionary measure” until cause of June 15 and 18 F-lll crashes had been determined. (AP, W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
New York Times editorial criticized Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird for insisting that U.S. press on with large defense budget increases that were requested before conclusion of U.S.-U.S.S.R. arms limitation pacts, including funds for accelerated buildup of strategic arms not covered in treaties. “If this were needed to insure Congressional approval of the Moscow agreements—the overriding need at the moment—the cost might not be too high. Rut the real aim seems to be to create ‘bargaining chips’ for the next round of negotiations to limit strategic arms. And the first round of . . . salt talks suggests that the Soviet Union will insist on matching or exceeding the additional American buildup before further agreement can be reached. Both sides already have more than ten times the number of warheads they need to deter or destroy each other. Mutual restraint now could speed up a salt ii agreement and, more important, assure much lower limits on offensive strategic forces than would be possible if both sides now press ahead to add to overkill as bargaining chips for the next negotiating round.” (NYT, 6/5/72, 30)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, discussed future air superiority aircraft in speech before Aero Club of Washington in Washington, D.C. Air Force had not developed new fighter aircraft that could maintain air superiority in battle area in 20 yrs, while U.S.S.R. had developed “whole family of sophisticated fighters.” F—15 program should give U.S. “what we need for the air superiority mission.” For allies, U.S. had developed F-5E international fighter, “a simple design that cost about half that of our present long-range, multipurpose aircraft.” It would “play a particularly vital role in improving the self-defense capabilities of our Asian allies. ... In modernizing our forces, we have learned an important lesson in the last few years. You cannot build an aircraft with every possible new technological device and expect to buy enough of them to get the job done. . . . The unit cost of high performance aircraft has increased tenfold every 18 years.” Avionics was factor in driving up cost of new aircraft systems. F-111D included Mark II avionics system costing over $4 million. To lower unit cost of systems, Air Force was tailoring new aircraft for “somewhat narrower purposes.” Through specialization “we hope to obtain aircraft that can both survive and perform more effectively in their individual mission and ... we will be able to afford many more of these aircraft than we could obtain in the case of one super-capable, multipurpose plane.” (Text)
Aerosonic Corp. President Herbert J. Frank, testifying before Subcommittee on Priorities and Economy of Joint Economic Committee of Congress, said Navy had paid $1700 each for altimeters for 300 aircraft without competitive bidding. Almost identical instruments had cost Air Force $565 each after competitive bidding. (Witkin, NYT, 3/30/72, 12)
Soviet delegation had visited Boeing Co. second time and had revived discussions of possible U.S. certification and marketing of Soviet Yak-40 short-haul transport aircraft by Boeing, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. U.S.S.R. also had discussed Yak-40 with North American Corp. and World Airways Inc. [see Oct. 27]. (Av Wk, 12/11/72, 9)
Philadelphia Inquirer quoted Lockheed spokesman as saying last C-5 Galaxy military transport aircraft to be built under Government contract was on assembly line and was expected to be completed in mid1973.	Lockheed was selling 81 C-5s to Air Force for $4.9 billion. (.P Inq, 3/17/72, 89)	_
NASA announced that NASA Assistant General Counsel Arthur D. Holzman had been detailed to Federal City College in Washington, D.C., to develop seminar courses in government. Courses would provide minority group students with background in government management and enhance their competitive position in government service. Assignment of Holzman was made under Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970, which provided for temporary exchanges of personnel between Federal agencies and state and local governments and institutions of higher learning, (nasa Release 72-125)
New York Times said it had asked more than 20 scientists and scholars with no part in space program to assess probable place of space exploration in “broad sweep of history and in the evolution of man and man’s perception of himself and his universe.” British historian Arnold J. Toynbee and American anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead had seen space experience as “turning point in human history.” Univ. of Michigan biophysicist Dr. John R. Platt had said that “the great picture of earth taken from the moon is one of the most powerful images in the minds of men today and may be worth the cost of the whole Apollo project.” He saw photo as “a great landmark in exploration—to get away from the earth to see it whole.” Soviet poet Robert Rozhdestvensky had said: “Man has become . . . more perceptive to what worries other people. He has no possibility of hiding away . . . of escaping reality and shutting himself up in the narrow world of his own.” French anthropologist Dr. Claude Levi-Strauss had said: “I never look at TV except when there’s a moon shot, and then I am glued to my set.” Dr. Garrett Hardin, ecologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, had said it was time to pull back from further manned space exploration for several centuries. Space program “can only be called ‘spiritual’ in both the good and bad senses.” Technological spinoffs of space program “could surely have been achieved with an expenditure of much less.” Dr. Daniel J. Boorstin, Director of Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of History and Technology, had said greatest thing about space exploration was “that we don’t know what its payoff will be. This symbolizes the American civilization. The people who settled America had no idea what the payoff would be. They settled it before they explored it.” Nobel Prize winning biologist Dr. Albert Szent-Gyorgyi had said Apollo flights demanded that word “impossible” be struck from scientific dictionary. “They are the greatest encouragement for the human spirit.” Oak Ridge National Laboratory Director, Dr. Alvin M. Weinberg, said successes in space and nuclear energy had given people “the feeling that essentially any technological problem can be solved. This has created within the technological community and within the public at large a kind of technological euphoria.” (Wilford, NYT, 12/3/72, 1)
Major advance in research to control nuclear fusion for commercial / energy was announced by Atomic Energy Commission. Experiments using adiabatic toroidal compressor (atc) at aec’s Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory had achieved, for first time, plasma density in range in which tokamak fusion reactor was expected to operate and had demonstrated new technique for heating tokamak plasma to thermonuclear temperatures. ATC was device for containing and heating plasma fuel to temperatures that would melt any other container. It was improved version of Soviet-developed tokamak containing and heating device that had been hailed internationally as promising approach to production of fusion power. Soviet results from T-3 tokamak experiment, published in 1969, had been confirmed by Princeton tokamak experiments in 1970. Dr. James R. Schlesinger, AEC Chairman, had said new ATC results “further brighten the prospect of realizing commercial fusion power in a tokamak confinement system.” But aec had “many years of hard work ahead” to develop concept into “practical power system.” (aec Release P-404; aec pio)
Sen. George S. McGovern (D-S. Dak.) addressed aerospace workers in presidential campaign speech at Redondo Beach, Calif. He felt “American people are getting sour” on science. “They’re weary of watching billions of dollars going into what they see as exotic projects, when their basic needs and concerns are still not being met. They’re tired of hearing about ‘spin-offs.’ And they’re wondering why we can’t go after some of these problems directly instead of just hoping for beneficial effects from other projects to do the job.” (McGovern Release)
NASA and Air Force had initiated program and developed contract with Lockheed-Georgia Co. to design and install composite-reinforced center wing boxes in two usaf C-130E aircraft, NASA announced. Objective of program was to evaluate concept of selective composite reinforcement of primary aircraft structures. Concept would increase strength and stiffness of metal structures by bonding composite materials to metal. (nasa Release 72-84)
Air Force System Command successfully launched 1.4-million-cu-m (47.8million-cu-ft) research balloon, world’s largest, from Chico, Calif. Balloon, developed by Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 113-kg (250-lb) payload to unofficial record altitude of 51 800 m (170 000 ft). Previous record of 49 400 m (162 000 ft) had been established in 1969 by afcrl balloon. Purpose of flight was to determine feasibility of flying large thin-film balloons and to study very-high-altitude parachute deployment characteristics, (afsc Release 121.72)
Award of $95 219 456 contract to Boeing Co. and $85 901 510 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp. to begin design and development of advanced, medium, short takeoff and landing transport (amst) aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, (dod Release 773—72)
Air Force announced award of $1.7-million letter contract to North American Rockwell Corp. for repair and modification of attack radar and inertial navigation components of Mark II avionics system of F-lll aircraft, (dod Release 697—72)
New York Times editorial praising Verms 8 achievement [see July 22] said planetary exploration would be “ideal area” for U.S.—U.S.S.R. cooperation, “since it poses none of the political or human problems involved in cooperation in manned space ventures such as the docking maneuver now scheduled for 1975. Both Soviet and American planetary probes would be better if the two nations pooled information and experience on the design and construction of these vehicles. Such pooling would seem to be a natural step in the evolution of Moscow-Washington space cooperation. The sooner it is realized the more effective and less expensive both nations’ space exploratory efforts are likely to be.” (NYT, 7/26/72,34)	_
First avionics testbed aircraft for Air Force Airborne Warning and Control System (awacs)— modified Boeing 707-320 topped by 9-m (30-ft) rotodome—was rolled out at Boeing Co. facility in Renton, Wash. AWACS would detect and track aircraft at high and low altitudes over land and water and track low-altitude aircraft over extended areas, (usaf memo for correspondents)
Twenty-fifth anniversary of supersonic flight. On Oct. 14, 1947, Capt. Charles E. Yeager (usaaf) flew Bell Aircraft Corp. X-l experimental jet aircraft—launched from B-29 bomber from Muroc Flight Test Base, Calif.—to speed of 1078 km per hr (670 mph) in first flight to break sound barrier. Aircraft, designed by Bell chief designer Robert J. Woods, had been developed under Army Air Force contract with cooperation of National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (naca) . (CR, 10/17/72, E8806-7)
Russian-born aviation pioneer Igor I. Sikorsky, who invented first successful helicopter in U.S., died at age 83 in Easton, Conn., after heart attack. Born in Kiev, he had come to U.S. in 1919 with only $600. In 1922 he established Sikorsky Aero Engineering Corp. in small shed. Firm produced amphibian aircraft in 1928, four-engine clipper in 1931 with which Pan American World Airways inaugurated first commercial route to Hawaii and to Asia, and first successful helicopter, which Sikorsky flew in 1939. Firm later became Sikorsky Aircraft Div. of United Aircraft Corp. Sikorsky retired as engineering manager in 1957 but had remained consultant. His honors included National Defense Transportation Award in 1953, first Dr. Alexander Klemin Award of American Helicopter Society, and National Medal of Science. (Hailey, W Post, 10/27/72)
Assignment by President Nixon of Gen. Horace M. Wade, Chief of Staff, Supreme Hq. Allied Powers Europe, as Vice Chief of Staff, United States Air Force, was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird, (dod Release 195-72)
Two-man crew of Air Force F-lll fighter-bomber aircraft bailed out safely after explosion in aircraft during flight from Mountain Home Air Force Base, Idaho. Aircraft crashed in Nevada. Accident was being investigated. (W Post, 6/21/72, A5)
Air Force Systems Command announced award of $142 000 to North American Rockwell Corp. and $53 000 to Sperry Univac Systems Div. for study of man-machine relationships in remotely piloted vehicles (rpv) designed for air-to-ground missions. Study would define advantages and disadvantages of man’s presence in rpv concept, (afsc Release 252.72)
President Nixon met with delegation of physicians from People’s Republic of China at White House. Delegation was beginning three-week tour of U.S. as guests of National Academy of Sciences Institute of Medicine and American Medical Assn. (PD, 10/16/72, 1518)
Astronautics & Aeronautics editorial by Courtland D. Perkins, Chairman of Princeton Univ. Dept, of Aerospace and Mechanical Sciences, urged support of space shuttle program because it was “natural development of the nasa mission to advance space technology,” which “takes advantage of the high competence in technical and operational management of large space-oriented systems now fully developed within NASA.” Program provided launch capability for nearly all manned and unmanned space programs, would eliminate “patchwork, disparate stable of boosters and facilities,” and was “one of only a few national programs that will continue growth in the various fields of high technology.” (A&A, 6/72, 20-1)
Vice President Spiro T. Agnew scored Senate critics of President Nixon’s decision to proceed with development of space shuttle in speech before Florida Jaycees state convention in Daytona Beach: “They would, in effect, bring to a virtual halt this country’s technological progress in a field which has already proved of enormous benefit to mankind and holds even greater promise for the future. Worse, they would have us abandon our hard-won leadership in an area where United States ingenuity and creativity visibly overcame the lead of our principal world competitor and proved the American free enterprise system is still Number One when the chips are down.” (Text)
Air Force was sponsoring “fly-off” of new attack aircraft prototypes at Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., to determine best aircraft, Wall Street Journal reported. Competition was “essential element” of Air Force A-X (attack-aircraft, experimental) program designed to produce new aircraft for supporting ground troops in battle at lowest possible cost. (Levine, WSJ, 11/27/72, 10)
Air Force Systems Command successfully completed two subsystem tests of new high-altitude supersonic target (hast) missile at its Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin Air Force Base, Fla. Tests over Gulf of Mexico used lightweight prototype target. First test was aerial recovery of HAST recovery test vehicle; payload test vehicle was towed by F-4 Phantom aircraft in second test, hast was highly maneuverable target missile with mach 4 speed and 10 000- to 30 000-m (35 000- to 100 000-ft) altitude. First powered missile would be delivered to adtc in December, (afsc Newsreview, 12/72, 3) November 7:	Annual Revolution Day parade in Moscow featured only muted display of military power. One of leading floats reproduced Pravda headline requesting public support for U.S.-U.S.S.R. agreements signed during year. Politburo members, led by Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev, reviewed display but only speaker was Defense Minister Andrey Grechko, who called for “peaceful coexistence of states with different social systems.” No new weapons were shown. (Seeger, LA Times, 11/8/72, 19)
Air Force F-lll swing-wing jet bomber aircraft was lost over Vietnam on first day of F-llls’ return to combat in Indochina since 1968. North Vietnam later claimed it had shot aircraft down but Dept, of Defense said it was unable to explain disappearance. (W Post, 10/3/72, A25)
New York Times science editor Walter S. Sullivan had been named one of three winners of 1972 science writing awards sponsored by American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and Westinghouse Education Foundation, New York Times reported. Sullivan had won award for third time. Award was for his series “The Einstein Papers.” Other winners were Dennis L. Meredith, science editor at Univ. of Rhode Island, and Eugene Kinkead, associate editor of New Yorker. (NYT, 12/14/72)
Discovery through infrared measurements that Titan, largest of Saturn’s six moons, had minimum temperature of 205 K (—90°F), same as atmosphere in which life originated on earth 2 billion yrs ago, was discussed by Cornell Univ. astronomer Dr. Carl E. Sagan in interview published by Washington Post. Discovery had been made by Cornell Univ. and Univ. of Minnesota astronomers using infrared measurements. Titan was about 1.5 billion km (900 million mi) from sun and received only one percent of sunlight that earth received. “We have to ask ourselves what kind of a planet would make this atmosphere so far from sun. The only answer we have been able to come up with is something identical to our primeval earth. Possible life form on Titan would not be earthlike, “but it would be earth chauvinism to think that no form of life whatever could survive so far off in the solar system.” Dr. Sagan believed Titan was made up of chemical ice, except for small molten core of radioactive rock. Core melted ice far below surface, forcing volcanic ice to surface, where it burst into brilliant red on contact with sun’s ultraviolet light. “We see Titan as a red disc through the telescopes, which is exactly what we get in the laboratory when we react methane, hydrogen, water ice, and ammonia with ultraviolet rays.” (O’Toole, W Post, 12/24/72, Al)
Designation of two new, lightweight, fighter prototype aircraft as YF-16 and YF-17 was announced by Secretary of the Air Force, Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr. YF-16, powered by one Pratt & Whitney F100 turbofan engine, had swept-wing, under-fuselage inlet, single vertical tail, and forebody strakes. YF-17, powered by two General Electric YJ101 turbojet engines, had twin tail, highly-swept-wing leading-edge extensions, and underwing side fuselage inlets. Both aircraft were expected to fly in early 1974. Air Force had no commitment to production. (dod Release 763—72)
Soviet delegation headed home after meeting with officials of North American Rockwell Corp. Aviation Services Div. at Bethany, Okla. Purpose of meeting was to discuss Soviet Yak-40 commuter aircraft. NR was considering purchase of Yak-40s for U.S. distribution. (AP, W Post, 10/28/72, A7)
NASA launched four-stage Trailblazer II reentry vehicle from Wallops Station to test chemical-injection method of eliminating radio blackout during reentry. Vehicle, launched for Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, carried 34-kg (75-lb) payload to 322-km (200-mi) altitude over Atlantic. Payload injected chemical into plasma surrounding vehicle during reentry and measured effectiveness of injection in eliminating blackout. Objective of AFCRL Trailblazer II program was to study techniques for improving transmission and reception of radio signals from aerospace vehicles during reentry. (WS Release 72-8)
The Air Force Space and Missiles Organization (samso) announced it was issuing a $1 334 319 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to TRW Systems Group, trw Inc., to maintain a history of all operational testing of Minuteman missiles, (dod Release 341—73)
The Air Force announced award of a $1 700 000 definitive contract to United Aircraft Corp. Pratt & Whitney Div. for fabrication of an advanced gas dynamic laser for the airborne laser laboratory of the Air Force Special Weapons Center at Kirkland Air Force Base, N. Mex. (dod Release 320—73)
Rapid detection of contaminated oxygen had been developed by researchers at the Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Contaminated oxygen, which could cause serious illness or death for high-altitude pilots, previously had been detected by analysis of samples at a regional laboratory. The new portable infrared and gas chromatographic analyzers would provide reliable analysis on the spot in 15 min. (afsc Release 014.73)
The Air Force announced award of a $59 000 000 firm-fixed-price contract to Boeing Co. for the first two 747B jet transport aircraft for the Advanced Airborne Command Post Program. If Congress appropriated funds, a total of seven 747Bs would replace EC—135 airborne command posts of the National Military Command System and Strategic Air Command. The seven would he first 747s used by Air Force, (dod Release 96-73)	‘
A “quiet but intense” debate was developing in the Dept, of Defense over which service would “dominate America’s nuclear arsenal and win the major share of appropriations,” the New York Times reported. In “the most serious challenge of Air Force primacy since the start of the nuclear era,” the Navy was pressing for construction of 12 Trident submarines with multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (mirvs). As a weapon system the Trident would be “more mobile and less vulnerable than icbm’s [intercontinental ballistic missiles] and more lethal than bombers.” The debate had remained “in the house” to date, but few believed it could be kept from Congress and the media. “The amounts involved are too large and Congressional hostility to what is considered excessive spending too pronounced.” (Middleton, NYT, 4/10/73, 16)
The U.S. Civil Service Commission ordered the Air Force to rehire A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a financial analyst who had been fired in 1970 after he had disclosed a $2-billion cost overrun on development of the Air Force C—5A jet transport. The Air Force also was ordered to pay Fitzgerald more than $100 000 in back pay. (Ripley, NYT, 9/19/73, 1)
President Nixon took his first ride in the new Spirit of ’76 presidential Boeing 707 jet aircraft. The aircraft, which replaced the 707 put into presidential service in 1962, had been flight-tested 100 hrs by the presidential pilot, Col. Ralph D. Albertazzi (usaf), before the President’s flight from Washington, D.C., to San Clemente, Calif, (upi, W Post, 2/9/73, 27; Boeing Co. pio)
Completion of nine test flights in the Air Force Systems Command Flight Dynamics Laboratory’s control-configured vehicle (ccv) program to produce a superstable aircraft was announced by afsc. The flights, to validate the Laboratory’s active-ride-control system design, were completed under part of a $4.1-million contract with Boeing Co. A second series of flights was expected to end in October. Tentative plans called for tests on fighter aircraft later, (afsc Release 051.73)
Sen. Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. (R-Conn.), told the press in Washington, D.C., that a hold had been ordered on the Air Force AX tactical fighter plane contract with Fairchild Industries, Inc. The Air Force had said Fairchild had won a $14-million contract to build 10 prototypes by outbidding Northrop Corp. but congressional critics had disagreed, saying Northrop could build the same aircraft more cheaply. The Air Force would conduct its own investigation. (AP, W Star & News, 2/7/73, A7)
m/g Vernon R. Turner, Director of Aircraft and Missiles in the Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Installations and Logistics), had been named Chief of Staff for the Air Force Systems Command, afsc Newsreview reported. He would succeed m/g Lew Allen, Jr., who had been assigned to the Central Intelligence Agency, (afsc Newsreview, 5/73, 2)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced the award of Air Force contracts to Fairchild Industries, Inc., and General Electric Co. to develop the A—X close air support aircraft. Fairchild Industries, Inc., would receive a $159 279 888 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to test prototype aircraft and to develop and build 10 pre-production A-10 aircraft for flight-testing. General Electric Co. would receive a $27 666 900 fixed-price-incentive firm contract to develop and deliver 32 TF-34 engines to power the A—10 aircraft, (dod Release 105—73)
The United Kingdom and the U.S.S.R. were negotiating for introduction of supersonic transport services in both countries, British Airways Chairman David Nicolson told a Washington, D.C., meeting of the Aviation/ Space Writers Assn. The U.K. also would begin talks with the People’s Republic of China toward inauguration of London-Peking air service before the year’s end. (AP, P Inq, h/^s/lN)
Univ. of Wisconsin psychologist Dr. David A. Grant visited the U.S.S.R. as the first U.S. scientist to participate in an exchange agreement between the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and its Soviet counterpart, All Union Znaniye [Knowledge] Society. Dr. Grant lectured in Moscow and Leningrad. (A A AS Bulletin, 6/73, 1) May 1:	The joint NASA-Navy board investigating the April 12 mid-air collision of NASA’s instrumented Convair 990 aircraft Galileo and a Navy P-3C Orion antisubmarine aircraft over Moffett Field, Calif., completed its investigation, forwarded its report to NASA and the Navy, and issued a statement: Both aircraft had been under visual flight rules (vfr) at the time of the accident; the P-3C was in the local landing pattern making touch-and-go landings and the Convair 990 was making a straight-in approach. “At initial contact with the control tower, the Convair 990 was cleared to continue for Runway 32 Right. At seven miles [11 km] the Convair 990 was again cleared to continue approach for the right runway. About three miles [5 km] out, the control tower operator cleared the Convair to land on Runway 32 Left. The Convair pilot acknowledged the new runway assignment. The control tower operator also cleared the P—3C to continue his approach to Runway 32 Left. It was the tower operator’s intention to land the Convair 990 on Runway 32 Right, but he mistakenly called the wrong runway.” There was no evidence that either pilot or the tower personnel were aware of the impending collision. (NASA Release 73-88)
Neilsen Engineering and Research, Inc., began testing the Ames Research Center-developed Randomdec computer-and-analysis method of application to detecting structural weakness in bridges. Under a NASA contract, monthly readings would be taken of bridges at the Highway 85 and 101 interchange in the San Francisco Bay area for one year. The experiment was jointly funded by NASA and the Federal Highway Administration. (nasa Release 73—161)
The Air Force was redesigning an F-15 jet fighter engine part for the third time, possibly creating a cost-delay in the $7.5-billion program, the Washington Evening Star and News reported. The Chief F-15 Project Engineer, l/c Frederick A. Rail, had said in an interview that the aircraft could perform satisfactorily at speeds and altitudes required for air-to-air combat and that the engine part redesign was to improve performance even further. Other sources had said the redesign had to succeed before the aircraft could perform as a fighter. (Kelly, W Star & News, 7/2/73)
The Department of Defense had furnished NASA photos of the crippled Skylab 1 Orbital Workshop after it was placed in orbit May 14, to help determine the status of the spacecraft, NASA told the press. Aviation Week & Space Technology later reported that Air Force tracking cameras in New Mexico had photographed the Workshop. The photos were not released publicly, (nasa pao; Av Wk, 5/21/73, 12)
Secretary of Transportation Claude S. Brinegar and Soviet Minister of Civil Aviation Boris P. Bugayev signed a protocol in Washington, D.C., to expand air service between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. Pan American World Airways, Inc., and the Soviet airline Aeroflot would have accelerated operating rights from and to New York, Washington, D.C., Moscow, and Leningrad, with optional intermediate points in Europe. (PD, 7/2/73, 831-2)
Rep. Leslie Aspin (D-Wis.) in a House statement requested the General Accounting Office to investigate a “secret agreement” between the Air Force and the Pratt & Whitney Div. of United Aircraft Corp. under which, he said, the Air Force had certified the F-15 jet fighter aircraft engine for production without ensuring that it met contract standards. As a result, Rep. Aspin said, “tens of millions of dollars in developmental costs have been passed on from Pratt & Whitney to the taxpayer.” (CR, 5/15/73, H3678)
The small, $240 000 guidance-control computers used in the Minuteman I nuclear missile force had been made available to public organizations by the Air Force, Science reported. For a $30 delivery fee, the general-purpose computers, one meter (three feet) in diameter, were being recycled to hospitals, laboratories, and universities to begin reprogramming for peaceful uses. The computers had become available because of the deployment of the Minuteman III multiple-warhead missiles. (Wade, Science, 3/2/73, 880)
The Air Force Aerospace Defense Command said in Colorado Springs, Colo., that 2897 man-made objects were orbiting the earth. The U.S. had orbited 1978 and the U.S.S.R., 843. (upi, NYT, 3/24/73, 7)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., and Trans World Airlines, Inc., announced a decision not to exercise their options to buy 13 Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft. The action was expected to lead American Airlines, Inc., and Eastern Airlines, Inc., to drop their options, the Washington Post reported later. Concorde options would then stand at 30, but lack of competitive pressure from U.S. airlines was likely to cause additional cancellations. Nine firm orders for Concorde were from the state-owned British Overseas Airways Corp. and Air France. Iran Air and People’s Republic of China had signed preliminary contracts for 5 Concordes but the Post said an order for only 14 aircraft could not sustain the Concorde production run. (Greer, Nossiter, W Post, 2/1/73, Al)
The Air Force announced a $3 547 890 firm-fixed-price contract award to Textron, Inc., Dalmo Victor Div. The contract was for aerospace ground equipment test sets applicable to the radar warning system for the F-105G, OV-1, and F-4E aircraft, (dod Release 277-73)
The last Air Force C-5A aircraft rolled off Lockheed Aircraft Corp.’s assembly line. The C-5A, world’s largest subsonic jet transport, had been plagued by problems during its development phase but had since proved its effectiveness as a materiel and troop carrier. (Atlanta JC, 2/1/73, 8)	_
Selection of Fairchild Industries, Inc., for full-scale development of the Air Force A-X specialized close air support aircraft was announced by Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force. The Fairchild A—10 had been selected after competitive evaluation with the Northrop A—9 aircraft. The Air Force would negotiate a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract with Fairchild for 10 preproduction aircraft. The full-production decision would be made late in 1975. (dod Release 36-73)
Award of a $6 826 250 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. for advanced development of an integrated aircraft propulsion control system was announced by the Air Force, (dod Release 165—73) April 6:	The U.S. and Brazil governments confirmed the Memorandum of Understanding signed by NASA and the Brazilian Institute for Space Research March 27. The agreement called for extension of a cooperative project in earth resources remote sensing, (nasa Release 73-82)
Sen. Barry M. Goldwater (R-Ariz.) received the Wright Brothers Memorial Trophy [see During October] at a Washington, D.C., dinner commemorating the 70th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first aircraft flight, made Dec. 17, 1903. Honored guests included Prof. Willy Messer-schmidt, German aircraft designer, and 85-year-old Grover Loening who had flown with Orville Wright in 1913 and 1914. (McCardle, W Post, 12/15/73, Dl)
The Coast Guard announced it would phase out its last two air cushion vehicles (acvs) in July. A Coast Guard spokesman told the press in San Francisco that acvs had met expectations but “we’ve just run out of money to operate them and they’re too old now.” (upi, NYT, 6/7/73, 19)
The Air Force had made the first major improvements in aircraft landing techniques in more than two decades with installation of solid-state instrument landing systems (ils) at six Air Force bases, the Air Force Systems Command announced. The new systems automatically transmitted signals that appeared on cockpit instruments to indicate the aircraft’s position in relation to the runway’s centerline and the pilot’s glide slope. They replaced failure-prone tube circuits and introduced longer system life, greater reliability, and easier maintenance, (afsc Release 035.73)
Associated Press quoted military sources in Brazil as saying the Brazilian Air Force had decided to buy $100-million worth of U.S. jet fighter aircraft. The order—for 48 Northrop F—5Es—was about double Brazil’s two most recent orders for arms from France, 16 Mirage Ills at $3 million each in 1970 and $2-million worth of French missiles more recently. {NYT, 5/31/73, 17)
The Anglo-French Concorde supersonic transport aircraft carried an 11 000-kg (24 000-lb) payload on a 6300-km (3900-mi), 3-hr 38-min flight-time journey from Toulouse, France, to the Madeira Islands and return. The distance flown equaled the distance between Washington, D.C., and Paris over which current scheduled flights took 7 hrs 42 min. (bac-Aerospatiale Release 6C/73)
Col. Bemt Balchen (usaf, Ret.), aviator and explorer who was chief pilot on Adm. Richard E. Byrd’s first South Pole flight in 1929, died in Mt. Kisco, N.Y., at age 74. From 1933 to 1935 Balchen had been chief pilot of the Ellsworth Antarctic Expedition and in 1935 to 1940 chief of inspection for Norwegian Airlines. He was President of Norwegian Airlines in 1946 when it became the parent company of Scandinavian Airlines System. In 1948 Col. Balchen was recalled to active duty in the Air Force and named commanding officer of the 10th Rescue Squadron at Fort Richardson, Alaska. (NYT, 10/19/73, 42)
U.S. patent No. 3 737 119 was granted to Princeton Univ. professor of aeronautical engineering Dr. Sin-i Cheng for a device to reduce supersonic aircraft sonic boom and improve SST flight performance. The device would create an antiboom jet with the same pressure as the flow around the aircraft and direct the jet toward the shock wave below. (Jones, NYT, 6/9/73; Who’s Who; Pat Off pio)
The Air Force would consider use of aerostats—tethered balloons that operated in galelike winds—to provide air defense radar surveillance of the U.S. southern perimeter, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Aerostats, operating at altitude of 3000 m (10 000 ft) could cover area and be effective against low-altitude surprise attacks in Air Force project Veto. Balloons also were attracting military and civil interest as modest-cost, long-endurance airborne platforms for battlefield reconnaissance and electronic intelligence and for modest-cost, quickly deployable communications and television relay or scientific observation. (Klass, Av Wk, 1/8/73, 36, 39)
Soviet Academicians Valery I. Popkov and Valentin A. Shteinberg visited the U.S. as the first Soviet participants in an exchange agreement between the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science and its Soviet counterpart, All Union Znaniye [Knowledge] Society. The first U.S. scientist had visited the U.S.S.R. under the agreement during April. {A A AS Bulletin, 6/73, 1)
The Air Force announced the award of a $39.6-million contract to the Raytheon Corp. for construction of a large, new phased-array radar station, code-named Cobra Dane, at Semya Air Force Station in the Aleutian Islands. Cobra Dane would be part of the Air Force worldwide tracking program to trace space objects. An Aerospace Defense Command spokesman said that the total cost of the installation would be about $60 million. It would be operational in 1976. (Kelly, W Star & News, 6/7/73, A15)
The Pratt & Whitney engine designed for the Air Force F—15 Eagle fighter aircraft passed a 150-hr endurance test on the third try at West Palm Beach, Fla. The success cleared the way for approval of a production contract, (upi, NYT, 10/14/73, 7)
The sky show “When Earth Became a Planet” opened at the American Museum-Hayden Planetarium to mark the 500th anniversary of the birth of Polish physician, economist, statesman, and astronomer Nicholas Copernicus. Copernicus, born in 1473, taught that the sun was the center of the solar system. The theory had paved the way for the work of Kepler, Galileo, Newton, and others who eventually made space age possible. (Am Mus-Hayden Planetarium Release)
The U.S.S.R. had successfully flight-tested missiles with multiple warheads that could be directed to separate targets, Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, told a Washington, D.C., press conference. One of the intercontinental missiles, the SS—18, had carried at least six hydrogen warheads in the one-megaton range. (Binder, NYT, 8/18/73, 1)
The Air Force announced the award of a $2 352 060 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for advanced development of conceptual hardware for an undesignated lightweight fighter aircraft, (dod Release 364-73)
Cost-plus-fixed-fee contract awards for demonstrator programs for turbofan engine technology were announced by the Air Force: $6 080 000 to United Aircraft Corp. and $1 141 633 to Teledyne Industries, Inc. (dod Release 193—73)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., Secretary of the Air Force, announced that the Air Force had received congressional approval to proceed with the FY 1973 production program of 30 F-15 air superiority fighter aircraft. Four test aircraft had flown 270 successful hours since July. Production of an additional 77 was planned for FY 1974, pending congressional approval, (dod Release 101-73)
Maryland State Police officials ordered troopers to search the sky for any abnormal light phenomena after receiving hundreds of reports of lights in the sky. One report came from a State Police helicopter pilot, who said he had seen a “very large” airborne vehicle with bright lights. Flight controllers at Andrews Air Force Base, Md., later said the object might have been a “special experimental aircraft testing an innovative lighting system for nasa.” (B Sun, 10/18/73, A3)
Sen. Harry F. Byrd, Jr. (Ind—Va.), introduced S. 328 to limit the amount payable in advance on any contract signed by NASA, the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Coast Guard to $20 million. (CR, 1/11/73, S427)
Developing technologies in short-haul air transportation were discussed by Rep. Silvio O. Conte (R-Mass.) in a speech before the Short-Haul Air Transportation—STOL Symposium in McLean, Va.: “Steep approaching, quiet, short-runway aircraft are now appearing on the drawing boards. The 45-passenger DeHavilland DHC-7, able to operate from short runways quietly and economically, is scheduled to appear by the mid-70’s. The Air Force is going ahead with construction of two prototype jet STOL [short takeoff and landing] transports from which technical fallout is inevitable. The major airframe manufacturers are seriously studying the type of short-haul aircraft that can meet the environmental and market demands of the next decade.” NASA was developing a clean, quiet experimental engine. “Of all things necessary for a practical and acceptable short-haul aircraft to meet our future transportation needs, a quiet engine is the most crucial.” (CR, 4/19/73, E2581-2)
National Park Service officials blamed sonic booms for damage to rock formations at Death Valley National Monument where Air Force jet pilots flew low over the desert floor to claim they had flown below sea level, United Press International reported. The Air Force had agreed in 1971 to avoid monuments or parks listed by Assistant Interior Secretary Nathaniel P. Reed as “fragile environment,” but the agreement had not worked in Death Valley as fliers found the “urge to zoom near desert floor irresistible.” (upi, TV Post, 1/11/73, A2) January 12:	Oao 3 (Copernicus) Orbiting Astronomical Observatory (launched Aug. 21, 1972, from Eastern Test Range) was adjudged successful by NASA. The spacecraft had completed 2000 earth orbits and all systems had operated satisfactorily. Oao 3 had obtained high-resolution spectra of stars in the ultraviolet range and investigated composition, density, and physical state of matter in interstellar space. (NASA prog off)
Air Force Base, Fla., had been designated the Skylab launch site medical facility. (Missileer, 5/11/73, 1)
Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, had directed the Air Force to plan safe demonstration launches of four Minuteman II missiles without warheads from operational silos in Montana during the winter of 1974-75, the Dept, of Defense announced. In Project Giant Patriot, the missiles would enter space shortly after launch and their trajectory would carry them up to 560 km (350 mi) over portions of Montana, Idaho, Washington, Oregon, and California en route to an ocean target in the Phoenix Islands, southwest of the Hawaiian Islands. No nuclear components would be carried; a safety destruction package would be carried in place of the normal warhead. The launches were to provide important test data and demonstrate the effectiveness and reliability of the Minuteman strategic deterrent force, (dod Release 615-73)
Jet aircraft pollution would be measured under a $1.1-million NASA contract awarded to United Air Lines, Inc., NASA announced. Under the cost-plus-fixed-fee contract, United would design, develop, test, and fly a Boeing 747—equipped to measure dust particles and gases—to determine the effects of jet exhaust on the natural environment, weather, and human health and to measure changes in the level of the ozone shielding people on the earth from solar ultraviolet radiation. Flights would be made over the continental U.S. and Hawaii in addition to international ' flights by another 747 under a subcontract with Pan American World Airways, Inc. The instruments were expected to be installed by the end of 1975. NASA would work closely with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to correlate study results, (nasa Release 74-20)
A. Ernest Fitzgerald, a financial analyst who had been fired from the Air Force after he exposed a $2-billion cost overrun in the development of the C-5A jet transport, filed a $3.5-million damage suit against Dept, of Defense and Air Force officials. The Civil Service Commission had ordered the Air Force to rehire Fitzgerald 19 Sept. 1973. (W Star-News, 26 Jan 74, A3)
A multibillion dollar competition between the U.S. and France was being waged over which country would produce the new generation of fighter aircraft for the Western European allies, the New York Times reported. To the victor would go one of the largest aircraft export sales in history, the possibility of producing 2006 or more aircraft worth between $10 billion and $15 billion. To replace their 10-yr-old, U.S.-built F-104 Star-fighter, the Europeans would like a low-cost, high-performance fighter that could meet military requirements through the 1990s. The U.S. was offering versions of the lightweight fighter—the General Dynamics Corp. YF-16 and the Northrop Corp. YF-17, now in competition for an Air Force production contract [see 9 June]—while the French were offering an improved version of the F—1 Mirage. Pentagon officials claimed both the YF-16 and YF—17 were superior to the Mirage in acceleration and maneuverability despite the more powerful engine in the French aircraft. The competition would probably be decided as much on economic and political grounds as by military considerations. The French argued that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies should “buy European” and maintain European solidarity. The U.S. emphasized standardization of weapons within NATO and the future willingness of the U.S. to maintain forces in Western Europe. Although the immediate potential customers—Belgium, The Netherlands, Norway, and Denmark—would need about 300 aircraft, American officials were envisaging even larger markets in other West European countries and the world market. (Finney, NYT, 21 July 74, 3)
The Air Force Air Weather Service began operational testing of the Airborne Weather Reconnaissance System (awrs) aircraft over the Gulf and East Coasts. The modified WC-130 aircraft—using the most advanced meteorological and atmospheric sensors to provide continuous accurate measurements of wind speed and direction, temperature, pressure, and dewpoint-humidity at flight levels—would study the structure and internal forces of hurricanes, storms, and other atmospheric phenomena. The aircraft also carried the first airborne, integrated Omega-inertial navigation system for positional accuracies of about 2 km on a 6000-km overwater mission, (afsc Release oip 116.74)
Northrop Corp.’s YF-17 lightweight tactical fighter prototype aircraft made its first flight, from Edwards Air Force Base. The mach 2 twin-engine jet remained aloft for 1 hr 5 min, reaching an altitude of 5500 m and a maximum speed of 740 km per hr. All flight objectives were met. The YF-17 joined the General Dynamics Corp. YF—16, which had made its first flight 2 Feb., in the lightweight fighter flight-test program. The two designs were being evaluated by the Air Force for possible full-scale development as the new air combat fighter, (afsc Newsreview, July 74,4)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 553 500 costplusincentivefee contract to Avco Corp. for design, development, and testing of a space reentry vehicle for the reentry vehicle nosetip test program, (dod Release 18-74)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., and Trans World Airlines, Inc., each petitioned the Civil Aeronautics Board for subsidies. Pan Am sought a $195-million-a-year mail subsidy because of a pending financial crisis following six years of losses, including an expected net loss of $65 million in 1974. In addition to a huge debt, Pan Am had been hit by foreign competition, sharp drops in traffic, overcapacity (half-empty Boeing 747 transports), and soaring costs, including a $200-million annual increase in fuel costs, twa asked a temporary subsidy to offset fuel costs, estimating 1974 international losses would be $47 million— in contrast to a 1973 profit of $19.5 million. On 2 April the Dept, of Justice and Dept, of Transportation had discouraged Pan Am and TWA discussions of pooling transatlantic operations as an economy measure, telling CAB that discussions were premature. (O’Hanlon, Fortune, Oct 74, 123-7, 212-6; cab Doc Section, Docs 26560 & 26563; W Star-News, 3 April 74, B9)
The Air Force announced the award of a $1 348 414 contract to General Electric Co. for the design, development, and testing of a space reentry vehicle for the reentry vehicle nosetip test program, (dod Release 31—74)
A one-fifth scale model of a large portion of the Air Force B-l swing-wing strategic bomber had been tested in transonic and supersonic wind tunnels at the Air Force Systems Command’s Arnold Engineering Development Center, afsc announced. The tests verified inputs to the computer control system that adjusted the B-l’s double inlets for an adequate air supply to the engines during flight maneuvers. Test data also would be used to optimize the inlets’ boundary-layer control, (afsc Release oip 196.73)
President Nixon announced his intention to nominate Gen. George S. Brown, Air Force Chief of Staff, as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff succeeding Adm. Thomas H. Moorer, who was retiring. The President would nominate Gen. David C. Jones to replace Gen. Brown as Air Force Chief of Staff. The nominations were submitted to the Senate 15 May. {PD, 20 May 74, 527, 529)
The Air Force announced the Aeronautical Systems Div. was awarding a $4 000 000 firm fixed-price contract to Northrop Corp. Aircraft Div. for the YF-17 lightweight fighter aircraft transition program. ASD was also awarding $4 000 000 to General Dynamics Corp. Convair Aerospace Div. for the YF-16 transition program, (dod Release 368-74)
The first of two C-130 transport aircraft with experimental boron-epoxy composite reinforced wing midsections was delivered to the Air Force to begin three years of tests. The joint nasa-tjsaf flight evaluation program was to demonstrate the fatigue resistance and weight reductions possible when the metal wing structures were reinforced with a composite of boron filaments embedded in an epoxy resin. Lockheed Aircraft Corp. would make periodic inspections and report to NASA and the Air Force, (nasa Release 74-290)
The Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory had awarded contracts to three companies to make configuration studies for an advanced fighter technology integration (afti) aircraft, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported: $750 000 to McDonnell Douglas Corp., $608 000 to Rockwell International Corp., and $597 000 to Fairchild Republic Co. The studies were the first step in designing a small, low-cost, high-technology demonstration aircraft in the initial phase of the usaf’s afti program. (Av Wk, 1 April 74,22)
Dr. Harriet G. Jenkins assumed her duties as Deputy Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs at NASA Hq. Dr. Jenkins would assist Dr. Dudley G. McConnell, Assistant Administrator for Equal Opportunity Programs, in agency-wide direction of both employee and contractor aspects of NASA equal opportunity programs. She had been an educational consultant for the Response to Educational Needs project of the Anacostia District of Washington, D.C., public schools and had served in the Berkeley, Calif., school system 20 yrs. (NASA Release 74-40)
The Air Force was making additional efforts in the application of boron and graphite composites in 1974—to take advantage of weight savings, higher performance, and lower costs—the Air Force Systems Command announced. Tests would include a full-sized composite wing for the YF-16 prototype lightweight fighter, a composite speedbrake for the F-15 air superiority fighter, and a composite outer wing for the A—7 attack fighter aircraft. The composite maneuver augmentation program called for the design, manufacture, and evaluation of an advanced composite wing on a remotely piloted test vehicle, (afsc Release oip 029.74)
Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense, announced plans to consider full-scale development of an air combat fighter (acf) as an alternative to costly tactical aircraft. The best option, he said, would be to follow the Air Force lightweight fighter prototype program-—including the YF—16 and YF—17—with an acf development program. Advocates later said the acf could defend bases from fighter attack while larger aircraft such as the F-4 and F—15 carried the battle to an enemy hundreds of kilometers away, (dod Release 171-74; AP, W Post, 30 April 74, A6)
Pan American World Airways, Inc., ordered a cockpit ground-proximity warning system installed on its entire 140-aircraft fleet. The device, designed by Sundstrand Data Control, Inc., would sound a loud “Whoop! Whoop! Pull up!” and flash a red light reading “terrain” if an aircraft was heading for a mountain slope or was too low on takeoff or landing. The decision to install the equipment had been hastened by recent aircraft accidents, including the 22 April crash of a Pan Am aircraft into a Bali, Indonesia, mountaintop, -which had killed 107 persons. (Witkin, NYT, 9 May 74)
The Air Force’s first flight-test B-l strategic bomber had been successfully mated with its wings iir Palmdale, Calif., the Air Force Systems Command announced. The B-l was being developed by prime contractor Rockwell International Corp. to provide a modern supersonic strategic manned bomber to replace the aging B-52. The B-l, designed to carry twice the payload of the B-52 at three times the speed, was equipped with movable fore and aft wings to carry out a variety of missions from both normal and short runways, in addition to low-level operation at high subsonic speeds and high-altitude supersonic flight, (afsc Release OIP 001.74)
The Air Force announced award of a $75 318 000 fixed-price-incentive, firm contract to Martin Marietta Corp. for Titan III launch services at Waterton, Colo.; Yandenberg, Calif.; and Cape Canaveral, Fla. (dod Release 2-74)
Dr. Karl G. Henize, scientist-astronaut, suffered a “landing mishap” while on instrument flight plan after flying his T-38 trainer aircraft from Ellington Air Force Base to Bergstrom afb, Tex. Dr. Henize was not injured. A wheel on the T-38 collapsed and the aircraft was damaged. (JSC Release 74-50; jsc Hist Off, interview)
A new Air Force air-traffic-control radar system that could track aircraft approaching a runway in heavy rain would be put into full production, the Air Force Systems Command announced. The an/tpn-19, to be produced by Raytheon Co., consisted of an operational shelter, an airport surveillance radar to detect aircraft within 97 km and direct them to final approach entry positions, and a precision-approach radar to guide aircraft along the 32-km final approach. The all-weather, $2 617 000 sysfem could be transported anywhere in the world and be operational within two hours, (afsc Release OIP 181.73)
French, Canadian, and U.S. scientists were participating in projects to expand Univ. of Hawaii facilities on top of 5000-m Mauna Kea into one of the world’s greatest centers for celestial observations. In addition to NASA’s planned 3-m infrared telescope announced 4 Feb., Hawaii had recently concluded an agreement with the National Research Council of France and the National Research Council of Canada for a $20-million enterprise to operate a new 3.8-m telescope for general astronomical observations. The university already had three telescopes on Mauna Kea. (Durdin, NYT, 14 Feb 74, 33 ; NASA Release 74-23)
U.S. trunkline air traffic rose to unexpected heights, but industry officials were hesitant to interpret gains during the first quarter of 1974 as a positive trend for the year. United Air Lines, Inc., revenue-passenger-miles rose 13.6% in March over March 1973; Delta Air Lines, Inc., 10.1%; and Eastern Airlines, Inc., 7.4%. Local service carriers also reported near-record traffic improvements for March, with many showing load factors above the 55% level, rather than the normal monthly 44%. High fuel costs, however, were forcing the load-factor level required for airlines to break even to all-time highs. International operations were an exception to the general rise: Pan American World Airways, Inc., reported a revenue-passenger-mile decline of 6.1% in system-wide scheduled operations for March; Trans World Airlines, Inc., a 10.9% dip. (Av Wk, 14 April 74, 29-30) April 1974
The Dept, of Defense announced the Air Force was issuing a $1400000 fixed-price-incentive contract to General Electric Co. for engine refurbishment and increase in test hours for eight YJ-101 test engines planned for use in the YF—17 aircraft, (dod Release 59—74)
The YF-17 prototype lightweight fighter aircraft was rolled out at the Northrop Corp. plant in Hawthorne, Calif. The YF—17 and the YF-16 being built by General Dynamics Corp. marked the first Air Force effort to place more emphasis on hardware performance and less on paper studies by using an advance prototyping concept. The usaf would evaluate the YF—16 and YF-17 in a 12-mo flight-test program before making a commitment to production, (dod Release 131-74)
The Air Force successfully test-fired an intercontinental Minuteman I missile dropped from a C-5A transport aircraft flying 6100 m above the Pacific Ocean. The first successful air-drop firing followed drops of two inert missiles in a step toward development of an icbm with mobility in the air and on land. (Finney, NYT, 26 Oct 74; Aerospace Daily, 29 Oct 74)
Development of a two-man version of the F-5E International Fighter had been initiated by the Air Force, the Air Force Systems Command announced. Designated the F-5F and to be built by Northrop Corp., the two-seater would have the same performance and weapon capability as the single-seat F-5E but was to provide the capability of training fighter pilots in all aspects of fighter aircraft operations. The first test aircraft was expected to fly in September 1974. (afsc Release OIP 002.74)
A 12-story addition to the RCA Corp. building in Rockefeller Center in New York City would be constructed to use solar energy heat, rca announced. The $6-million addition, a management conference center, would use panels on its solid exterior surfaces to capture solar energy in the form of radiant heat, which would be stored and substituted for other forms of energy, (rca Release, 16 Jan 74)
Magnetic domain bubbles” being tested as computer memory devices could do mass memory jobs faster, cheaper, and more reliably than conventional devices and could store information for many years for long space journeys, the Air Force Systems Command reported. Dr. Millar Mier of AFSC believed the minute bubbles—densely packed in very thin, magnetic garnet material—would replace tape recorders and computer disc and drum memories in aircraft and spacecraft within a few years. The solid-state bubble bits of information were resistant to radiation and would remain stable during vehicle reentry into the atmosphere or operation in the Van Allen belts. A 10 000-bit test module delivered to the Air Force Avionics Laboratory in May was undergoing tests. (AFSC Release oip 138.74)
The Air Force had formally entered into an agreement with NASA on development of an experimental hypersonic research aircraft capable of mach 6 flight. The two agencies had agreed after a joint 1974— 75 study that “the combined objective and the national interest” would be best served by a joint hypersonic flight-test program. The agreement provided that the report of the joint study would be the baseline document for program development; that technology development and experimental tests would be completed in 1976 so preliminary design study could begin in FY1977; that personnel from both agencies would participate in all phases to the maximum extent practicable; and that an ad hoc steering committee would be established to prepare a project plan for use in vehicle procurement. (Memo of understanding, 10 Dec 75)
Private industry and government agencies in the U.S. and in Europe were investing money in designs and prototypes of giant dirigibles that could carry cargo and passengers more cheaply than conventional aircraft, Newsweek reported. In May a 9-m-wide helium-filled prototype dirigible named Skyship, shaped like a flying saucer, had been flight-tested at a Royal Air Force station in England; a flight model was expected to go into commercial operation within 3 yr. Shell Oil Co. had spent more than $1 million studying the possibility of developing dirigibles to transport natural gas, Newsweek said. The U.S. Air Force was investigating dirigibles as a means of ferrying missiles from silo to silo, and the Navy was studying their ability to track submarines. A reason for the resurgence of interest in lighter-than-air craft was the energy crisis. Airships require hardly any fuel to get aloft and use very little for propulsion, and they also produce less noise and less atmospheric pollution. New designs for dirigibles included the substitution of inert helium for highly flammable hydrogen as the lifting gas, and the replacement of the familiar cigar shape with other configurations to do away with the problem of bistability near the ground. (Newsweek, 2 June 75)
NASA awarded a $5.5 million cost-reimbursable contract to the Univ. of . Hawaii for construction of an infrared telescope facility on the summit of Mauna Kea, an extinct volcano on Hawaii Island. The contract covered the second part of a $6-million two-phase project covering design, construction, installation, and assembly of the facility. The 3-m infrared telescope, scheduled for 1977 completion, would be the world’s largest. The Univ. of Hawaii would operate it in support of NASA’s planetary exploration programs, particularly the 1977 Mariner mission to Jupiter and Saturn. The facility would provide a national capability of observing interstellar dust, exploding galaxies, and galactic nuclei in the middle and far infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. (NASA Release 75— 209)
National Science Foundation held in Chicago the first of 7 meetings scheduled nationwide to obtain public views on a Federal program for greater public involvement in science policy issues. Subsequent meetings would be held during Dec. in Atlanta, Dallas, Denver, San Francisco, Washington, D.C., and Boston. Oral and written statements presented at the meetings would be included in an NSF report to Congress. (SBD, 3 Dec 75, 173)
The National Science Foundation marked the 25th anniversary of its establishment at a dinner at the Dept, of State in Washington, D.C. Dr. Norman Hackerman, chairman of the National Science Board, presided at the dinner hosted by the 25-member board, the policy-making body of NSF. Among those present were many former board members, including the six charter members appointed by President Truman in 1950, and representatives of the scientific community, industry, and the executive and legislative branches of government. President Ford sent a message saluting NSF: “In the last quarter century the National Science Foundation has become the Nation’s principal agency for the support of basic research and education in all fields of scientific endeavor. The creation of the National Science Foundation represented a culmination of our national understanding of the role of science in our society. In the last two and a half decades, the Foundation has built a prestigious reputation for sound scientific exploration to improve the quality of life for all.” Dr. H. Guyford Stever, NSF Director, announced plans to establish an Alan T. Waterman Award for research and advanced study in the mathematical, physical, medical, biological, engineering, social, and other sciences. Dr. Waterman had been the first NSF Director. (NSF Release PR75—47)
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration had developed a new remote-sensing technique to “see” nitrogen oxide in the stratosphere, permitting scientists for the first time to calculate the actual rate at which the nitrogen compounds destroy stratospheric ozone. Much of the work on the ozone cycle had been theoretical, based on computer models and laboratory tests; seasonal variations in the stratosphere at high latitudes, revealed by spectrometers on jet aircraft, had not been predicted by theory, which meant that the computer models had not provided close simulation. The new technique, using a spectrometer to measure the light spectrum and isolate that portion caused by nitrogen dioxides, would permit routine checks on daily, seasonal, and latitudinal variations in the content of the stratosphere. The method would be applied by small automated instruments run by minicomputers at NOAA stations in Alaska, Samoa, Hawaii, and the South Pole, and at the Air Force base in Greenland. (NOAA Release 75—220)
Limitations imposed by the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT) agreements had made the development of the B-l bomber essential, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported Secretary of Defense James R. Schlesinger as telling Rep. Richard Bolling in an interview. Because the U.S. would be limited in megaton strike capability and approximately 60% of U.S. megatonnage was carried by bombers, it was essential to maintain a significant and highly effective bomber force. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 2)
The Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported that the Air Force had awarded an estimated $17 649 042 contract to McDonnell Douglas Corp.’s Douglas Aircraft Co. for the development, manufacture, and testing of a wide-body cargo aircraft fuselage segment using adhesive bonding instead of conventional riveting of the primary structures. Either the YC—14 or the YC—15, advanced medium-short-takeoff-and-landing transport prototypes, would be used as the engineering baseline against which the technology could be developed and evaluated. The contract was AFSC’s primary adhesively bonded structure (PABST) portion of the advanced metallic structures (AMS) program to improve structured integrity and durability of future aircraft while minimizing weight and costs of acquisition and maintenance. (AFSC Newsreview, May 75, 4)
Soviet cosmonauts Valery Kubasov and Gen. Aleksey Leonov arrived in Washington, D.C., to begin a 2-wk tour of the U.S. by visiting President Ford at the White House and touring the capital. The American crew of the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project and their wives would accompany the cosmonauts on the tour, which would also visit Chicago, Omaha, Salt Lake City, San Francisco, Reno, Lake Tahoe, Los Angeles, Atlanta, Nashville, and New York City. The cosmonauts were accompanied by their wives and three of their children, as well ' as the director of cosmonaut training, Gen. Vladimir Shatalov, plus a support staff and Soviet journalists. The Apollo-Soyuz crews had completed a 2-wk tour of the Soviet Union 4 Oct. (NASA Release 75-276; SBD, 14 Oct 75, 216)
A backup Skylab Orbital Workshop and an airlock module and multiple docking adapter would be shipped by barge to Washington, D.C., for display at the Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. Stripped of all equipment that could be used for future programs, the workshop would be cut into three sections for transport; two doors would be added and the floor strengthened to accommodate the flow of tourists. The museum was scheduled to open 4 July 1976. (MSFC Release 75-189)
The Air Force’s new B —1 bomber broke the sound barrier for the first time while making its sixth flight test, from Vandenberg Air Force Base. During the 6-hr 23-min mission, the B—1 also took on fuel from a KC—135 tanker for the first time and opened its weapons-bay doors. (AP, W Star, 11 April 75, 4)
Johnson Space Center’s Roundup reported that Scott Aviation Co. would begin commercial production of a new lightweight breathing system for firefighters based on concepts and hardware developed by JSC engineers. Called the Scott Air-Pak 4.5, the new apparatus was the first major improvement in compressed-air breathing systems in more than 20 yrs. New features of the equipment included a 40% weight reduction; an improved pack frame and harness, with the unit’s weight carried on the hips rather than the shoulders; and a redesigned face mask for better vision. NASA’s part in developing the apparatus had begun in 1970 when a national meeting of municipal officials identified the need for an improved system as their highest priority, NASA’s effprt had been carried out at JSC as an engineering applications project under the Technology Utilization Program. After a design had been chosen from a number of candidates, prototype units were successfully field tested under actual firefighting conditions by the Houston, New York City, and Los Angeles fire departments. Scott Aviation was the first manufacturer to announce commercial production of an apparatus based on NASA effort. (JSC Roundup, 26 Sept 75, 4)
The Department of Defense announced the award of a $1 500 000 costplus-incentive-fee contract to General Dynamics Corp. for launch services for the Atlas E and F vehicles at Vandenberg Air Force Base. (DOD Release 8—75)
NASA announced appointment of Gonzalo Fernandez as Assistant Associate Administrator for Center Operations, replacing Raymond A. Kline, appointed Assistant Administrator of Institutional Management. Fernandez, who came to NASA from the Air Force, would be responsible for the Offices of Administrative Data Processing Management, Information Systems, NASA Aircraft, Safety and Environmental Health, and Operating Systems. (NASA anno, 16 Sept 75)
The Air Force Systems Command reported that researchers at the Air Force Avionics Laboratory were testing fiber optics—thin strands of glass that transmit light—to transmit avionic signals from one point to another in an aircraft. Fiber-optics data transfer began with an electronic signal that was converted into light by a transducer; the light traveled through glass strands and was reconverted at the other end into electrical signals, with minimal loss of energy. AFSC quoted Avionics Lab researchers as saying that, unlike the usual copper wire, fiber optics were unaffected by static from nearby electrical equipment and were immune to lightning, nuclear radiation, electrical sparking, fires, and grounding problems. Because extensive lab testing was nearly complete, the next step would be a low-cost flight-test program, perhaps on a remotely piloted vehicle (RPV). The Avionics Lab also had awarded contracts to develop passive optical couplers, a fiber-optics data bus, and a wideband fiber-optics system that would handle large data rates. The proposed Air Force Advanced Development Program could put a total fiber-optics system on manned and unmanned aerospace vehicles by 1980. (AFSC Release OIP 087.75)
The Air Force had successfully test-flown an F—111D turbofan jet engine with all-composite third-stage fan blades 40% lighter than conventional titanium fan blades. The tests—made at Edwards Air Force Base—marked the first military flight evaluation of a rotating structural engine component made of composite materials. Objectives of the flight-test program were to determine long-term environmental effects on the material and to verify potential operation and maintenance cost benefits. Use of composites could provide a 15 to 20% weight savings in jet engines, allowing increased payloads or extended range. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 75, 1)
Pan American World Airways announced the industry’s first nonstop flights from New York and Los Angeles to Tokyo, beginning early in 1976. The announcement came a day after a new Boeing 747SP jetliner had made a demonstration flight New York to Tokyo in 13 hrs 33 min, fastest commercial service to Japan from the U.S. Current commercial time on that route, which required a refueling stop, was more than 17 hr. The Boeing 747SP (special performance) was 100 seats smaller than the 747-21, but had the same fuel capacity and the same four engines as the larger model. The SP had been capable of cruising faster and higher than any other commercial jetliner and had a range of 1200 km beyond that of the standard 747. (B Sun, 15 Nov 75, A9)
In NASA’s 5—10 yr Global Air Sampling Program (GASP), a second instrumented Boeing 747 jumbo aircraft began sampling flights monitoring pollution in the earth’s atmosphere. GASP data on carbon dioxide, ozone, water vapor, and particles larger than 0.3 microns would help determine whether the amount of ozone was being altered, whether vapor trails from jets contributed to cloud cover, and the amount of pollution caused by aircraft. The first GASP-instrumented 747 began flights in December 1974. Four aircraft—one each from United Airlines, Pan American, Qantas Airways, and Scandinavian Airlines—would be instrumented for global sampling. (NASA Release 75— 60)
The Air Force System Command’s Materials Laboratory had successfully static-tested a full-scale F—15 aircraft wing constructed of advanced composite materials, AFSC announced. The wing had withstood a maximum load 45% greater than expected during actual flight, before giving way at the point where the titanium rear spur flange and upper skin were bolted together. The composite wing, 18% lighter than an allmetal wing, was made of a brown epoxy thin honeycomb sandwich material reinforced with graphite-epoxy stiffeners. The ribs were graphite-epoxy and the spurs were metal. The wing, the largest aircraft wing ever built of advanced composite materials, was 4.9 m wide at the root chord and 1.5 m wide at the tip chord, and had a 4.3-m span. The program had begun in May 1971 with an $8.2-million contract award to McDonnell Douglas Corp. for development of the wing, which was expected to reduce fuel requirements by increasing range, speed, and maneuverability. (AFSC Release OIP 021.75)
The Air Force Systems Command announced the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils half the size of a C—5 aircraft’s wing to recover remotely piloted vehicles (RPVs). RPVs were currently retrieved by recovery helicopters, a reliable but expensive system affected by weather conditions. The parafoil, part of an AF effort to find cheaper ways to land RPVs, was a high glider which, when deployed like a parachute, would take on an airfoil shape and descend at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. Under the terms of the contract Aero would design and build two 12- by 24-m parafoils for testing scheduled to begin in May. (AFSC Release OIP 81.75)
An A— 7D aircraft with a DIGITAC digital flight-control system—first of its kind to be flight-tested by the Air Force—made its first flight at Air Force Flight Test Center. DIGITAC was part of a program to investigate the feasibility of installing digital flight-control systems in current and future tactical fighter aircraft. The system, featuring a pilot-selectable control mode, would increase flight-control reliability with its component self-test capability, improve combat effectiveness by permitting multimode aircrafthandling qualities, and cost less because of the system’s inherent flexibility and the general availability of its digital components. (AFSC Release OIP 057.75)
Department of Defense said the Navy had understated the long-term cost of building the new F—18 carrier aircraft by at least $1.6 billion, the Washington Star reported. The Star said the Navy had chosen the F—18 under pressure from DOD and Congress, after the Air Force selected the F—16 for its low-cost fighter instead of the fighter version of the F—18. At the time the Navy estimated the cost of each F—18 as $7.8 million, or $2.6 billion to develop and produce the first 128 F—18s; however, the Star reported, a DOD analysis found the 5-yr costs would be closer to $4.3 billion. The future of the program was under discussion. One alternative would be to raise projected Navy budget to accommodate the increased costs of the F—18. Another would be for the Navy to drop F—18 and go back to industry to design and develop a lower cost fighter that would fit into the original budget and, in the interim, to let the Navy buy fighter-bombers from McDonnell Douglas to meet its fleet-modernization needs in the early 1980s. (Finney, W Star, 17 July 75, A16) 17 July. Pioneer 10, launched 2 March 1972 and traveling out of the solar system at 43 200 km per hr, was operating normally despite a report that the spacecraft was making unexplained orientation changes [see 11 June]. The apparent changes were caused when, during a routine change in spacecraft orientation on 6 May, the spacecraft’s star sensor made an undetected shift in its lock from the star Betelgeuse to the star Sirius. This shift twisted the frame of reference for measuring direction, and for changing the direction of spin-axis pointing. As a result, onboard and ground computers had recorded a gradual northward shift of the spin axis relative to the earth’s motion around the sun. Also, when the thrusters were fired to move the spin axis with the earth’s east-west course, “southward” impulses were necessary. No loss of data had occurred, and techniques were being designed to verify star reference during intervals when the star sensor was used. (ARC Astrogram, 17 July 75, 1)
The Air Force continued its development of the remotely piloted vehicle (RPV), the Air Force Systems Command’s Newsreview reported. The Air Force awarded three 1-yr firm-fixed-price contracts for definition Studies of an advanced remotely piloted vehicle and associated elements. Rockwell International Corp. received $699 684; Boeing Aerospace Co., $646 750; and Northrop Corp., $499 614, to produce designs of an RPV for use in the 1980s. The system was expected to provide an improved cost-effective capability of carrying out electronic warfare, reconnaissance, and strike missions. The three companies would define the vehicle and its avionics, options of launch and recovery, ground-support elements, and systems maintenance to permit rapid mission turnaround. The Newsreview reported the award of a $100 000 contract to Aero Co. to study the feasibility of using parafoils, half the size of a C—5 aircraft wing, to recover RPVs returning from missions. Aero Co. would design and build for flight testing two 12- by 24-m parafoils— high-glide parachutes that, when deployed like a parachute, take on airfoil characteristics, descending at a rate of 1 m forward for each 0.3-m loss in altitude. (AFSC Newsreview, June 75, 1) July 1975
Air Force Systems Command’s Aeronautical Systems Div. announced plans to begin flight evaluation of fan blades constructed of advanced composite materials. The new blades, made of an aluminum alloy matrix enforced by silicon carbide-coated boron filaments, would be flown on an F— 111 aircraft over a 2- to 3-yr period at the Air Force Flight Test Center in California. The composite blades, 40% lighter than conventional titanium blades, were expected to increase operating efficiency by reducing rotating mass, increasing tip speeds, and eliminating part-span shrouds. (AFSC Release OIP
Soviet and American fraternizing at Cape Canaveral and Florida’s Disney World in recent weeks were evidence of how much the world had changed since the 1950s, a New York Times editorial said. “What was once a ferociously pursued race in space has given way to detente in space,” with the preparations for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project in July. Skeptics, complaining that Moscow would be the “big net gainer” in the project, were correct only from a narrow intelligence point of view. They missed the main point for detente in space. Neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union had resources sufficient for fruitful human activity in space for decades ahead. “It is simply enlightened selfishness for Washington and Moscow to work together in space.” And this was only a start. What was needed even more was “broadly based cooperation in space efforts embracing the personnel and talents of all nations for the benefit of all humanity.” (NYT, 15 Feb 75. 28)
The U.S.—represented by Dr. James R. Schlesinger, Secretary of Defense—signed a memorandum of understanding with Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Norway that finalized selection of the General Dynamics Corp. F —16 air combat fighter as the four countries’ replacement for the F—104G. The U.S. and the four countries entered into a co-production agreement under which the Europeans planned to produce up to 348 aircraft—at a value of $2.1 billion—for their own use. The proposal permitted aircraft manufacturers in these countries to share in the manufacture of aircraft and parts for U.S. and third world sales, which could more than offset their initial investment [see 2 June]. The Europeans would share logistics, maintenance, and training facilities in Europe. The agreement would help enable the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and allied forces to standardize their weapon systems. The U.S. Air Force had announced earlier plans to procure at least 650 F—16s, with a large number of these deployed to European bases. (AFSC Release 280—75)
Dr. Detlev W. Bronk, president emeritus of Rockefeller Univ. and former president of Johns Hopkins Univ., the Natl. Academy of Sciences, and the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science, died at the age of 78. A scientist who had been adviser to Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy, Dr. Bronk had been credited with formulating the modem theory of the science of biophysics—application of physics to the life systems of plants and animals. He had been chairman of the National Research Council from 1946 to 1950, and president of the National Science Foundation for three terms from 1950 to 1960. In 1964 he had received the Medal of Freedom, highest civilian award to be granted by a U.S. President. (B Sun, 18 Nov 75, A13; NYT, 18 Nov 75, 38M)
The Air Force had awarded a $28.5-million contract to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. for design, development, and testing of a strengthened wing for the C — 5A transport airplane that the New York Times called a symbol of Pentagon “cost overruns.” Aim of the original C—5A contract with Lockheed had been to produce a transport capable of carrying a 99 700-kg payload and having a service life of 30 000 flying hours. Even before it had gone into full operational use, the C—5A wing had been shown in static ground tests to be too weak to carry the prescribed load and had developed fatigue cracks in the metal structure. The cracking had been attributed to high stress levels inherent in the design, ineffective fasteners on the wing panels, and difficulty in mating the stiff contours of the wing and joints during manufacture. The Air Force had paid $4.5 billion on delivery of 81 C—5As; it had already spent more than $198 million through June 1975 correcting deficiencies for which Lockheed was responsible under the original contract, renegotiated when Lockheed was in financial difficulty in 1971. In addition to $1.3 billion for fixing the wings, the AF planned to spend another $200 million to fix other defects. Cost of the repairs would nearly double the original AF estimate of $3.4 billion for the C—5A program. However, without the repairs, the C—5A fleet would have to be grounded beginning in 1979 when the flying-time safety limit had been reached. Because of the defects, service life had recently been re-estimated at 8750 hr and payload limit at 78 900 kg. (NYT, 15 Dec 75, 1; WSJ, 24 Dec 75, 3)
The Air Force’s prototype B— 1 strategic bomber successfully completed its second flight test at Air Force Flight Test Center. Primary objectives of the 3-hr 21-min flight included evaluation of the aircraft’s wing sweep control system, flying qualities in the initial climb, and power approach configuration. The auxiliary power unit was also evaluated and air-start tests were made. Following takeoff, the B—1 climbed to 3050 m, where its landing gear, flaps, and slats were retracted. After flying at low speeds with the wings in the full forward 15° position, the wings were swept 25°, and the aircraft climbed to 4900 m and conducted air-start tests at mach 0.7. The prototype then slowed to 463 km per hr and its speed brake was checked in a descent to traffic-pattern altitude. The B— 1 then landed safely at AFFTC. (AFSC Newsreview, March 75)
The National Transportation Safety Board reported that U.S. commercial airlines had the best safety record in 1975 since 1957, with only 42 accidents and a total of 124 deaths, 112 of those in the major air disaster of the year: the crash of an Eastern Airlines flight short of the runway at Kennedy International Airport in New York City on
Britain and France announced their decision to build no more Concorde supersonic jetliners beyond the 16 now under construction or in the air. After a meeting in London with France’s transport minister Marcel Cavaille, British industry minister Gerald Kaufman told a news conference that future projects would concentrate on less exotic subsonic aircraft that would stand a better chance of making money. The Concorde, a project begun by treaty in 1962, had already cost about $1.92 billion for research, design, and development; each plane, with support facilities, would cost about $49.6 million. Nine had been built and sold—five to British Airways, four to Air France—and, of those remaining, three would go to British Airways and two to Air France, while preliminary purchase agreements had been signed with Iran for two others. British Airways had begun supersonic commercial flights in Jan. 1976 with its Concordes between London and Bahrein; Air France had begun similar service at about the same time between Paris and Rio de Janeiro. On 24 May 1976, a trial service began from London and Paris to Dulles Inti. Airport at Washington, D.C. Banned by the New York Port Authority from landing at JFK Inti. Airport, pending results of environmental testing at Dulles, the Concorde was losing money for both its state-owned sponsors; Air France reported losses of from $30 to $32 million in the first 9 mo of Concorde operation. Potential customers for the Concorde had made it clear that they would be interested only in the Europe-to-New York City route, most lucrative of the international flights. Kaufman added that the two countries had not become disenchanted with supersonic transport even though their future plans were to build smaller planes; “the fact that you’re going for bread and butter now,” he said, “doesn’t mean that you’d be disenchanted with caviar later.” (ATT, 3 Nov 76, 61; W Post, 4 Nov 76, A-3; W Star, 3 Nov 76, A-5)
Physicists at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in Batavia, 111., discovered a new elementary particle, heaviest ever observed, the annual meeting of the American Physical Society was told. The investigators from Columbia Univ., the State Univ. of N.Y. at Stony Brook, and the Fermi lab said the “upsilon” particle raised the possibility that physics might never be able to identify any ultimate or basic building blocks of matter. The upsilon was discovered in debris of particles created by acceleration of a proton beam aimed at a beryllium target; the resulting collision produced a cluster of electron-positron pairs with a mass of 6 billion electron volts, more than 6 times that of the proton and 1.5 times that of any other particle. The report on the upsilon particle was a last-minute addition to the annual meeting’s agenda because the data were available only in the last few wk; first observed about 5 mo ago, the upsilon had been seen only 12 times so far, but was expected to require new thinking in theoretical physics. (B Sun, 6 Feb. 76, A-3; W Post, 9 Feb 76, A-3)
Astronomical observations and laboratory experiments spanning 16 yr had failed to detect any signals of life in outer space, the 142nd annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science was told. The session in Roston heard reports on a 4-galaxy scan using the largest radiotelescope in the world—the 600-m-dia. antenna at Arecibo, P.R.—from Dr. Carl Sagan of Cornell Univ. and his Cornell colleague, Dr. Frank Drake, director of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center at Arecibo. “Of the trillion stars we looked at in four galaxies,” Dr. Sagan said, “there is not a single one that at the time of our observation was devoting a major effort to communicate with us.” Another effort—a 4-yr scan by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory at Green Rank, W.Va., of 659 stars in the region of the Milky Way—had yielded negative results after analysis of 90% of the observations. However, fewer than a millionth of the stars in the Milky Way had been scanned, for very brief periods, at only a few wavelengths. Negative results did not rule out the possibility of receiving the looked-for signals some day, the meeting was told. (NYT, 21 Feb 76, 40; B Sun, 21 Feb 76, A-3; W Star, 20 Feb 76, A-3)
Long-term directions and opportunities in civil aviation—including passenger air travel by rotorcraft from small urban-center airports, or intercontinental air transportation on hypersonic craft rated environmentally acceptable—were projected in a NASA study, “Outlook for Aeronautics,” announced by the agency as the result of its study on the role it should play in research and development of aviation and the technical advances that might be needed. Relatively few major new developments could be expected through the early 1980s because of economic setbacks and environmental pressures, the agency said, but, with adequate research and technology investments, new opportunities should arise in the period 1985-2000. Demand for passenger transportation should grow from 250 million annually to about 1 billion annually by the year 2000; by the late 1980s, air traffic should exceed the capacity of the present airport system. Congestion should lead to development of short-haul aircraft using smaller airports; increasing costs would result in greater efficiency and economy with improved safety in subsonic aircraft, the report said. (NASA Release 76-78) During April: Air Force cold-weather tests of an air-cushion landing system for use on large transport aircraft were completed after 4 wk at a site in Canada. The device, which resembled an upside-down life raft installed under the fuselage, was made of rubber and nylon; it measured about 10 m long and about 4 m wide. The elastic container was filled with air from two engines mounted under the wings; air forced out through more than 6800 holes on the bottom surface created an air bearing between the landing surface and the trunk. The cushion system, successfully demonstrated in the late 1960s on a smaller single-engine aircraft, had the advantage of exerting a very small amount of pressure over the entire landing surface as contrasted to conventional landing systems. Further tests of the system would be conducted on the twin-engine short-takeoff-and-landing (STOL) aircraft. (AFSC Newsreview, Apr 76, 15)
The universe had been analyzed and found to be open, a group of astronomers told the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston. The director of Cornell Univ.’s national astronomy and ionosphere center, Dr. Frank Drake, said that the most recent astronomical data indicated that in about 30 billion years the universe would have changed, and no stars would appear in a night sky, having gathered into “Island Universes”—clusters of galaxies widely separated from each other. Computer analysis of recent observations indicated that separation of galaxies into islands had not yet begun, which meant that the universe might be comparatively young. The conclusion that the universe was open had been based on factors such as expansion rate, deceleration, and density of the universe. Evidence today would support the “big bang” theory which stated that the universe had exploded in the beginning from a single solid mass, and would go on expanding. (B Sun, 19 Feb 76, A-3)
The U.S. Air Force announced it would begin flight tests of a new system called latar (laser-augmented target acquisition/recognition), developed by Northrop Corp. to give pilots of single-seat aircraft enhanced air-to-surface and air-to-air attack capability. The latar pod, mounted in the gun bay of the USAF F-4E, would contain long-range high-resolution electro-optical equipment for target imaging, laser designation, and acquisition and tracking; its field-of-view would be limited only by the fuselage and the externally carried munitions on the aircraft. The system would allow a pilot to acquire a target visually, using either a helmet-mounted sight system or a telescopic radar, with the optical turret following his line of sight; the view seen by the latar would appear on a helmet-mounted display built by Minneapolis Honeywell. The system would be suitable for use in all types of aircraft, including helicopters. (OIP Release 203.76)
The Air Force awarded a $1 million supplement of a previous costplusincentive-fee contract to General Electric’s Aircraft Engine Group at Cincinnati, O., a labor-surplus area, for extended flight-test spare parts support for B-l aircraft engines, the Department of Defense announced. (DOD Release 213-76)
Meetings in Ardashat, Armenia, between Soviet and American scientists on space biology and manned flight safety had concluded, announced the Yerevan domestic radio news service. The meeting heard reports on results of the Apollo-Soyuz joint space mission, and proposed subjects for discussion at another meeting to be held in the U.S. in 1977. The government of the Armenian Republic gave a reception to honor the participants. (FBIS, Yerevan in Armenian, 29 Sept 76)
FAA Administrator John L. McLucas announced award to Wilcox Electric Co., Kansas City, Mo., of a $3 720 699 contract for nine Category III instrument-landing systems that would complete a program to provide all-weather landing capability at key airports across the U.S. One Category III system would be installed at the FAA academy at Oklahoma City for training; the other eight would go to Kennedy Airport, NYC; O’Hare, Chicago; Houston Inti., Kansas City Inti., Seattle-Tacoma Inti., Los Angeles Inti., Portland Inti., and Detroit’s Metropolitan Wayne County Airport. The new equipment had already been installed at Dulles Inti, near Washington, D.C., Atlanta Inti., San Francisco Inti., and Stapleton Airport at Denver, as well as at the FAA center at Atlantic City, N.J., where it had been used for test and evaluation. Category III equipment would permit landings without visual reference to the ground, under weather conditions with ceiling zero and runway visibility no less than about 200 m. Existing Category II equipment at the sites to be replaced would be moved to other airports, to be named later. (FAA Release 76-97)
Tass reported a new development in U.S.-Soviet scientific and technical cooperation in a joint oceanographic experiment called Polymode to study vortex formations in the ocean. Professor Alan Robinson of Harvard University, heading a delegation of U.S. oceanographers toa plenary meeting of the Polymode organizing committee, said the mission would help crack the secrets of the ocean and place its resources at the service of mankind. Scientists had theorized that ocean vortexes, like cyclones in the atmosphere, had substantial influence on weather all over the globe. Work on Polymode would begin in mid-1977, with the northern area of research in the North Atlantic, 1000 km west of the Azores, and the southern area 200 to 300 km north of the Antilles. (FBIS, Tass in English, 29 Apr 76)
Inspection by U.S. Air Force and Japanese technicians of the MiG-25 Foxbat Soviet interceptor plane landed in Japan by a defecting pilot early in September revealed a minimum of innovation and an approach that relied on “brute force,” reported Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine. Examination of the Foxbat revealed a standard ejection seat, although the pilot had told U.S. interrogators none was carried because of a desire to hold down the weight of the steel-frame aircraft (about 14 000 kg with wings, tail surfaces, and afterburners removed). The number of cockpit instruments was about half those used in the F-4EJ built in Japan under license. None of the avionics in the MiG-25 used solid-state circuitry, relying instead on vacuum tubes; fatigue cracks in the airframe had been repaired by rough welding techniques. Despite the design deficiencies, however, the MiG-25 was “a formidable opponent,” Av Wk noted. (Av Wk, 11 Oct 76, 18)
The Air Force announced that its third prototype B-l bomber successfully completed its maiden flight, having left Air Force Plant 42 at Palmdale, Calif., at 3:37 pm PDT and landed at nearby Edwards AFB after a flight of 2 hr 9 min. Since its rollout 11 May, the prototype built for USAF by Rockwell International’s B-l Division had undergone fuel and propulsion-system checkout, subsystem tests, low- and high-speed taxi tests, and a complete review of flight readiness. The B-l was the first large swing-wing aircraft to complete a complex 8-mo series of structural integrity testing so early in its design life. The third B-l’s primary flight-test objective was to acquire data to verify predicted design loads in test missions at both subsonic and supersonic speeds. Highest altitude reached during the maiden flight was about 3 km, with top speed at .45 mach. Crew members were Doug Benefield of Rockwell, pilot; AF Lt. Col. Ed McDowell, copilot; and Rockwell flight-test engineer Jack Baldwin, who was riding in the B-l for the first time. (USAF release 14 June 76)
A new manmade fiber stronger than nylon for possible use in drogue parachutes had been tested in the 5-m transonic tunnel at the Arnold Engineering Development Center in Ohio, the Air Force announced. The material, called Kevlar, had been developed by DuPont for use in tires, and could be woven into parachute materials twice as strong as nylon with only half the weight and volume of nylon counterparts. The AEDC tests used 4 ribbon-type parachutes 2 m in diameter, tested to destruction; one was 100% nylon, another 100% Kevlar, and the remaining two were composed of different blends of the two substances. 'The tests measured dynamic loads as the chutes were deployed at about 966 km per hr at simulated altitudes from 15 to 115 km; steady-state loads were also measured at those altitudes for speeds of from 640 to 1440 km per hr. The material-evaluation tests were a novelty for the tunnel, normally used for aerodynamic studies of large-scale models or engine compatibility with flight hardware. (AF OIP 003.76)
Cost of the Air Force B-l bomber might run more than $11 billion over original estimates because of inflation and higher prices, said Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.), adding that total cost increases on the B-l would be around $1 billion while inflation would be responsible for another $10 billion increase. Three research contracts on the B-l had already run $129 million higher than expected, he said, and those represented only money spent for models, engines, and electronics. By the end of 1976, Congress would have to decide whether to go ahead with the bomber, intended as a replacement for the aging B-52. (LA Times, 22 Mar 76, 11C)
Laser beams had become the latest major tool in manufacturing aircraft, the Aerospace Industries Association announced, reporting on a year-long series of tests of the numerically controlled laser cutting-arm technique. The test objective was to define effects of a laser on physical characteristics of the parts produced, such as corrosion and fatigue. The cutting arm was coupled with a computer data bank that chose the best method of positioning parts on flat thin aluminum sheets, saving both time and money and reducing aluminum scrap by 30 to 50%. Usual methods such as blanking, routing, and sawing had been used since World War'll. The Air Force was funding a program to use thicker sheets of metal and higher power lasers in an application of new technology to aircraft manufacture, (aia Release 76-4)
In an address to the American Institute of Industrial Engineers, meeting in St. Louis, W.F. Rockwell, Jr., chairman of Rockwell International Corp., warned that the U.S. in its search for energy independence should not “go driving up the wrong street” but should make use of nuclear power. Claiming that solar power, nuclear fusion, or other exotic power sources were solutions for the distant future, Rockwell described nuclear energy as “the bridge that will allow us to make a smooth transition to those future energy sources” and as being “safe, clean, abundant and economical.” Rockwell noted the 6- to 10-yr period needed between the concept and the start-up of a power plant, adding that today’s Americans have roughly 36 mo to “get it all together if we’re going to have enough power in 1990.” (Rockwell Release R-20)
The Air Force Systems Command announced completion of 3 yr of test and evaluation on a production-engineered version of a laser-guided bomb kit designed for easy mounting on standard unguided bombs. AFSC noted that, during the Southeast Asia conflict, laser-guided bombs were 200 times as likely to reach the target as manually released unguided bombs, and had outscored computer-aimed bombs by 50 to 1. The USAF described the LGB as “one of the most effective technological advances” in weaponry, one LGB costing less than 12 standard unguided bombs and offering additional savings in fewer missions flown, fewer crew losses, increased storage life, and greater reliability. (OIP Release 241.76)
The Newsreview, published by the Air Force Systems Command, reported that a long-winged U-2 aircraft on loan to NASA had successfully completed tests in the “icy grip” of the main chamber at McKinley Climatic Laboratory during which it underwent exposure to temperatures as low as —57°C. The laboratory, operated by the USAF Armament Development and Test Center at Eglin AFB, Fla., conducted the tests at NASA’s request to isolate flight-control malfunctions occurring in the cold temperatures of high altitude. The U-2, a single-seat single-engine jet designed to operate at altitudes above 21 km, had been used by NASA as an earth-resources survey tool, making observations in astronomy, high-altitude atmospheric physics, and geophysics in addition to supporting general earth-resources programs. (AFSC Newsreview, July 76, 6)
The Concorde supersonic airliner, making regularly scheduled flights between London, Paris, and the Dulles airport outside Washington, D.C. since 24 May, had been lending its distinctive sonic waves to atmospheric research by Columbia Univ. monitors, the New York Times reported. Dr. William L. Donn, senior research associate at Columbia’s Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory, and his colleagues Nambath Balachan-dran and David Rind had derived surprising data on daily variations in the supposed prevailing winds in the upper atmosphere, and were anticipating new data on dispersal of atmospheric pollutants and the content of the rarefied reaches of earth’s atmosphere. The sound waves, inaudible to the human ear but detectable by sensitive microphones registering changes in air pressure, contained atmospheric information up to as far as 120-km altitude, through reflection from the thermosphere. Precise knowledge of the Concorde’s elevation and location along its flight path had aided in interpreting data on atmospheric temperatures and wind conditions depending on the exact strength and path of the sound waves, Dr. Donn said. (ATT, 17 Dec 76, A-18)
More trouble developed for the DOD’s “controversial” F— 111 and F-14A jet fighter planes, the Wall Street Journal reported, as the Air Force announced grounding of 183 General Dynamics F— Ills at Nellis AFB, Nev., and Cannon AFB, N.M. The groundings, ordered after inspections showed defects in fan blades, would continue to midmonth and would not affect F— Ills stationed elsewhere. A General Accounting Office report on the Grumman F-14A, 14 of which had crashed at a loss of $161.6 million, questioned the plane’s ability to cope with attacks by antiship missiles. The GAO said that problems with equipment and inadequate supplies of parts had reduced the readiness of the F-14A to 37.2% during 1975, and that the electronic equipment’s reliability was extremely low, some of the major systems exhibiting only 6% to 14% of the desired objective. Cost of the F-14A had risen from $18.2 million each in 1973 to $20.2 million. Designed to defend the Navy against assaults by antiship missiles, the F-14A could engage current Soviet fighter jets, said GAO, but the Navy itself feared the plane’s ability to cope with the missiles might be “marginal.” (WSJ, 9 Aug 76, 11)
Aviation Week magazine reported that the State Superior Court of Ariz. had found against aeronautical chartmaker Jeppesen Sanderson, sued by insurance underwriters for failing to include on the map of the Philippines a peak near Manila—Mt. Kamunay, nearly 1050 m high—where four crewmen were killed in July 1971 when a Pan American Boeing 707 flew into the mountain. More than $5.8 million was awarded in damages for value of cargo and aircraft in a ruling called a “landmark in product liability litigation.” The suit had been brought originally by three of the four widows, whose damage awards had not been set. (Av Wk, 6 Sept 76, 47)
The National Aeronautic Assn., at its annual meeting in Washington, D.C., announced its selections for Elder Statesmen of Aviation for 1976. The award, established in 1954, honored outstanding Americans over the age of 60 who had made significant contributions to aeronautics. The three persons chosen were: J. Leland Atwood, 72, leader in aviation for more than 50 yr, who headed North American Rockwell (now Rockwell Inti.) until his retirement in 1970 and originated the design concept for the P-51 Mustang; Clifford W. Henderson, 81, originator of the Bendix and Thompson trophy races and the Power Puff Derby, and manager of the National Air Races 1928-1939; and Blanche Wilcox Noyes, 76, who learned to fly in 1928 and won the national closed-course race in 1929, the Miami All-American air race in 1931, and the Bendix trophy for a cross-country flight in 1936. (NAA release 9 Nov 76)
Rep. Les Aspin (D-Wis.) charged that the U.S. Navy planned to spend $187.6 million to repair F-14 Tomcat jet-fighter engines that it planned to replace at an additional cost of up to $1.9 billion. “. . . The Navy hopes to pull a double whammy on the taxpayers by replacing the repaired engine with a brand new one,” Aspin said. The Navy conceded that replacing engines in the jet fighters would cost $1.6 to $1.9 billion, but claimed the planned repairs to current engines would cost only $86 million. The Navy said it wanted new engines for installation beginning in 1981. (WPost, 26 July 76, A— 1) A New York Times story 30 July said that a breakfast meeting with Secy. Reed for a group of Senate aides had been paid for by the Air Force Association, a private group with 155 000 members—largely retired Air Force personnel—and chartered as a veterans organization not required to register as a lobbyist. The Air Force Legislative Liaison Office, which arranged the breakfast, seemed to have been “concerned that it might be engaged in a form of lobbying of doubtful legality,” said the NYT, pointing out that a 1948 law “specifically provides that no funds appropriated by Congress can be used by a Government agency directly or indirectly ‘to influence in any manner’ the vote of a member of Congress.” (NYT magazine, 25 July 76, 7; W Post, 26 July 76, A-13; C Trib, 29 July 76,10; NYT, 30 July 76, A6; Av Wk, 26 July 76, 23)
NASA announced that it would simulate the drop of the main probe of its planned 1978 Pioneer Venus mission into the Venusian atmosphere, by dropping the probe from an Air Force balloon at 32 km altitude over the White Sands Missile Range, N.M. The drop, scheduled for a date between 13 and 16 Dec., would be the first of two tests, a second being scheduled for early 1977. Flight events to be simulated just before the probe’s descent into the dense hot lower atmosphere of Venus—deployment of the probe parachute, separation of the heat-shield, and (after a 17-min parachute descent) separation of the parachute—would occur at an altitude of 16 km, where the temperature and density of earth’s atmosphere and the velocity of the probe would be much the same as those on Venus. The instrumented vessel would contain special equipment to monitor system performance, and movie cameras on the balloon platform as well as telescopic still and movie cameras on the ground would record the test. (NASA Release 76-192; ARC Release 76-84)
The Air Force announced award of a $2 067 113 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Teledyne McCormick Selph of Hollister, Calif., for unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine, a chemical used in Titan missiles and NASA-USAF space boosters. The contracting activity was the San Antonio Logistics Center at Kelly AFB, Texas. (DOD Release 223-76)
Flight tests by the Air Force had confirmed the concept called LATAR (laser-augmented target acquisition and recognition) that would permit a pilot in a high-performance single-seat fighter to fly the aircraft and operate its weaponry at the same time. The LATAR pod, mounted under the fuselage of an F-5E directly beneath the cockpit, contained a laser-target designator, a spot tracker, and an electro-optical sensor. The spot tracker was a device that finds a laser “spot” from another target designator operated from another aircraft or on the ground; initial target identification could be either visual, by radar, or by a helmet-mounted sight system that integrated sight control with movement of the pilot’s head. The flight tests were conducted at the Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards AFB, Calif. (OIP Release 308.75)
NASA announced award to Owen Enterprises, Inc., of Wilmington, Calif., of an exclusive patent license for production of a solar-energy concentrator invented by JPL’s Dr. Katsunori Shimada that focuses the sun’s rays from almost any angle without the need for a tracking mechanism. The concentrator—a special arrangement of multifaceted Fresnel lenses— magnifies solar energy tenfold, heating a fluid in channels beneath the lenses, which is released through a thermostat when the proper temperature is attained. A series of the devices could be set up, depending on the specific energy requirements of a structure. Suitable for residential, commercial, or industrial applications, the concentrator had proved much more efficient than other solar-collector units on the market. Owen Enterprises, Inc., the licensee, is an American Indian-owned firm that planned to assemble the device at facilities on the Rincon Indian Reservation near Escondido, Calif. The firm would invest $200 000 to develop the concentrator for the market, and pay 1% royalty to the U.S. Treasury on its gross sales. (NASA Release 76-209)
Rockwell Inti, announced award to the Aerostructures Div. of Avco Corp. of a contract valued at more than $50 million for long lead-time production work on outer wings of the B-l bomber. Work would cover the first three operational B-ls produced for the U.S. Air Force. The Aero-structures Div. would design and fabricate tools and prepare for actual building of the outer wings. Rockwell Inti, had assembled outer wings for the first three B-l prototypes, which had already accumulated more than 350 hr of flight tests at Edwards AFB, Calif. Outer wings on each side of the B-l would constitute a shipset—one of the largest sections of the B-l—weighing more than 13 000 kg, and measuring more than 18 m long and 4.5 m wide. Fuel would be stored inside the wing structure. (Rockwell Release LA-5)
DOD announced plans to sell West Germany 500 Sidewinder missiles and support equipment valued at $43 million. The announcement was one of several made by the Pentagon on foreign weapons sales, since law required that Congress must be notified and have 20 days in which to disapprove such sales. DOD also planned to provide $26 million in pilot training under a Northrop Corp. contract to upgrade the Saudi Arabian air force, through the sale of F5E jet fighters and construction of support and training facilities. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 3)
A Pentagon group charged with making decisions on weapons programs—the Defense Systems Acquisition Committee—held its first meeting to consider production of the controversial B-l bomber and scheduled another meeting for 6 Jan. 1977 to decide on consolidation of cruise missile programs backed separately by the Air Force and the Navy. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld had stated—apparently with approval from the transition team of the incoming Carter administration—that he was responsible until 20 Jan. for making weapons decisions that came up for scheduled consideration; however, he had also told subordinates that DOD should exercise restraint in passing on programs that the incoming administration might review or change. President-elect Carter had questioned the necessity for a B-I bomber program. The controversy over cruise missiles arose from Air Force advocacy of an air-launched missile that could be used only with a B-l or B—52 bomber; this restraint offered the verification possibility, acceptable to the USSR, of controlling the number of cruise missiles by counting the bombers carrying them. However, the Navy had advocated its Tomahawk missile which could be launched from a submarine torpedo tube as well as from a surface ship or a bombing plane. The Navy’s preference would thwart verification of future arms-limitation agreements, since all attack submarines as well as surface ships and bombers could be potential platforms for launching the Navy missile. The Carter transition team was concerned, said the New York Times, that the Navy might be trying to lock in the new administration with a pre-inauguration decision that would complicate future negotiations with the USSR. Both the Navy and the Air Force programs were started after a 1972 agreement with the USSR that placed a 5-yr limitation on strategic ballistic missiles; the $ 15 million design studies had grown into $300 million development programs, and had reached the point where a decision was needed on proceeding into costly engineering development. Observers pointed to the Army’s plan to award contracts in the next week or so on its $7 million programs for troop-carrier and attack helicopters as a decision that would make it difficult for the incoming administration to re-examine its predecessor’s policy. (NYT, 2 Dec 76, 23)
Ruth Bates Harris, NASA’s deputy assistant administrator for community and human relations, announced that she would leave the agency effective 15 Oct. Mrs. Harris said she would return to New York “to attend to pressing personal family needs,” but would “spend an number of months continuing to work as a consultant” to NASA, in order to complete some unfinished community and human relations projects. She had been a deputy assistant administrator since Aug. 1974, the first woman to reach that position in NASA, and had earlier been the first director of NASA’s Office of Equal Employment Opportunity. Before joining NASA, Mrs. Harris had been director of human relations for the public schools in Montgomery County, Md., and had been director of the Human Relations Commission in Washington, D.C. She had received more than 50 awards and citations for her work in human relations. (NASA Release 76-170)
Under a 3-nation agreement announced by Britain, West Germany, and Italy, the Tornado MRCA (multi-role combat aircraft) dubbed “the spearhead of Europe’s coming offensive against the United States for equality in the skies” would go into production and would be operational by 1980. The agreement provided for construction at a total cost of $ 10 billion of 809 swing-wing “wonder weapon” planes that could fly just under the speed of sound at treetop level, and twice the speed of sound at higher altitudes; it was designed to replace 2 of the most profitable planes ever produced by U.S. makers, the Phantom used by Britain’s RAF and the F104 Starfighters used by West Germany and Italy. The Tornado carried terrain-following radar that could fly it under enemy radar, and could vary its wingspan from 8.5 to 14m. Panavia (consisting of British Aircraft Corp., Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm, and Aeritalia) would build the Tornado airframe and Turbo-Union (Rolls Royce, Motoren-und-Turbinen Union, and Fiat) would build the engine. The U.S. press noted that, for the first time, American aerospace firms would be facing a competitor as formidable as themselves. (WPost, 15 Aug 76, A-14; W Star, 18 Aug 76, A-4)
The U.S. Air Force announced production of a new material with electrical properties suitable for solid-state laser applications: anisotropic yttrium aluminate doped with neodymium (Nd:YA10:i), a substance difficult to make into high-quality single crystals. The new material would replace neodymium YAC in solid-state lasers because it loses less heat than conventional lasing materials, requires no external component to polarize the laser light, and stores more energy for electro-optical switched-laser operations. The USAF sponsored the research at a pilot plant of Lambda-Airtron Division of Litton at Morris Plains, N.J. which produced 40 rods of the new material; the longest, about 100 mm long, was valued at $4000. The high cost resulted from the cost of the raw materials and the iridium crucibles used in production, as well as the large amounts of power needed. The Air Force Materials Laboratory at Wright-Patterson AFB, 0., would lend the tested rods to qualified government agencies and contractors. (AFSC Release OIP 118.76)
U.S. airline traffic increased more than 12% in the first half of 1976, the Air Transport Association reported; increasing numbers of passengers plus increased fares and cost-cutting would produce better profits for the airlines. Analysts said Americans were flying in unprecedented numbers because they felt the recession was over; even “ailing international carriers” like Pan American World Airways and Trans World Airlines were trimming their operating losses and might show some profit for the year, the Wall Street Journal reported. (WSJ, 29 July 76, 15)
The Dept, of Defense announced its first successful powered Bight test of a bomber-launched cruise missile, prototype of a weapon the USSR had sought to curb in strategic arms talks. The Boeing-made missile, basically a pilotless jet drone resembling a small plane with airbreathing engines, could carry nuclear warheads at low altitudes to evade detection by enemy radar. The successful test, in which the robot-like craft was launched from a B-5 2 at an altitude of about 3 km and flew for 11 min. over the White Sands range, was viewed as a step in final development of a highly strategic weapon for the U.S. Control of cruise missiles—both air- and submarine-launched types—had been a major issue in negotiations with the USSR. The Air Force missile just tested would be an aid to bomber penetration of enemy defenses, whereas the Navy’s cruise missile would be a tactical type for use against enemy ships rather than a strategic type aimed at land targets. The first test scheduled for 26 Feb. had been canceled because of problems with the B-52’s airconditioning unit. Later tests would try out the programmed guidance system. (WPost, 6 Mar 76, A-12; WStar, 6 Mar 76, A-2; B Sun, 6 Mar 76, A— 1; NYT, 6 Mar 76, 18)
International golfing great Arnold Palmer was scheduled to pilot a Learjet 36 “business aircraft” from Denver, Colo., for an assault on the speed-around-the-world record that had not been surpassed for 10 yr. A Learjet 24 had circled the earth in 1966 in 65 hr 38 min 39 sec elapsed time, at an average speed of better than 563 kph (50 hr 20 min actual flying time) including 17 intermediary stops. The National Aeronautic Association had sanctioned the new attempt, designating journalist Robert Serling as official onboard observer. Two additional pilots would accompany Palmer and Serling on their 2-day flight, scheduled to cover nearly 37 000 km, under the auspices of the Aviation Space Writers Association. Nine stops were planned for the new flight: Logan Airport at Boston; LeBourget at Paris; Mehrabad Airport at Tehran, Iran; Band-anaraike International Airport at Colombo, Sri Lanka; Kemayoran Airport, Jakarta, Indonesia; Manila International Airport; Wake Island; Honolulu International Airport; and Arapahoe County Airport, Denver. Besides NAA sponsorship, the flight was sanctioned by the American Revolution Bicentennial Association and the Aviation Historical Foundation. (NAA newsletter, May 1976, 1)
MSFC reported that Mack Vinson of its personnel office had been one of only 25 people, and the only one from Alabama, selected for a 2-wk study tour in March 1978 of the Peoples Republic of China. The group, a delegation from the American Society for Public Administration, would view firsthand the ways in which PRC officials solved public policy and administrative issues. Other objectives would be to set up a 2-way interchange of administrative ideas and techniques, obtain information for use in university courses, and broaden understanding of China and its people. Vinson said the tour was a matter of personal interest and would be made at his own expense. He had been a member of ASPA since 1965 and was president of its northern Alabama section in 1975-76. {Marshall Star, Dec 21/77, 2)
LaRC announced that the Charles W. Swain family of Tallahassee, Fla., would move into the Tech House Aug. 15 for a yr-long demonstration of NASA designed systems in and around the house to save energy and water and make the home more secure. They would pay a prorated rent and all utilities during their stay. Dr. Swain, a humanities professor at Fla. State Univ., would work with LaRC personnel in career counseling and employee relations. Mrs. Swain, a registered nurse, hoped to continue in her profession while living at LaRC. Their two children would attend local high schools. LaRC had chosen the Swains from a list provided by the American Council on Education, a nonprofit organization sponsoring university professors for lyr assignments to the federal government. (LaRC Release 77-37)
Timothy Leary, once described by the media as “high priest of LSD,” visited Washington, D.C., on behalf of his latest enthusiasm, space migration, according to a story in the Washington Star. Leary, at his first press conference in 7yr, described “a raging epidemic of hope in this country” and said it was time to find a new frontier. He wanted his support taken seriously, and cited the studies by Gerard K. O’Neill of Princeton Univ. and those of the L-5 Society. “Soon people will find it cheaper to build a new world than to fight over an old one,” he added. When would space migration become a reality? “Ten years after people stop laughing about it,” Leary replied. (W Star, Jan 25/77, D-3)
NASA reported that Kenneth Souza of ARC and Dr. Eugene Benton of the Univ. of San Francisco had returned to the U.S. from Moscow Sept. 2 with the biological samples carried on the USSR biosat Cosmos 936 [see Aug. 30]. This mission was the first to subject laboratory rats to artificial gravity in the'weightlessness of space. NASA would send the samples (tissue from the rats and live fruit flies, processed ! and packed in dry ice at the mobile landing site in Siberia) with radiation records to U.S. laboratories at the Univ. of Calif., Berkeley; Univ. of Wash., Seattle; Univ. of San Francisco; Univ. of Southern Calif.; and ARC, for analysis. (NASA Release 77-182)
KSC’s Spaceport News reported on Center efforts to recover launch-vehicle and payload wreckage from the “unprecedented” back-to-back explosions of a Delta and an Atlas Centaur carrying an OTS and an Intelsat spacecraft. In “the most comprehensive and painstaking recovery in the Space Center’s history,” land, sea, and air crews searched every foot of the 50mi2 impact area. Two Patrick AFB helicopters and a private chopper worked to spot scattered wreckage from the air; the USAF crew made 19 flights in 2wk, with a total of 88hr in the air, covering a 12mi2 area and locating about 95% of the wreckage recovered. Ground crews in armored personnel carriers and sea crews in Navy and private craft then took over to retrieve and identify each piece, check it for live ordnance, and catalog its recovery location. USAF ordnance disposal personnel often had to penetrate thick, snake-infested vegetation to reach Delta and Atlas Centaur fragments. Personnel from Port Everglades and the Navy’s harbor-clearance unit using an Air Force landing craft-utility (LCU) boat retrieved the Delta’s solid-fuel motor #1 from the water as prime suspect in the OTS launch failure. The teams worked from early morning to dusk, even over weekends, and recovery work for the Delta was still under way. Hundreds of persons helped on the recovery, from directors to office clerks. Personnel from KSC had the aid of representatives from McDonnell Douglas, General Dynamics, Patrick AFB, and Pan American Airways operations in the extensive ground search. To reward the combined efforts, KSC would present a group achievement award to the Delta 134/Atlas Centaur 43 recovery team at an awards ceremony Nov. 22. (Spaceport News, Nov 11/77, 4)
First appraisals .of a Soviet MiG-25 aircraft flown by a Soviet pilot to Japan on Sept. 6, 1976, had been revised, according to U.S. Air Force specialists quoted by the NY Times. Further analysis had revealed that the aircfaft did not lag behind the advanced technology of U.S aircraft, as previously stated, but contained some surprises. After 7wk of study, officials reported the MiG-25’s radar to be more powerful and less vulnerable to enemy jamming than U.S. radars, although operated on vacuum-tube technology. The Soviet aircraft’s radar also lacked the “look-down” capability of U.S. aircraft, so that Soviet MiG-25’s could not detect low-flying enemy aircraft that blended in with the earth’s surface. Similarly, Air Force specialists described the MiG-25’s Tumansky jet engines as 15yrs outmoded: the flight computer—called impressive even though it too was based on vacuum-tube technology—required extra space, maintenance, and cooling mechanisms. The USSR apparently was reluctant to entrust its pilots with total control of their aircraft, which explained the “very sophisticated data base” which could not only handle fire control and sensor systems but could also return the craft to any of four predesignated landing fields. “The biggest advantage,” said one U.S. Air Force officer, “is that we allow, we train, our men to think, to adapt. This does not occur in many cases with the Soviet air force.” Designed in 1960 to combat the U.S. B-70 bomber, which never went into production, the MiG-25 had been altered later for use against the highflying Lockheed SR-71 reconnaissance plane. (NYT, Jan 26/77, A-ll)
The Natl. Space Club announced that the guest speaker at its Aug. luncheon would be Col. W. J. Mellors, head of the Washington, D.C. office of the European Space Agency (ESA) since 1973. Col. Mellors had begun his career with the British army in 1942 and had become commander of the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers in the Middle East by 1965. After joining ESA in 1970, he worked until 1973 with ESTEC, the technology center in the Netherlands. ESA had united the programs of its predecessor organizations, the European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the European Organization for Development and Construction of Space-Vehicle Launchers (ELDO); its members nations were Belgium, Denmark, France, West Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. (NSC bulletin Aug 17/77)
The U.S Air Force Systems Command announced plans to experiment with dispersal of cloudcover by sowing minute amounts of silver iodide into supercooled clouds over a sparsely populated area of Michigan, using two small civilian aircraft, one to dispense the chemical and the second to photograph effects of the treatment. North American Weather Consultants of Goleta, Calif., contractor to the AF Geophysics Laboratory, would conduct the experiments to disperse cloudcover that could interfere with military or civilian flight operations. The experiments, aimed at clearing specific areas of cloud during landings, would occur only on days that were overcast with little or no precipitation, said Bruce A. Kunkel, project scientist for AFGL. Clouds sought for the tests would be supercooled (consisting of water drops remaining liquid though below freezing temperature) so that they would form ice crystals when treated with the chemical and would fall from the sky, clearing up to a few square miles for up to an hour. Some snow might reach the ground, but most should evaporate after falling from the cloud, and the amount of silver iodide needed would be extremely small notwithstanding its visually dramatic effect. (OIP Release 004.77)
Rockwell Intl.’s B-l Division announced award of contracts for more than $3 million to two Phoenix, Ariz., firms—Sperry Rand Flight Systems Division and AiResearch Manufacturing Co. —for work on the new USAF B-l strategic bomber. The B-l Division was system contractor to the Air Force for the program, which received DOD production approval on Dec. 2, 1976. Sperry would receive a $1 840 500 contract to build a gyrostabilization subsystem and a vertical situation display for a B-l prototype that would enter flight testing in 1979; AiResearch would receive a $1 218 102 contract to produce a secondary power subsystem for the same prototype. The gyrostabilization subsystem would provide the B-l crew with the aircraft’s course heading and flight angle with relation to the horizon; the secondary power subsystem would provide extra power for engine start and operation of support systems on the B-l. (Rockwell Release LA-1)
MSFC employees Alfred G. Orillion, Advanced Projects Office, and James E. Downey, III, deputy director for program develapment, received special awards for the Alabama section of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the AIAA honors banquet in Washington, D.C., Jan 13. The awards were for a 1975 space industrialization symposium at MSFC of which Downey was general chairman; Orillion was chairman of AIAA’s Alabama section. (MSFC Release 77-9)
In a W. Post column, science writer Daniel S. Greenberg commented on the “leaky embargo system that is supposed to deny the Soviets western technology of strategic value.” The principal feature of a new DOD plan drawn up for State and Commerce Dept, approval before presentation next spring to the Coordinating Committee of Nations (“NATO minus Iceland, plus Japan”) on restricting strategic export to Communist bloc nations was that “it isn’t confined to hardware,” Greenberg noted. The new embargo scheme, he said, was aimdd at technological know-how; its enforcement would admittedly encompass “the entire span of advanced American technology. . . . Hardware can be stopped at the loading dock, but know-how, being intangible or confined to paper, calls for different barricades.” The truth about the embargo, Greenberg charged, was that “virtually no one is interested in it except certain military and industrial elements in the U.S. Furthermore, most of what we won’t sell is easily available from sales hungry producers elsewhere. And, finally, there is ample evidence that ... the Soviets, despite their many technological shortcomings, can home produce whatever they deem necessary.” The proposed embargo, Greenberg concluded, might retard the Soviets a bit, but the presence of DOD “gumshoes in the American scientific and technological enterprise is a stiff price to pay” for that delay. (WPost, July 12/77, A19)
The Dept, of Commerce reported that a Boeing 747 in regular passenger service for Pan American World Airways had been doing double duty as a flying laboratory for 2 government agencies, NASA and NOAA, carrying an electronic package collecting data from the plane’s instruments to show that ordinary planes could get weather information in flight and relay it to the ground. This yr, five more packages would be put on planes of international carriers. The prototype package, weighing about 18kg and the size of an electric typewriter, used about 200w power and transmitted at 401.7MHz. LeRC had built the package under technical management from GSFC to tap into the inertial-navigation systems of widebodied jets like the 747 and DC-10 series, recording data on air temperature, wind direction and speed, and aircraft location and altitude. The package converted the data to a format transmitted hourly to the ground through NOAA’s Goes 1. The idea was to enable planes flying over areas where such information was sparse or unobtainable to collect and transmit the data as a help to aircraft operations as well as to weather prediction and analysis. NOAA had begun negotiations with foreign weather services and international airlines to put the packages on their aircraft, especially those flying over equatorial regions. (NOAA Release 77-91)
A new estimate of the cost of building three more Shuttle or-biters might run as high as $600 million apiece, Thomas O’Toole reported in the W Post. NASA had told Congress 3mo ago that the remaining Shuttles would cost $550 million apiece; the increase had resulted from the rising price of aluminum and titanium, the two key metals in Shuttle construction. NASA had bought the materials for two vehicles 3yr ago when prices were lower but had held off buying for the last three. Only one of the five Shuttles presently proposed had been completed, at a cost of about $500 million. A second being assembled at the Rockwell Inti, plant in Palmdale, Calif., would cost just over $500 million. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., director of JSC (the Shuttle-management center), said that NASA expected “by the end of this month a new proposal from Rockwell for the last three spacecraft. ... I don’t know how much Rockwell’s going to suggest but they’re for sure going to cost more than the last estimate we got.” NASA had hoped Congress would approve starting construction of the third Shuttle before the end of 1977. This vehicle was to be sent to Vandenberg AFB in March 1982 for Pentagon use. The fate of the last two Shuttles was not certain, since GAO had told Congress to delay further action on them. NASA and the USAF had expressed concern that delay would mean not only the shutdown around the country of contractor and subcontractor work forces that would be both difficult and costly to reestablish, but also further and more rapid escalation of prices: OToole quoted a NASA estimate that a 2yr delay would boost to about $1 billion the price of each Shuttle affected. (WPost, June 11/77, A-2)
The U.S. Air Force Systems Command reported it had worked out a way to suppress noise of jet-aircraft engines during maintenance operations on the ground, as a means of reducing hearing loss in maintenance personnel and noise impact on the community. Fifty-eight Air Force bases worldwide had received the suppressor units, consisting of primary and secondary air intakes and enclosures, augmenter tube, exhaust muffler, and support structure to house controls and water pumps. After backing an aircraft into the secondary enclosure, workers would enclose the air intakes at the front in the primary-intake mufflers; the secondary enclosure, covering the aft fuselage and engine exhaust, would include openings to be sealed against the fuselage and stabilizers to keep noise inside. Inside the augmenter tube, secondary cooling air would mix with the exhaust, and spray bars in the tube would spray water at 800gal per min during afterburner operation. (OIP Release 284.76)
The Natl. Aeronautic Assn, reported that Pan American Airways would mark the 50th anniversary of its first flight Oct. 28 by attempting a world-record round-the-world, over-the-poles flight in less than 48hr with a Boeing 747 jumbo jet. Carrying an official observer to certify record performance, the 747 would leave San Francisco, fly over the North Pole to London, then to Cape Town, South Africa, over the South Pole to Auckland, New Zealand, and back to San Francisco, a distance of 26 642 statute mi. A Boeing 707 had flown the polar route in 1965 in a record 62hr 27min 35sec. In May 1976 Pan Am’s 747 had set an east-west record, a bicentennial flight covering 23,137mi over a New York-Delhi-Tokyo-New York route in 46hr 50sec. That flight had carried 98 passengers, many of whom would be aboard the polar flight in Oct. Pan Am’s first flight had taken place Oct. 28, 1927, when a Fokker F-7 trimotor lifted off a dirt runway at Key West, Fla., for an hr-long flight over 90 miles of ocean to Havana, Cuba. (NAA newsletter Sept 77)
The Dept, of Defense announced plans to begin full-scale development of cruise missiles made by Boeing Co. and General Dynamics Corp., with the first to be available in 1979, the Wall St. Journal reported. Cruise missiles (small low-flying pilotless jet planes designed to evade enemy radar) could carry either nuclear or conventional warheads and could be launched from ships, planes, or trucks, or submerged submarines. Boeing and General Dynamics had each developed a cruise missile: Boeing the Air Force version, and General Dynamics, the Navy version called the Tomahawk, designed for launch from submarines and surface vessels. Although the two versions used different airframes, they used the same engines, guidance systems, and warheads. After reviewing both versions, the DOD decided to continue both, and established a joint program office under the direction of Navy Capt. Walter Locke, whose orders required maximum cooperation with the Air Force. In addition to its “short” cruise missile, 1083cm long with a range of 1127km, the Air Force supported development of a stretch version 1470cm long with a range of 2254km for more distant targets. The DOD also expressed support for advanced technology to refine missile accuracy and for a supersonic version to exceed present speed of 885kph. It had asked Congress for $402.7 million for the programs in FY 1978, up from $198.7 million in 1977. (WSJ, Jan 19/77, 38)
KSC announced award of a $3.5 million contract to Federal Systems Division, Honeywell Information Systems, for delivery of a central data subsystem for Shuttle launch processing, consisting of two large scale computers sharing a common memory that would store test procedures, a master-program library, pre- and post-test data analyses, and other types of data to support Shuttle checkout, countdown, and launch. KSC had procured the subsystem for Vandenberg AFB for a second Shuttle launch and processing facility. (KSC Release 3-78)
Scientists in NASA’s Viking project this spring would award grants totaling $5000 to support undergraduate research projects in planetology or astronomy, NASA announced. The money had been part of the annual Newcomb Cleveland Award presented Feb. 15 by the American Assn, for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) to 150 Viking scientists, authors of scientific papers that had appeared in 3 special Viking issues of Science magazine. This had been the first Cleveland Award to a group. The grants, ranging from $500 to $2000, would fund a student’s (or group of students’) ideas or would supplement student work in progress, selected on the basis of originality and feasibility. (LaRC Release 78-7; Langley Researcher, Feb 24/78, 3)
The Marshall Star reported that 6 American and 2 British scientists would compete for the 2 experimenter seats on the second flight of the Shuttle-borne Spacelab experiments in 1981. The experimenters, called payload specialists, would be employed by the payload sponsor and would differ from NASA’s pilots and mission specialists in being selected and trained for a specific mission. Four selected from the group of 8 would train to operate the mission’s 13 scientific investigations; NASA would choose 2 of the 4 to fly on the 7- to 12-day mission. The investigators working group (IWG), scientists representing 13 experiment teams for the U.S. and the United Kingdom charged by NASA with directing Spacelab scientific investigations, had selected the candidates for payload specialist. MSFC would manage the training programs for all 4 payload specialists. The Spacelab 2 finalists would be the second group of candidates for flight assignments; 10 Spacelab 1 payload-specialist finalists had been selected in Dec. 1977 to compete for 2 flight positions. Finalists for the Spacelab 2 payload-specialist positions were Loren Acton, Lockheed’s Palo Alto research laboratory; John-David Bartoe, Naval Research Laboratory; John Harvey, Kitt Peak National Observatory; Bruce Patchett, Astrophysics Research Division of Appleton Laboratory; N. Paul Patterson, Ball Brothers Research Corporation; Dianne Prinz, NRL; George Simon, Sacramento Peak Observatory; and Keith Strong, Mullard Space Science Laboratory. (Marshall Star, Apr 26/78, 4)
The Carter administration, calling for national commemoration of the 75th anniversary of the Wright brothers’ first powered flight, had designated DOT lead agency to coordinate programs and materials, the National Aeronautic Association reported. The task force for the 75th anniversary, which had held its first meeting at DOT in Jan., would be a clearinghouse to avoid duplication, facilitate innovation, and develop ideas suitable for agencies a^d private organizations. Peter Clapper, FAA assistant administrator for public affairs, noted that the American people had taken for granted the tremendous advances in aviation over the last 75yr and that the anniversary offered an opportunity to bring these advances to public attention. (NAA newsletter, Feb 78, 1)
LaRC announced that Dr. Peter Calder, project director for the Olympus 593 engine at Rolls Royce Ltd., Bristol, England, would be guest speaker at a center colloquium July 31 on “Engine Options for Supersonic Cruise Aircraft.” Calder would discuss the Olympus 593 twin-spool turbojet engine produced by Rolls Royce in Britain and SNECMA in France, which had powered the Concorde supersonic jet transport. He would describe development of the engine and its inlet, and discuss possible modifications to improve propulsion system operating efficiency and environmental acceptability. Concorde supersonic passenger service from Paris and London to South America and the Middle East had been under way for 2.5yr and to North America for 2yr, initially to Washington, D.C., and then to New York. (LaRC Release 78-38; Langley Researcher, July 28/78, 2)
Disagreement about the age of the newly discovered rings around Uranus was expressed at the Nov. 9 meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Pasadena, Calif., the Pasadena Star-News reported. Discovered by astronomer Jim Elliot of Cornell Univ. in March 1977, the rings had sparked many scientific theories. Elliot originally had observed five rings; subsequent observations had disclosed four additional rings. Uranus’s rings did not spread into broad bands circling the planet like those of Saturn, but were narrow and confined to tight belts. Attracting most attention was the fifth ring, Epsilon, which was thicker and wider than the other rings, although its width varied from 20 to 100km. The inner edge of the Epsilon ring did not move around the planet at a rate different from that of the outer edge, contrary to what might have been expected. Dr. Richard Goldreich of CalTech theorized that the Epsilon ring was bound together by its own gravity, which, in turn, meant it had substantial mass (possibly as much as 25grams per cm3, extremely dense by ring standards), causing him to conclude the rings around Uranus were very old. However, Judd Boynton, director of Geophysics Labs and Research in Berkeley, who had predicted that rings would be found around Uranus, had concluded the rings were of relatively recent origin, perhaps as young as 10 million yr. (JPL newsclips, Nov 10/78)
Modification and flight of U.S. Air Force jet cargo/tanker aircraft delivered to DFRC would allow NASA to research the possibility of significant fuel savings, NASA announced. Winglets (2.7m [9ft]-long airfoil sections attached to the wingtips of a KC-135 aircraft) could improve performance in cruise flight by approximately 8%, for an annual fuel saving of 11.9 million liters (45 million gal) based on 1975 use rates for KC-135 aircraft. Other NASA studies had indicated that use of the winglet could benefit existing medium-weight civil-transport aircraft. LaRC had developed the winglet concept in its wind tunnels. Winglets, made of aluminum 0.6m (2ft) wide at the tip and 1.8m (6ft) wide at the base, could weigh almost 68kg (1501b). The Boeing Co. would install them on outer wing panels under an Air Force contract estimated at $3 million. Varying the incidence and cant angle of the winglets between flights would demonstrate their effectiveness at various positions. After installation of recorders, the KC-135 would make the first flights in a joint NASA-USAF program scheduled after winglet installation in early 1979. Comparison of data would demonstrate winglet effectiveness. (NASA Release 78-25)
FBIS carried from Tass a Pravda report that cosmonauts Vladimir Kovalenok and Alexander Ivanchenkov were concluding the program of scientific explorations in their 4.5mo orbital flight and preparing for return to earth, by reactivating the transport ship Soyuz31 and closing down Salyut 6. The mission had produced new information for biologists, medical personnel; glaciologists, volcanologists, oceanologists, and firemen. One example was the previously unknown regularity of glacial movement in Latin American mountains; the cosmonauts also had observed seven forest fires in Australia. Visiting crews had already returned major portions of experimental results to earth. (FBIS, Tass in English, Oct 29/78)
George Mueller, NASA’s associate administrator for manned spaceflight 1963-1969, now chairman and president of Systems Development Corp., was named president-elect of the American Inst, of Aeronautics and Astronautics, AvWk reported. He would serve on the AIAA board of directors during 1978 and be inaugurated as president in 1979. {AvWk, Mar 27/78, 11)
NASA announced appointment of Kenneth Chapman as associate administrator for external relations, effective Jan. 8. Chapman had been acting in the position since its creation Nov. 8, 1977, and had been assistant administrator for DOD and interagency affairs since joining NASA April 1, 1977. Chapman would be senior policy official responsible for integrating NASA activities in public, legislative, university, community, interagency, and international affairs. Chapman had come to NASA from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. He retired from the Air Force in 1975 after a 29-yr career. (NASA Release 78-4)
KSC had begun preparation for launching Shuttle Orbiter 102 in Oct., Spaceport News reported. Construction of new facilities and modifications to existing ones were proceeding on schedule. The orbiter-landing facility and orbiter-processing facility had been the only new facilities built at KSC to support Shuttle operations. Other preparations included modifications of existing facilities originally designed and built to support Apollo/Satum operations. KSC would transform hanger AF at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station into a solid-fuel rocket-booster recovery and disassembly facility. {Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1)
NASA announced that JPL, acting for the Dept, of Energy, had awarded study contracts to Acurex, Inc., Mountain View, Calif.; Boeing Engineering & Construction Co., Seattle, Wash.; and General Electric Space Division, Valley Forge, Pa., to develop a solar-energy concentrator for generating electric power. The contracts, each valued at about $240 000, would cover the first part of a two-phase program to develop a low-cost point-focusing solar concentrator. The concentrator would direct mirror-reflected sunlight to a heat absorber and heat-driven engine turning a generator to produce electricity to supplement electrical power for small communities and rural areas. The solar concentrator to be developed under the contracts would include the optics (mirrors) and the mechanism that allowed the concentrator to track the sun. Heat absorbers and engine generators would be developed under separate contracts. Prime objective of the contracts would be to obtain the best thermal performance at the least cost per concentrator. As many as six would be tested and evaluated at JPL’s Solar Thermal Test Site at Edwards, Calif. JPL would manage the study for DOE’s Small Power Systems Program under an interagency agreement with NASA. (NASA Release 78-161)
The National Aeronautic Association announced the 1977 Collier trophy winners: U.S. Air Force Gen. Robert J. Dixon, and the Tactical Air Command headed by him since 1973. The NAA had awarded the Collier trophy annually for U.S. achievement in aeronautics and astronautics during the preceding yr; the selection committee had made the award for development and implementation in 1977 of the Red Flag combat-simulation flight-training program. Red Flag, designed to enhance combat readiness of U.S. air crews, had been regarded as a significant contribution to national defense. Encounters in Red Flag, consisting of missions against simulated surface-to-air missiles, had been the most realistic undertaken in peacetime aerial-combat training. Gen. Dixon had established the program in 1977, conducting ten 4-wk exercises at Nellis Air Force Base, Nev.; more than 8200 air crews had trained during 1977, with 10 000 ground troops participating. (NAA newsletter Apr 7/78)
NASA announced award of a $5 million contract to Vought Corporation, Dallas, Tex., for 5 Scout launch vehicles and associated hardware, such as separation systems and heat shields. Vought had been the Scout project’s prime contractor since 1959. The first Scout, designed to place a 130-lb payload into a 300-nautical-mi circular earth orbit, had been launched in 1960. The new Scout could launch a 4041b payload from Wallops Island, Va.; Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif.; or San Marco offshore at Kenya, Africa, into that orbit. The latest configuration of Scout vehicles was known as Phase 8; phases 1 through 7 had produced 107 vehicles, 96 of which had been launched. (NASA Release 78-20)
The Langley Researcher reported that, under a program sponsored jointly by NASA and the American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE), a team of 19 university professors and two legal interns had spent the summer at LaRC on a study, An Integrated Air-Cargo Transport System. The team had reviewed forecasts of the air-cargo industry and had recommended changes in aircraft, air-freight terminals, air-transportation networks, and government regulation, to best serve national needs between 1990-2000. Recommendations had included designing a new medium-range aircraft for cargo service and a long-range aircraft that constituted an improved or derivative version of today’s craft; arrangements for all aircraft and major freight terminals to handle 20ft intermodal containers; continuation of air-cargo industry deregulation for at least the immediate future; and permission for airlines to own interstate trucking companies. Dr. Griffith McRee of Old Dominion Univ. had directed the study. (Langley Researcher, Aug 25/78, 4)
ESA announced that the full-scale propellant mockup of the European launcher Ariane (47m high, maximum diameter 3.8m) had left the integration site near Paris for its launch base at Kourou in French Guiana on the South American coast. Two Seine barges had transported three pressurized containers (one for each stage) to Le Havre, where they were loaded on a freighter bound for Cayenne. Tests of the mockup would begin in Aug. when the launcher would be erected on the pad for the first time. ESA had planned 3mo of tests to check general conditions for launcher assembly and vehicle compatibility with ground facilities, as well as fueling and draining facilities and systems both on the ground and on the vehicle. Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales (CNES) would handle, transport, assembly, and test operations. Aerospatiale, the system integrator, would evaluate dynamic and thermal behavior of the launcher under ambient climatic conditions in tests simulating vibrations like those at liftoff. ESA had planned four qualification launches between June 1979 and Oct. 1980 (ESA Release June 16/78)
In 1977 JPL scientists Donn Lynn and Jean Lorre had agreed to apply image-processing techniques to photographs of the Shroud of Turin, but had not expected their results to be published in newspapers and magazines around the world, JPL Universe reported. Their “mild curiosity” about the relic had introduced them to other American scientists who proposed using a variety of sophisticated tests to determine how the shroud had been imprinted. The result was a trip planned for Oct. that would take Lynn and Lorre to Turin, where church authorities would allow the American science team an unprecedented 24hr examination of the shroud itself.	■ Coinciding with a public exhibition and international conference about the shroud, the tests would entail infrared and ultraviolet photography as well as conventional black-and-white pictures. Other team members would make radiographic and x-ray fluorescence examinations, all to investigate the mechanical formation of the “negative” image on the cloth. The shroud had been stitched to a protective cloth backing, but the team would use a flexible optical instrument to examine the reverse side of the fragile fabric. Major business corporations, including photographic and electronic-equipment companies such as Polaroid, Kodak, and the Brooks Institute of Photography had agreed to lend or donate facilities and equipment for the tests. Lynn and Lorre expected to provide a quick-look report of their findings soon after the Turin exhibition. (JPL Universe, July 21/78, 1)
NASA announced it had appointed Terence Finn director of legislative affairs. Finn had served since Dec. 1974 as senior analyst for energy, science, and space on the staff of the Senate budget committee, where he had been responsible for the budgets of NASA, National Space Foundation, and DOE. He was teaching a graduate course, Congress and Budget, at Catholic Univ., and also had taught at American Univ. and the Dept, of Agriculture Graduate School. Finn was a member of the American Political Science Association and a life member of the American Aviation Historical Society. (NASA Release 78-131)
NASA announced it would hold a symposium Jan. 16 and 17 in Washington, D.C., on the proper role NASA should be prepared to fulfill during the early to mid-1980s. The symposium would host 20 nationally-known authorities in fields including federal research policy, economics, education, science, aircraft development, and space applications. The symposium was a part of its current assessment of its institutional base. (NASA Release 78-5)
NASA reported procurements during FY78 totalled $3660 million, 3.6% more than during FY77. Approximately 81% of the net dollar value was placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 5% with or through other government agencies; 90% of the dollar value of the latter resulted in contracts with industry. About 53% of funds placed by NASA under JPL contracts resulted in subcontracts or purchases with business firms. In short, about 90% of NASA procurement was contracted to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 72% were competitive procurements (either through formal advertising or negotiation) and 28% were noncompetitive. Small business firms had received $282 million (10%) of NASA’s direct awards, indicating that most agency awards to business firms were large continuing R&D contracts for major systems or items of hardware generally beyond the capability of small business firms on a prime-contract basis. However, of the $633 million in new contracts worth $10 000 or more awarded to business firms during 1978, small business received $137 million (22%); in addition to direct awards, small business received substantial subcontract awards from 75 of the NASA prime contractors participating in its small business subcontracting program. Total direct awards plus known subcontract awards to small business aggregated $513 million, 17% of NASA’s total (direct plus indirect) awards to business firms. Included in awards to small business firms were $75,852 million awarded to minority business enterprises: $14,064 million in direct awards, $32,151 million under Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, and known subcontract awards of $29,637 million. In 1978, 49 states and Washington, D.C., participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over. These larger awards went to 2068 business firms in 46 states and D.C., and to 341 universities and nonprofit organizations in 47 states and D.C. Labor-surplus areas in 40 states had received 53% of the awards. (NASA ann proc rpt FY78)
NASA announced plans for 25 launches in 1978 and support of 3 Atlas-F space launches from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The 1978 missions would be almost equally divided between those directly benefiting people (for communications and geodetic, environmental, navigation, meteorological, and earth-resources studies) and those primarily for scientific and exploratory research. Fifteen launches would be for paying customers, including the European Space Agency (ESA), ComSatCorp, the U.S. Navy, Japan, NOAA, the United Kingdom, and Canada. Cape Canaveral had been scheduled for 10 Delta launches and all the Atlas-Centaur launches; one Delta would be launched from the Western Test Range at Vandenberg AFB. (Spaceport News, Jan 9/78, 1; Goddard News, Jan/Feb 78, 1; AvWk, Jan 9/78, 48)
NASA’s annual procurement report for FY77 said that agency procurements had totaled $3532 million, a 10.2% increase over FY76. Approximately 80% of the net dollar value had been placed directly with business firms, 5% with educational and other nonprofit institutions or organizations, 8% with the Calif. Inst, of Technology (for operations conducted by or through JPL), and 6% with or through other government agencies. Of procurements placed by NASA with other government agencies, 90% had resulted in contracts with industry; about 48% of funds under JPL contracts had been for subcontracts with or purchases from business firms. Thus, about 90% of NASA’s procurement dollars had gone directly or indirectly to private industry. Of total direct awards to business firms, 73% were competitive procurements. Small business firms had received $255 million (only 9%) of these direct awards, since most of them were for large continuing R&D contracts for major systems and items of hardware, generally beyond the prime contractor capability of a small business. However, small business had received $119 million (22%) of the $522 million in new contracts worth $10 000 and more with business firms. Small business had also received $496 million (18%) of subcontract awards from 87 of NASA’s prime contractors, including $59,382 million awarded to minority small business enterprises. During 1977, 48 states and- Washington, D.C., had participated in NASA prime-contract awards of $10 000 and over, 83% of which were placed in labor-surplus areas located in 41 states. Of NASA’s prime contractors, 86% reported their larger subcontract awards had gone to 1684 different subcontractors in 45 states and Washington, D.C. (NASA pro-cur rpt FY77)
NASA announced it had selected Pan American World Airways, Inc., Aerospace Services Division, for negotiations leading to award of a contract for support services to facility operations at the National Space Technology Laboratories in Miss. Estimated cost over the first 3yr of the cost-plus-award-fee contract would be $32 million, with two 1-yr unpriced options. The contractor would operate and maintain NSTL real and installed property; manage supplies and equipment; and provide institutional, construction, and installation services. (NASA Release 78-94)
NASA announced that its administrator, Dr. Robert Frosch, had accepted for NASA a document commemorating the anniversary of Charles A. Lindbergh’s solo trans-Atlantic flight from New York to Paris in the “Spirit of St. Louis” on May 20, 1927. Copies of the framed Flight Philatelic Document, containing a series of American and French Lindbergh stamps and cancellations tracing the history of the aviator’s achievement, had been presented to 25 persons and organizations in the U.S. and France. Friends of the Nassau County Museum, Long Island, N.Y., had produced the tribute and selected the recipients, including President Jimmy Carter, French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing, Anne Morrow Lindbergh, and museums and agencies linked to aviation. Each of the documents bore seven American and French Lindbergh stamps with key cancellations, and each document was autographed by President Carter, President d’Estaing, Paris Mayor Jacques Chirac, U.S. Postmaster General Benjamin Bailer, French Postal Secretary Norbert Segard, and Mrs. Lindbergh. (NASA Actv, Dec 78, 12)
The Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported that a NASA-USAF pilotless research vehicle called HiMAT (highly maneuverable aircraft technology) made its first flight at the Edwards Air Force Base test center. Purpose of the HiMAT program was to improve maneuverability of U.S. fighter craft at transonic speeds (700-780 mph) and in air-to-air combat. No other remotely piloted vehicle or aircraft had the design features used on HiMAT, which would be incorporated into future USAF vehicles if successful: winglets (airfoils at the end of each wing) and unique close-coupled canards (small winglike surfaces located close to the main wings) to reduce air drag, and aeroelastic tailoring that originated in the early 1970s using the directional properties of graphite composites in the wings and canards (representing about 25% of HiMAT’s total weight) to control deformations under aerodynamic loads. The first flight was to test vehicle aerodynamics during separation from the carrier and during approach and landing. Taken to an altitude of 45,000 feet under the right wing of a B-52, HiMAT flew for 22 minutes under control of a NASA research pilot on the ground before landing on skids at a dry lakebed. HiMAT was built by Rockwell International’s North American Aircraft Division under contract to DFRC, using concepts from the Air Force Flight Dynamics Laboratory. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79,
The Washington Star reported on a NASA Pioneer Venus briefing at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in Washington, D.C., which revealed that Venus (far from being the dull and featureless object it appeared, covered by heavy cloud layers) had spectacular terrain and a unique atmospheric circulation system. Pioneer Venus 1 had been sending back radar and other information since it arrived at Venus in December 1978; Pioneer Venus 2 had arrived shortly thereafter, separating into five probes to study the atmosphere, four of which reached the “smoldering 900° F surface.” Dr. Harold Masursky of the U.S. Geological Survey reported that radar scans of Venus had shown a mountain estimated at 27,000 feet, far higher than Earth’s 29,028-foot Mt. Everest. Dr. Alvin Seiff of ARC said that Venus’s atmospheric circulation was different from any known elsewhere: Earth’s surface absorbed sunlight, and the resulting heat in combination with Earth’s rotation made the atmosphere flow west to east. However, the atmosphere of Venus absorbed the sunlight 30 to 35 miles above the surface, and heat variations in the atmospheric layers apparently drove one another with their motion. (W Star May 29/79, A-2)
The Washington Star said that three jet planes in four days had lost large parts while in flight: on September 15, a Boeing 707 passenger jet operated by American Airlines on a flight from Detroit to San Francisco had dropped a wing flap into San Francisco Bay; on September 17, a DC-9 passenger jet of Air Canada, 60 miles north of Boston’s Logan International Airport en route to Nova Scotia, had dropped is tailcone into the Atlantic Ocean from 25,000 feet up. An American Airlines Boeing cargo jet had scattered 200-pound chunks of its left wing over Chicago September 18 before landing safely at O’Hare airport. No one had reported injuries from falling debris. (W Star Sept 19/79, A-9)
The Washington Star reported that DOD would begin next week a long-awaited fly-off to see who would get a $2 billion contract to produce air-launched cruise missiles. The U.S. Air Force said that the missile was “desperately needed” to fill a gap in the U.S. weapons system created by President Carter’s decision to scrap the B-l bomber. Launched from a B-52 flying off the coast of California, the missiles would fly to a target southwest of Salt Lake City, Utah. W Star, July 13/79, A-4)
NASA announced it would test a modified U.S. Air Force jet July 20 at DFRC to see if winglets (9-foot airfoil sections) attached to wingtips of a KC-135 could improve performance and save fuel. Dr. Richard T. Whitcomb, LaRC’s inventor-engineer, had had the idea of using normal drag from a wingtip vortex as lift to improve performance. NASA would vary the winglets’ cant angle and incidence between test flights to measure effects of different positions; DFRC had already flown the plane without winglets to obtain baseline measurements for comparison. (NASA Release 79-94; DFRC Release 27-79)
The Washington Post reported that the Air Force had taken an “unusual step” December 4 in formally defending the Pratt & Whitney F100 engine powering the F-15 and F-16 fighter planes. Robert J. Hermann, assistant PRECEDING page blank not filmed INTFNTIONM-tY 91 secretary for research, said the U.S. Air Force had no plans to use another engine because of F100 problems. Conceding that F100 engine durability was “less than anticipated,” Hermann said F-15 engine-related safety was better than that of any Air Force fighter after comparable service. On November 21, the head of the USAF Systems Command told the Senate Armed Services Committee that “as many as 43” F-15s and F-16s would be without engines by next summer because of F100 production delays and other problems; at Congress’s insistence, the Pentagon had financed limited work on General Electric’s F101X engine as a possible alternative. Pratt & Whitney and General Electric were competing “hotly” for flight-engine contracts, the Washington Post said, and Pratt & Whitney had announced plans to spend $10 million on expansion of its jet production capabilities. (WPost, Dec 5/79, D9)
NASA reported that researchers from JPL and the U.S. Geological Survey had carried out measurements using radio noise from distant quasars that indicated rapid increase in southern California’s width. Dr. Arthur E. Niell of JPL’s astronomical radio-interferometric Earth-survey team reported an increase of 20.3 centimeters (8 inches) over 7 months between JPL and NASA’s Goldstone deep-space station about 193 kilometers (120 miles) away. At the American Geophysical Union meeting in San Francisco, Nieil and J.C. Savage of the U.S. Geologic;il Survey described making simultaneous recordings at the two radiotelescopes of radio noise from quasars and comparing the signals’ time of arrival using extremely precise clocks. Changes in distance between the telescopies could be measured with accuracies of 5 centimeters (2 inches) or less, and could be important to the Survey’s earthquake prediction mission. (NASA Release 79-166)
The DOD launched two spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Titan 3D, with no word on mission or orbital elements. A later report in Aviation Week & Space Technology'said that the 10:30 a.m. local time launch put a Lockheed-built high-resolution film-return satellite in an orbit with 244-kilometer apogee, 177-kilometer perigee, and 96.4° inclination, to supplement a KH-11 high-resolution recon vehicle that had been operating in space since June 1978, furnishing data by digital transmission rather than film returned to Earth in reentry capsules. The digital system allowed much longer life for this type of spacecraft, whose usefulness did not depend on depletion of its film pod. “As is often the case with film-return spacecraft,” said Aviation Week & Space Technology, the March 16 launch had included a piggyback payload, probably a ferret mission, put in orbit with 625-kilometer apogee, 623-kilometer perigee, and 95.7° inclination. (WTR cover Mar 16/79; AvWk, Apr 9/79, 18)
Rockwell International said that its Autonetics Strategic Systems Division would develop an airborne imaging-sensor autoprocessor under a $1 million contract with the U.S. Air Force Avionics Laboratory covering design, fabrication, and testing. The device would automate functions such as target recognition and cueing for sensors such as the forward-looking infrared sensor (FLIR) used in tactical fighters for air-to-ground combat. (Rockwell Release ESG 19)
The Washington Star reported that three U.S.-built Singapore air force jets had disappeared simultaneously at noon December 19 during a training flight from Clark Air Force Base near Manila, Philippines, toward a bombing range 20 miles away. Maurice Baker, Singapore ambassador to the Philippines, said “the astonishing thing is that they all disappeared at the same time without a trace.” The planes were on the same route flown by four Philippine air force planes when they mysteriously disappeared more than 5 years ago. (W Star, Dec 21/79, A-7)
Effective this date, Air Force Secretary Dr. Hans Mark announced that the U.S. Air Force would realign its space and missile systems research, development, and acquisition elements, establishing two new organizations in the AFSC: Ballistic Missile Office (BMO) and Space Service Division (SSD). The SSD would assume space-related activities for which SAMSO (the U.S. Air Force space and missile systems organization) had been responsible, realigning operations on the east and west coasts: the Eastern Space and Missile Center (ESMC) would be formed at Patrick Air Force Base, Fla., and the Western Space and Missile Center (WSMC) at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif. These centers would report through a Vandenberg unit not yet named. ESMC would include the present Eastern Test Range (ETR), the 6,555th aerospace test group, and 6,550th air base wing. WSMC would include the Western Test Range (WTR) and the 6,595th aerospace test wing. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 79, 1)
DOD launched a “classified payload” at 9:38 a.m. local time from Cape Canaveral on a Titan 3C into a geosynchronous orbit with 36,261-kilometer apogee, 35,802-kilometer perigee, 1,448.6-minute period, and 2.0° inclination. The U.S. Air Force had no comment on press speculation about the launch. The New York Times said “such satellites are used to monitor Russian and Chinese launches [and to warn] American officials if a missile is launched from a submarine at sea.” Aviation Week & Space Technology said that the payload had “orbital characteristics of previously launched early warning satellites.” (NASA wkly SSR, June 7-13; NY Times, June 11/79, B-6; W Post, June 11/79, A-9; Today, June 11/79, 1A, 8A; AvWk, June 18/79, 13)
The NAA announced that Sam B. Williams, president of Williams Research Corporation of Walled Lake, Mich., would receive the Collier Trophy, the oldest U.S. aviation award. Williams had designed and developed the world’s smallest high-efficiency fanjet engine, a low-cost lightweight means to realization of the cruise missile. The Williams engine measured 12 x 37 inches, weighed 145 pounds, and produced more than 600 pounds of thrust; it had qualified for both Air Force and Navy cruise missiles. The NAA had presented the trophy annually since 1911 for the greatest achievement in aeronautics or astronautics in the United States, demonstrated by actual use in the preceding year. (NAA Release Apr 3/79)
“Once again,” wrote editor Robert Hotz in Aviation Week & Space Technology magazine, “the American public is far ahead of its political leadership” in grasping the significance of NASA’s program of planetary exploration. NASA Headquarters was “astounded by the vast amount of unsolicited public reaction to the Viking and Voyager missions,” in the form of 17,000	letters it received in the first weeks after the Mars pictures reached Earth; the “Voyager flybys of Jupiter.. .have aroused similar public interest.” In Europe and Japan, interest in U.S. planetary exploration was even stronger; media coverage there “far surpasses domestic interest.” Hotz criticized the “penny-wise, pound-foolish policy” that would force NASA to use a single spacecraft for future planetary missions, not the dual-spacecraft approach used through Voyager. “Some day,” he added, “the high price for this folly will be paid in spectacular ‘low cost’ failures.” {AvWk, July 23/79, 9)
The U.S. Air Force launched a DOD surveillance spacecraft from Vandenberg Air Force Base at 11:30 a.m. PDT on a Titan 3B-Agena into an orbit with 323-kilometer apogee, 126-kilometer perigee, 89-minute period, and 96.4° inclination. DOD made no announcement, but press reports said that the launch was probably a low-resolution search-and-find mission; this type of system would remain in orbit about 2.5 months. (NASA wkly SSR, May 24-30; D/SD, May 31/79, 149; AvWk, June 11/79, 23)
ARC announced plans to flight test the parachute system for the Galileo Jupiter-atmosphere probe, third and last test of the system at the Naval Weapons Center test range at China Lake, Calif. Previous tests revealed the need for improvements, which had been made on the chutes to be tested. On completion of the test program, the design would be ready for delivery. Early in 1982 a U.S. Air Force Geophysics Laboratory balloon would carry a fully equipped probe to 100,000-foot altitude over the White Sands missile range and release it in a drop like the Jupiter descent, including parachute and hardware staging. When launched by a Shuttle and released from its carrier at the planet in September 1987, the parachute would slow descent of the probe in the turbulent atmosphere, using its six instruments to measure chemical elements and compounds, weather patterns, and pressures. (ARC Release 80-81)
ARC reported that its Earth-resources survey aircraft (U-2) was helping the U.S. Forest Service, National Park Service, and California Department of Forestry fight fires by providing real-time infrared imaging of smoke-obscured landscapes. The images, used for the first time October 2 during a fire at Kings Canyon National Park in the Sierra Nevada where thick smoke blocked aerial viewing, gave the size, shape, direction of burn, and hot spots of the fire. Crews had to hike four hours each way to get to some areas. Steep terrain would endanger firefighters and equ ipment if the fire perimeter was unknown. Flying at 21-kilometer altitude (about 65,000 feet), the plane used a Daedalus multispectral scanner with a Fairchild charge-coupled linear-array scanner to send infrared (IR) images directly to ARC, which transferred the hard copy of processed information immediately to U.S. Geological Survey maps of the area. Within 10 minutes, fire control headquarters would receive a telecopy for use in deploying manpower and equipment. The U-2 could photograph a fire for up to 5 hours and transmit anywhere within 500 kilometers (300 miles) of ARC, located near San Francisco, covering virtually all forested lands in California. (ARC Release 80-90)
Jack Anderson wrote in the Washington Post that the controversial B-l bomber, “like the wondrous Phoenix of Egyptian mythology, seems about to rise from the ashes” 3 years after the President “shot it down in flames”: the House Armed Services Committee had voted $600 million for B-l research and procurement. The committee had asked Rockwell International, “which still hopes to build the big bird,” to prepare a brochure comparing the B-l with the FB-111 preferred by the U.S. Air Force to carry cruise missiles. The Post said an internal Air Force report prepared for Rep. Robert Carr (D-Mich.) indicated that Rockwell had “drastically” oversold B-l capabilities. The brochure “grossly understated the range of the FB-111” by almost 900 nautical miles, comparing it on a low-level mission with a B-l flying at a higher, fuel-saving altitude, the U.S. Air Force noted. Rockwell also “fudged on the delivery dates it promised in the brochure” by three to four months in one case, almost a year in another. The U.S. Air Force report said that there were “many other areas that are inaccurate.” (W Post, May 21/80, B-16)
NASA said that JPL would arrange for media coverage of Voyager 7’s Saturn encounter over a 47-hour period on or about November 11-13, relaying live television to television stations, science centers, and planetariums across the United States. The Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C., also planned to change its regular closing time from 5:00 to 8:30 p.m. during the encounter to handle the expected crowds and had scheduled special programs around the encounter. (NASA Release 80-164)
The Washington Post reported that Ihe House Armed Services Committee had voted $50 million to expand production of Fairchild Industries, A-10 plane from a one-seat to a two-seat configuration. The aircraft was originally designed to accommodate two cockpits. Fairchild said DOD would save $10.5 million a year in fuel costs because it would not need a second plane to follow the first in training flights. Besides the added seat, the new model had the capability of flying in bad whether and at night. The company tested the two-seater for five months in 1979 and turned over the prototype to Eglin Air Force Base for testing; the U.S. Air Force had completed its tests and was assessing results. (W Post, Mar 27/80, B-l)
NASA announced award of a $70,072 million contract to McDonnell Douglas for Delta expendable launch vehicle services. The company would continue for 2 years the launch services work it had done for the past 18 years, including mission-peculiar vehicle changes, checkout, and launch. KSC would supervise the work at ESMC and Vandenberg Air Force Base for GSFC, which had overall Delta management responsibility. (NASA Release
Aviation leaders from across the United States attended a banquet at the Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C., to honor Dr. Paul B. MacCready, designer of the Gossamer Condor and Gossamer Albatross, who won the Robert J. Collier trophy for the first human powered flight across the 22-milewide English Channel. Master of ceremonies was NBC news correspondent Peter Hackes, a fellow enthusiast of sail planing. The audience saw the film of the Channel flight and applauded the touchdown of the Albatross on the beach at Cap Gris Nez, France. MacCready accepted the trophy for himself and for the “engine” of the Albatross, cyclist Bryan Allen, who was unable to attend. MacCready reported that NASA was negotiating to use his backup aircraft Gossamer Albatross II in tests aimed at design and operation of a remotely powered vehicle at 100,000 feet altitude. The Albatross’s extremely light weight “exaggerates the apparent mass effects in stability and control, and also the effect of turbulence on wing efficiency.” “These are areas heretofore unexamined and deal with phenomena never before encountered,” he added. (NAA newsletter May/June 80; NAA Release May 19/80)
In the first transcontinental balloon trip, a father-son team landed the 75-foot-tall helium-filled Kitty Hawk on Canada’s Gaspe peninsula at 7:27 EDT after a May 8 liftoff in San Francisco, Calif. Maxie Anderson, 48, and his son Kris, 23, of Albuquerque, N.M., had planned to land in Kitty Hawk, N.C., but were blown by brisk winds toward Maine and Canada. They had met with bad weather beginning with strong winds, rain, and snowstorms over Wyoming. Despite their failure to land at Kitty Hawk, the team set distance records: a previous balloon record was set last year by a 2,002-mile flight that ended in a snowstorm in Ohio. The Andersons on May 11 had gone 2,417 miles. In August 1978 Maxie Anderson and two companions had crossed the Atlantic in 137 hours in the balloon Double Eagle II from Presque Isle, Maine, to Paris. The Washington Star said in a May 21 editorial: “Mr. Anderson says he has no plans for further record-breaking trips, but refuse to believe it. There’s the Pacific Ocean just waiting to yield to helium and human dexterity.” During a visit to North Carolina the week after the flight, Anderson was inducted into the Man Will Never Fly society, a group with the motto “Birds Fly; Men Drink.” The society’s Dr. Ed North said it had awarded Anderson and his son memberships without knowing whether they were drinkers. “They missed their landing site by over a thousand miles,” North said, “so I just assumed that they were.” (W Star, May 12/80, A-l; May 20/80, A-2; May 21/80, A-12)
LaRC staff working this summer at NOAA’s National Severe Storms Laboratory at Norman, Okla., guided a modified F-106B jet fighter plane through severe southwest thunderstorms to show that lightning could strike not just once but two or even three times in the same pilace. Most lightning study had been at ground level; LaRC was studying its effect on planes in flight. The F-106, holder of a world single-engine speed record set in the 1950s, was still used by the Air Force and could fly up to 50,000 feet (15,250 meters); most flights would be around 15,000 feet (4,500 meters), the altitude where lightning was most statistically likely to strike. LaRC used an F-106B on loan from DFRC, considered top choice for the mission because of its thick wing skins and its larger-than-average bay with room for much experimental equipment. All F-106B work was on storm hazards, divided into those that did or did not involve lightning (those unrelated to lightning were turbulence, wind shear, and storm-hazards correlation). Hazards from storms were factors in aircraft operations and design. Through the summer, WFC instruments would map thunderstorms and the exact location of the F-106B in them, to compare with pilot and instrument observations. (NASA Release 80-130; LaRC Release 80-56)
NASA said that it had picked Jack R. Lousma and C. Gordon Fullerton as commander and pilot for the third flight of Shuttle orbiter Columbia. The backup crew would be Thomas K. Mattingly II and Henry W. Hartsfield, Jr. Lousma, a colonel in the U.S. Marine Corps, was mission pilot on Skylab 3, logging more than 1,427 hours in space as he and his crew accomplished 150% of their assigned goals. Fullerton, a colonel in the U.S. Air Force, piloted the Shuttle Enterprise on its first, third, and fifth flights in the approach-and-landing tests in 1977. The third Columbia flight, a seven-day and three hour mission of 116 orbits set for March 1982, would carry a payload (OSS-1) developed by NASA’s Office of Space Scinece and would further test the remote manipulator arm for inserting future payloads into space. (NASA Release 81-187)
The NASA centers which were directed in April to merge reported the steps being taken to complete the action, approved by the agency’s new administrator, James M. Beggs. As of October 1, DFRC, Edwards, Calif., would become a directorate of ARC, Mountain View, Calif., reporting to ARC director C.A. Syvertson; it would retain its name and its “essential identity” but would function as an operational element of ARC. Aeronautical research at the two locations would be integrated and staff functions for the two centers would be combined. Several ARC projects, such as the quiet short-harid research aircraft (QSRA) and the tilt-rotor research aircraft would be moved to DFRC over the 30-month consolidation period. WFC in Virginia would become an operating clement of GSFC at Greenbelt, Md., responsible for suborbital projects and operations. WFC’s applied sciences directorate would be a new instrument-systems division of GSFC’s applications directorate. GSFC’s management operations directorate would absorb WFC’s technical support and administrative directorates, except for electronic and mechanical shops. (NASA Release 81-107; WFC Release
In an accompanying statement, Frosch reviewed the situation of the inertial upper stage (IUS) to be used on the Shuttle for launching spacecraft into outer space from Shuttle orbit. Within resources offered by the 1981 and 1982 budgets, the best alternative seemed to be modifying the Centaur instead of proceeding with a three-stage IUS, in order to have “that very powerful combination available for first launches in 1985. No other alternative upper stage is available on a reasonable schedule or with comparable costs. Therefore, NASA will expand discussions with the Air Force on the best means for providing upper stages. . .[and continue with] the two-stage IUS, which both we and the Air Force are counting on.” (NASA Release 81-14)
NASA’s Atmosphere Explorer 5 reentered Earth’s atmosphere after 31,268 orbits and more than 5'A years of service. Launched from KSC November 20, 1975, the 720-kilogram (1,587-pourd) AE-5 carried 15 highly specialized instruments to gather data on Earth’s near-space environment. It was the first spacecraft using on-board propulsion to make large orbit changes and to use a central computer to make all data acquired immediately accessible to members of investigator teams at terminals in their own facilities. The last signal from AE-5 came over Hawaii, and no signal was received when it was due over Ascension Island. Trajectory of the descent was across the Pacific, Central America, and toward the Atlantic; the North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) confirmed reentry into the atmosphere over the Caribbean east of Nicaragua at 9:57 a.m. EE'T. (NASA Release 81-86)
NASA announced the selection of American Airlines to negotiate a contract for a new helicopter-simulation system to be installed at ARC, funded by the U.S. Army and used by both agencies. The $16 million system, designed to duplicate cockpit configurations and flight handling of helicopters, would aid in rotorcraft design and allow simulation of experiments, flight tests, and evaluation of improvements in basic helicopter technology. Pilots and engineers could simulate sight, sound, and motion of helicopter flight, using the system either stationary or in the vertical-motion simulator. (NASA Release 82-52; ARC Release 82-13)
Dr. Wubbo Ockels of the Netherlands and Dr. Ulf Merbold of West Germany, the Spacelab payload specialists representing the European Space Agency (ESA), had arrived at MSFC to complete training for the first Spacelab flight set for September 1983, a seven-day joint U.S.-ESA mission to carry out 70 investigations in five different disciplines. Of the four payload specialists in training, one American and one European would actually go into space; the other two would provide ground support to those in orbit. (MSFC Release 82-11)
NASA announced a week-long series of Shuttle checks to verify readiness for launch. Prime and backup crew members would fly a mock liftoff, return to launch site, and descend from orbit to a simulated landing on the dry lake bed at Edwards Air Force Base, California. The first 99 hours would be checkout of individual orbiter systems (electrical distribution, environmental control, instrumentation, flight control, and propulsion), the external tank (power, instrumentation, range safety, and tumble-valve systems), and solid-fuel rocket boosters (hydraulic, electrical, instrumentation, and range-safety systems) as well as critical electrical and mechanical connections between Shuttle elements. The second part of the tests would simulate portions of the mission, the launch, a return-to-launch-site abort with the orbiter’s system in control, and descent from orbit. (NASA Release 82-19)
NASA declared successful the mission of Nimbus 7, launched October 24, 1978, from Vandernberg Air Force Base into a polar orbit. Using eight interdisciplinary research experiments representing domestic and international scientific and government communities, it accomplished mission objectives, including proof of the feasibility of mapping upper-atmosphere characteristics, of supplying space-collected oceanographic data to scientific uses, and of extending the solar-radiation and Earth-radiation data base. Objectives were met or exceeded with high-quality and high-quantity data, and Nimbus 7would continue into its seventh year “in good health.” (NASA MOR E-604-78-08 [postlaunch] Jan 21/83)
Pilot Brooke Knapp landed a Gulfstream III business jet at Washington (D.C.) National Airport today and claimed a new speed record for an around-the-world flight by any type of aircraft. Her unofficial average speed was 512 miles per hour. Knapp had originally intended to break the record for a heavy class of business jet, but she bested by nine miles per hour the old record for all types of planes, set by an Pan American World Airways 747 in 1976. Knapp was president of a California executive charter and aircraft management service. The flight raised about $500,000 in gifts and pledges for the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and carried children’s letters and art from country to country. At the Novosibirsk Airport in the Soviet Union, children carrying their paintings greeted Knapp. The elaborate welcoming ceremony lost time for the crew, but they believed they could not ignore it. After refueling stops in London, Moscow, Novosibirsk, Peking, Tokyo, Honolulu, and Los Angeles, Knapp landed the twin-engined jet at National at 9:12 a.m., 45 hours, 32 minutes, and 53 seconds after taking off. The plane flew about 20,300 miles. (W Post, Feb 10/84, C—1)
In May an armament division F-16 from the U.S. Air Force's 3246th Test Wing fired an advanced, medium range air-to-air missile (AMRAAM) over White Sands Missile Range in the first guided launch of its full-scale development program, the Air Force System Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Armament division officials said the successful flight verified AMRAAM's interface with the F-16's avionics system and the performance of its active radar guidance capabilities. AMRAAM is an all-weather, all-aspect radar missile designed to replace the AIM-7 radar missile. AMRAAM is smaller, lighter, and faster than AIM-7 and had an active radar seeker that would permit air crews to "launch and leave" or to execute simultaneous multiple-target attacks during a single intercept. Pilots could launch AMRAAM from beyond visual range, because it received target information from the launch aircraft's avionics systems. After launch, the aircraft could pass target information to the missile, or the missile could use its own inertial reference unit and microcomputer to guide inertially toward the target. During the terminal phase, the missile's active seeker would take over and guide the missile to the target. The Air Force and Navy had a contract with Hughes Aircraft Co. for full-scale development of AMRAAM, with Raytheon Co. designated as "follower" contractor to introduce competition during the production phase. The previous December an AMRAAM separation/control test vehicle flew a preprogrammed course to evaluate the missile's autopilot, control system, aerodynamic characteristics, and safe separation from the aircraft. The Air Force planned over the next three years more launches from several aircraft including the F-14, F—15, F-16, and F—18. Plans also called for combat aircraft of the United Kingdom and Federal Republic of Germany to carry AMRAAM. (AFSC Newsreview, June 28/85, 4)
NASA announced finalists in its Teacher in Space Project would arrive in Washington, D.C., beginning June 22 to attend a national conference sponsored by NASA and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) as part of the selection process in the program. Through June 27 the 114 elementary and secondary school teachers would hear from NASA officials and other experts in space science and exploration, including discussions about their responsibilities if chosen to fly aboard the Space Shuttle, and participate in workshops sponsored by NASA's educational affairs division to provide a hands-on learning experience about NASA and its programs. During the week, a national selection panel would interview the finalists. On June 25 the teachers would attend a reception on Capitol Hill with members of Congress and on June 26 meet with President Reagan. (NASA Release 85-92)
NASA announced it has named effective November 3 Lewis Rinker deputy inspector general, Office of Inspector General (OIG). In that position, Rinker would assist the inspector general in the direction and management of nationwide OIG programs. Since joining NASA in October 1980, Rinker served in various management positions, the most recent of which was assistant inspector general for technical services and also served as the acting deputy inspector general. Before his NASA work, Rinker served in managerial positions with the U.S. General Accounting Office and was an industrial engineer and procurement analyst with the Air Force Systems Command. Rinker received his B.S. degree in engineering from Johns Hopkins University and was doing graduate work at George Washington University. He was a senior member of the American Institute of Industrial Engineers and a member of the Association of Government Accountants and the Association of Federal Investigators. (NASA anno., Nov 5/85)
As part of its FY 87 defense budget planning, the Department of Defense (DOD) approved a competition between the Northrop F-20 Ti-gershark and the General Dynamics F—16 Falcon as a fighter interceptor aircraft for the air defense fleet, Defense Daily reported. However, DOD had not decided how many prototype aircraft it would purchase for the competition. Although a FY 86 defense authorization bill specified a competition between the two aircraft, some members of the U.S. House wanted to direct the Air Force to set a minimum number of F—16 and F-20 fighters that it would procure in FY 86 and then institute the competition. The possibility of a competition had set off a price war between Northrup and General Dynamics, with General Dynamics proposing a specially configured F-16C to compete in cost and effectiveness with the F-20. (D/D, Sept 5/86, 12)
As part of the continuing Lewis Advanced Turboprop Project (ATP), supported by some 50 contracts and 15 grants, two advanced propeller propulsion systems recently underwent testing, the Lewis News reported. Lewis Research Center's (LeRC) Advanced Turboprop Project Office was directing development of the new highly loaded, multi-bladed propellers for use at speeds up to Mach 0.85 and at altitudes compatible with commercial air support system requirements. Advanced turboprop engines offered the potential of 15 to 30% savings in aircraft fuel burned relative to advanced turbofan engines (50 to 60% savings over the current turbofan fleet). Investigators were developing both single- and counter-rotation propeller systems. Researchers at Wright Patterson Air Force Base were testing in a static propeller test rig the first Large-Scale Advanced Propfan (LAP), designed and built by Hamilton Standard Div. of United Technologies Corp. under a NASA/ LeRC contract. Testing of the nine-foot diameter propfan, powered by an electric drive motor in the rig test, began in late August. At approximately the same time, the General Electric Co. began static proof-of-concept tests of its Unducted Fan (UDF) demonstrator engine at the GE Peebles, Ohio, test site. LeRC partially funded development of this advanced counter-rotating pusher propellers propulsion system. After completing a series of ground tests, both advanced propeller propulsion systems would undergo flight tests starting in mid-to-late 1986. The propfan would be tested in a wing-mount installation on a modified Gulf-stream II testbed aircraft under a NASA-contracted program with Lockheed; the UDF would be tested as an aft-mounted pusher on a Boeing 727 as part of a GE/Boeing cooperative program. The propfan of the LAP program was an example of the application of single-rotation tractor propulsion technology, whereas the UDF was a unique example of counter-rotation pusher propulsion technology. The UDF was unique in that its propellers were directly driven by the multi-stage power turbine without the need for gearbox speed reduction. Normal procedure in propeller installations was to drive the propeller through a reduction gearbox so that both the propeller and its driving turbine operated at close to their optimum speeds for peak efficiency. The APT effort was also addressing more conventional counter-rotation propfan configurations, as well as associated gearbox designs. (LeRc News, Oct 4/85, 1)
expose wild and lab research gypsy moth eggs and engorged female American dog ticks to weightlessness (GSFC/U.S. Department of Agriculture); and
Under a 1985 memorandum of agreement, the Eglin Air Force Base's armament division was leading a joint U.S., British, and West German project to determine how a non-nuclear, long-range standoff missile should be developed, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. General Dynamics and Boeing Aerospace Co., which had 15-month contracts to study the possibilities, was working with subcontractors from the other two countries. The countries could use the conventional, low-altitude subsonic missile, launched from air or ground, primarily against airfields. The immediate goal of the project was to design the system, develop a procurement program and schedule, and identify technological transfers among the three countries. The point of the agreement was to save money and eliminate duplication of effort in development of a needed weapon system. One country would build the system, but the others would support the effort. While the U.S. completed the procurement package, England provided most of the threat information needed to design the missile. West Germany was taking an active part in all project phases. (AFSC Newsreview, Aug 23/85, 3) NASA and Department of Defense
A Northrop F-20 Tigershark crashed today while practicing its routine for the Paris Air Show during a stopover at Goose Bay, Labrador, Aerospace Daily reported. The pilot, whose name was withheld pending notification of next of kin, was fatally injured. A Northrup spokesman said an investigation was underway to determine the cause of the crash and that the company "would expect the cooperation of the Air Force in the investigation since they are the executive agency for the F-20." The only other F-20 was at Edwards Air Force Base, California, and would remain there to continue the flight demonstration program "because of the high interest in the F-20 program in this country," the spokesman continued. The first F-20 had crashed the previous October during a demonstration flight at Suwon Air Base near Seoul, South Korea, killing Northrop chief test pilot Darrell Cornell. Northrop reported at the time that the crash was "pilot induced" and the "the aircraft and all its systems functioned properly." The fourth Tigershark was on the assembly line. An attempt earlier in the month to provide funding for the Northrop F-20 failed, Defense Daily reported, when an amendment by Rep. James Courter (R-N.J.) to substitute 30 Northrop F-20s for 24 General Dynamics F-16s in FY 86, brought up in a closed door markup by the House Armed Services procurement and military nuclear systems subcommittee, failed by a note of 8-4. An amendment by the panel's chairman, Rep. Samuel Stratton (D-NY), calling for competition between the F-20 and the F-16 in the FY 87 budget, prevailed. The Stratton amendment specified that the Secretary of the Air Force, in the development of the tactical aircraft fighter program for the Five-Year Defense Plan beginning in FY 87, "shall establish a competition for procurement of tactical fighter aircraft to meet the requirements of the Air Force above a minimum number of F-16 and F-20 aircraft that the Secretary determines appropriate for meeting the requirements of the active and reserve components. Such competition shall be among all suitable aircraft, including the F-16 and F-20 aircraft." A report drafted for the subcommittee stated that the F-16 and F-20 "are both roughly comparable aircraft. Both have new and modern radar and avionics systems, both have excellent performance as air-to-air combat fighters, and both have highly accurate air-to-ground bombing systems." The report did note that the F-16 had the advantage in range and payload capabilities, while the F-20 has "a significant advantage" in reliability and maintainability factors that affect the combat readiness and operating costs." (A/D, May 15/85, 1; D/D, May 2/85, 9)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division successfully flight-tested a low-cost, state-of-the-art autopilot on an unmanned research vehicle, the Air Force Systems Command's Newsreview reported. The division adapted commercially available microprocessor chips in the $50,000, in-house autopilot program to develop flight control-systems technology that would lead to cost reductions in tactical missiles. Researchers made five flight tests of the autopilot since October 1983 on an XBQM-106 unmanned vehicle during which the autopilot provided control augmentation, translating user inputs into vehicle actions. Current guidance and stabilization packages in missiles and other aerospace systems were costly because they used expensive data processing microchips that had excessive amounts of computational processing capability but no built-in control functions, thus requiring additional electronic interface components to perform the "control" function tasks. The microprocessor chip, in contrast, had sufficient built-in computational and control functions to permit 60% fewer interfacing components and should be appropriate to numerous tactical weapons systems, both surface and air-launched. The next step in the program would require replacing the wire-wrapped or brassboard model of the autopilot with a refined system on a printed circuit board, which would undergo at least 2 additional flights before the end of FY 85. (AFSC Newsreview, Jan 23/85, 8)
A Federal grand jury in St. Louis subpoenaed 11 McDonnell Douglas employees and certain company records as part of its investigation of alleged overcharges on F—15 contracts with the Air Force, Defense Daily reported. The Defense Contract Audit Agency alleged that the company furnished inaccurate cost and pricing data to justify $28 million in probable inflation in the cost of manufacturing major pieces of the F-15's equipment. McDonnell spokesman Gerald Meyer said the subpoenas apparently related to an investigation of pricing elements in FY 80 and 81 F—15 contracts, although McDonnell did not know the full scope of the investigation. Meyer said McDonnell had "no reason to believe there was any unlawful conduct" on its part and that it would cooperate with the Justice Department and other government agencies participating in the investigation. He added that McDonnell felt the serving of the subpoenas "was inappropriate and unnecessary because it was not preceded by more ordinary channels of communications. All they had to do was ask." (D/D, Sept 26/85, 130) NASA and U.S. Air Force
The U.S. Air Force rolled out the C-5B today, the first B model of the free world's largest military cargo aircraft, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Although it looked like a C-5A, the new C-5B had many improved features including state-of-the-art materials and avionics. It also had the new wings, which would boost the service life of the aircraft to 30,000 flight hours, that the Air Force was retrofitting to the A model. The Air Force planned to buy 50 C-5Bs, nearly doubling its capability to airlift non-stop anywhere in the world large equipment such as the Army's 74-ton mobile scissors bridge, Abrams M-1 tanks, and helicopters. When the purchase of the C-5Bs was completed, the Air Force would be about 18 million-ton-miles per day short of its goal of 66-million-tons per day of out-sized airlift capability, the minimum capability recommended in a 1981 Congressionally mandated mobility study. The Air Force planned to make up the difference by acquiring the C-17. Four improved General Electric TF-39 engines, rated at 41,000 lb. of thrust each, powered the C-5B. The aircraft seated 75, and its seats were 30% lighter than the A model's, decreasing total aircraft weight by 725 lb and cutting fuel consumption by an estimated $13 million pver the life of the C-5B fleet. The C-5B's 24 main landing gear wheels had carbon brake assemblies with multiple discs. More than 400 lb. lighter per aircraft, the new brakes doubled the life of the A model's beryllium system and should bring about an estimated 20-year savings of $20 million. In October 1982 the Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division had awarded a $50-million preliminary C-5B production contract to Lockheed-Georgia. Plans called for early September flight testing of the first production aircraft at Dobbins AFB, Georgia. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs for $7,817 billion. (AFSC Newsreview, July 29/85, 1)
In an internal memorandum Assistant Defense Secretary James Wade Jr. asked the Air Force why F—15 and F—16 fighter jets were getting more— rather than less—expensive to build as time went on, the Washington Times reported. The cost of an aircraft normally decreased over the years because the high initial costs of design, engineering, and getting an assembly line into operation were no longer charged. The memo said the price of the F—15—calculated in 1970 dollars—rose from $5.5 million to $7.4 million a plane in 1985. In current dollars, an F—15 cost 26.3 million. The price of an F-16, in 1975 dollars, rose from $3.9 million in 1980 to $4.8 million in 1984. In current dollars, the plane cost $14 million. McDonnell Douglas Corp. had been making F-15s since 1970; General Dynamics Corp. started building F-16s in 1975. A Pentagon spokesman said the Air Force was working on a response. However, Pentagon documents provided to Sen. Charles Grassley (R-lowa) showed construction hours for both aircraft were well above engineering predictions. A single F—15 was supposed to take 22,978 manhours to build; during the first quarter of 1984, McDonnell Douglas needed 37,193 manhours to complete a plane, the documents reported. An F-16 was supposed to take 837,300 manhours to build; in the first quarter of 1984, General Dynamics took 1.4 million manhours to build a plane. (W Times, July 8/85, IOC)
The U.S. Air Force's Aeronautical Systems Division's 4950th Test Wing unveiled a generic testbed, the airborne digital avionics test system (ADATS), for flight testing newly developed aircraft avionics systems, the Air Force System Command's Newsreview reported. The wing's flight test engineering division developed the test pallet in a continuing effort to enhance its mission capabilities at reduced costs. Air Force personnel could easily load and unload the test pallet from C-141 and C-130 aircraft and would use it to flight test aircraft components that used a Mil-Std-1553B data bus (a format for transferring digitized information to and from various systems and sensors in an aircraft). The avionics test system pallet provided or simulated all electronic signals the test item received from the aircraft in which it was designed to fly. To accomplish this the pallet had navigation, air data, and time-measuring systems. A mission computer on the pallet controlled the test item and the ADATS's functions. Flight-test engineers instructed the ADATS through a computer console during each test. Before ADATS, test wing electronic technicians typically built a dedicated test pallet for each test item. With ADATS, only software needed changing. Future planned upgrades for ADATS included a global positioning system for better navigation accuracy, a radar altimeter, and Doppler velocity sensor. Other planned improvements should permit ADATS to satisfy most digital avionics flight-test requirements through the year 2005. (AFSC Newsreview, May 312/85, 4)
measure the dynamics of a vibrating beam in the zero-gravity environment (U.S. Air Force Academy);
The U.S. Air Force awarded Martin Marietta Corp. an $87-million contract to begin production of the Low-Altitude Navigation and Targeting Infrared System for Night (LANTRIN), the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. The award enabled Martin Marietta to buy specialized factory equipment to produce the first two of 700 navigation pods for LANTRIN, which consisted of navigation and targeting pods mounted on tactical aircraft and a head-up display in the cockpit. The Air Force scheduled production of the targeting pod for spring 1986. Production of the entire system, which would give tactical pilots a day/ night under weather navigation and weapon-delivery capability, would cost $3.16 billion for the 700 systems for use on F-15E, F-16, and A-10 aircraft. The remaining 698 systems would come under fiscal year options on the contract over the next eight years. The only system of its kind, LANTRIN had a terrain-following radar that scanned the horizon while keeping the pilot at a safe altitude, even in poor visibility. The navigation pod turned night into day by distinguishing the difference in temperature of the terrain below. The result was a daylight scene that appeared on the head-up display mounted in front of the pilot. The combination of infrared and radar allowed the pilot to fly safely at a few hundred feet above ground. The targeting pod also contained a laser designator for delivery of laser guided weapons and an automatic handoff capability to allow acquisition and delivery of Maverick missiles against tactical targets. (AFSC Newsreview, May 17/85, 7)
NASA announced an award of a $400,000 contract to North American Aircraft Operations of Rockwell Internatl. Corp. for preliminary design of a pivoting wing for a supersonic aircraft. The contract covered Phase B of a joint NASA/Navy program to design, develop, and flight test an aeroelastically tailored, pivoting-oblique wing for transonic and supersonic flight evaluation. It was part of a four-phase procurement program to modify the NASA Ames-Dryden F-8 fly-by-wire research aircraft to a supersonic oblique-wing configuration. For takeoff and landing, the pivoting wing was set in the conventional aircraft flight position. For faster flight speeds, the wing pivoted so that one side was swept forward and the other side swept aft, forming an oblique angle with the aircraft's fuselage. In the oblique wing configuration, an aircraft in high-speed flight encountered less air resistance. The contract covered preliminary design of the oblique wing, its pivot assembly, and flight control program for the F-8's computers. The company would also define the aircraft's flight envelope and assess the operational capabilities of oblique wings for potential naval applications. A follow-on contract phase would provide detailed design, fabrication, ground testing, and flight support for a 12-month flight test program of approximately 40 flights. (NASA Release 85-152)
The EC-18B advanced-range instrumentation aircraft (ARIA), the first of four former 707 commercial aircraft modified by Aeronautical Systems Division's (ASD) 4950th Test Wing, rolled out on January 4, the Air Force Systems Command's (AFSC) Newsreview reported. To augment ARI Amission capabilities, ASD had purchased the Boeing 707-320 aircraft from American Airlines in 1982 as replacements for four of the seven Boeing EC-135s in the current ARIA fleet. The aircraft would provide worldwide missile- and space-testing support by serving as airborne tracking stations over land where geographical constraints limited ground-tracking stations and over broad ocean areas where no tracking stations existed. The EC-18B's ARIA fleet improvements included more room for mission equipment, increased fuel capacity, and more fuel-efficient engines. Modification of the 707s had offered major cost savings over purchase of new aircraft; program costs for the four aircraft were $25 million—$6 million for aircraft purchase and $19 million for ARIA conversion. At the time of purchase, Boeing officials had estimated new aircraft would cost $25 million each, not including ARIA-conversion costs. The most obvious external modification was the large bulbous nose—a 9 ft. radome housing the world's largest airborne-steerable antenna, a 7 ft. dish for telemetry reception. The nose also housed a smaller weather antenna. Other additions included a smaller radome for communications on the aircraft top and wingtip-probe antennas for high-frequency radio transmission and reception. ASD also outfitted the aircraft with a navigation station, mission-critical cockpit avionics, a modified electrical system, and an improved environmental-control system. (AFSC Newsreview, Feb 8/85, 6)
NASA Administrator James Beggs, in testimony before the Senate science, technology, and space subcommittee, said that projected cost overruns for the Centaur G and G Prime vehicles-development programs could run as high as $50 to $60 million, but that the agency did not think the problems would affect Galileo and Ulysses mission launches planned for the 2nd half of 1986, Aerospace Daily reported. Another NASA official testifying earlier had estimated the overrun at $30 to $40 million. The discrepancy in estimates apparently stemmed from an agreement between NASA and the Air Force calling for a 50-50 sharing of Centaur G program-design and -development costs. The Air Force, however, had set a $150 million ceiling on basic Centaur-development costs, which had not yet been reached. If the overrun surpassed the ceiling, NASA would have to absorb the costs. (A/D, Feb 28/85, 1)
The C-5's new B model made its first flight today from Dobbins Air Force Base, Georgia, climbing to 15,000 feet and cruising at 300 knots—an appropriate altitude and speed to determine airworthiness, the Air Force Systems Command (AFSC) Newsreview reported. Airborne for slightly more than three hours, the Galaxy began 55 hrs of production flight testing designed to evaluate its improved features. Evaluation would be shorter than usual for a newly designed aircraft because the C-5B only carried state-of-the-art features added to the already proven C-5A. Col. Thomas Stover, acting C-5B director in Aeronautical System's Division (ASD) Deputy for Airlift and Trainer Systems, called the first flight a "key event . . . ushering in a significant improvement to our strategic airlift capability." The nine-member crew alternately shut down and restarted each of the airlifter's four General Electric TF39-1C engines, which restarted without a hitch. Production flight evaluation would include airborne testing of an improved onboard computer called MASAR II, the malfunction detection analysis and recording computer. Pilots would also evaluate the improved automatic flight control and landing gear actuation systems. In October 1982 ASD awarded Lockheed Georgia a $50-million preliminary contract to begin C-5B production, and the first aircraft rolled out July 12, 1985. The Air Force had contract options to buy 50 C-5Bs, at total cost of $7,817 billion. Military Airlift Command expected to receive its first B model by December, with delivery of the 50th expected near mid-1989. (AFSC Newsreview, Sept 27/85, 1)
During a ceremony today at Peterson Air Force Base in Colorado Springs, the Department of Defense (DOD) activated its first unified space command, SPACECOM, to oversee all military programs in space, the NY Times reported. SPACECOM would oversee and control all Air Force, Army, Navy, and Marine Corps defensive space activities, which consisted of systems devoted to intelligence-gathering, watching for an attack, and facilitating communications and navigation, and would operate separately from the civilian programs run by NASA. However, it was the potential role that the new command might play as headquarters for any space-based defense against enemy missiles that drew most attention, despite official assertions that any such assignment would lie far in the future. Although the U.S. was committed to the early stage of research for a missile defense system known as the Strategic Defense Initiative, Gen. John Vessey Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said after the ceremony that the command's purpose was an extension of the armed services' current strategy of deterrence, and he sought to allay concern that it would be a first step toward war in space. "There are several things the command will not become," he said. "It is not a force built to escalate the arms race. It is not a force built to achieve dominance for the United States. The command will make its contribution to that fundamental element of United States strategy, the prevention of war." Rep. Ken Kramer (R-Colo.), who strongly favored development of a missile defense system, said that the Space Command opened a new period in the lives of nations. Noting that he could "speak a little more freely" than the military officials, Kramer said, "I call it the post-nuclear era, in which the people of this nation and potentially all nations will no longer live in this shadow of potential nuclear destruction and nuclear holocaust." Kramer had fought hard to have the military's space functions united and based in his district and said Colorado had become the "military space capital of the free world." DOD named Gen. Robert Herres, who headed the North American Aerospace Defense Command and the United States Air Force Space Command, to command the new organization. Herres attempted to dampen speculation about SPACECOM's role in strategic defense development. "There is a lot of uncertainty about how that research is going to turn out. That's why we call it research," he said. "I could speculate about what our role might be, but those decisions will depend on how the research turns out. (NVT, Sept 24/85, A28)
The Smithsonian Institution announced that "Celestial Images: Astronomical Charts, 1500-1900," a special exhibition of 39 rare depictions of star patterns and planetary systems, would open May 16 at its National Museum of American History. The exhibition, intended to illustrate a unity of science and art from the Renaissance to the 1900s, would include two woodcuts, the first printed star charts with coordinates and scales from which positions of stars could be plotted, from the workshop of Renaissance artist and mathematician Albrecht Durer (1471-1528). The museum would also display from Lahore, India, a 17th-century Islamic celestial globe made of brass and inlaid with silver stars; the only extant copy of engraved paper gores (1599) for the first celestial globe by Willem Janszoon Blaeu (1571-1638), the first to incorporate the Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe's unexcelled positions for 1,000 stars; and a 17th-century celestial atlas by Andreas Cellarius. In addition to reflecting artistic styles and conventions of their periods, the works represented differing points of scientific and philosophical debate. Charts that accurately fixed many constellations and thousands of stars also depicted Ptolemy's view of the earth as the center of the universe. Constellations rendered as mythological figures in one work might appear as Biblical figures in another. However, as a result of astronomer's access to stronger and technically improved instruments, the works showed increasing accuracy over the 400 years covered in the exhibition. (Smithsonian Institution Release, May 8/85)
The U.S. Air Force Space Technology Center's Kirtland Contracting Center awarded Aerojet Electro Systems a $17-million contract and Hughes Aircraft a $21-million contract for work on the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) program, the Air Force Systems Command Newsreview reported. Under the contracts the companies would develop and build a space surveillance sensor called "the precursor above the horizon sensor," which would look across space using several frequency bands in the long-wave infrared spectrum to track the trajectory of intercontinental ballistic missiles or space systems. (AFSC Newsreview, Oct 11/85, 3)
NASA and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics planned a symposium on Quality and Productivity for December. The event would focus on strategies for revitalizing organizations and provide a forum for discussing issues involved in increasing national quality and productivity. The symposium would bring together over 900 key executives from industry, government, and academia. (NASA anno)
A number of American space scientists expressed disappointment because no U.S. spacecraft would fly by Halley's Comet as it swings by Earth for the first time since 1910 and for the thirtieth time since 240 B.C. The scientists ascribed U.S. failure to have a mission to the comet to a "combination of over expectations, missed signals, poor planning, a streak of bad luck, and politics and infighting in the science community." In the meantime, the European Space Agency's spacecraft iotto, the Soviet Union's twin Vega spacecraft, and two Japanese0*spacecraft would each probe Halley's Comet. Particularly galling to American space scientists was the knowledge that none of these spacecraft could carry out their mission without U.S. help, as each was guided by U.S. Deep Space Network to reach the comet. The most sophisticated mission would be by the spacecraft Giotto. After a 60,000 voyage through Halley's "dusty tail," it would pass "within 300 miles of the coma, which with the nucleus forms the comet's head." The twin Soviet spacecraft were launched in
Two papers delivered by Dr. Allan Harris and Dr. Eugene Shoemaker to the American Geophysical Union in Baltimore dealt with the possibilities and consequences of a comet, asteroid, or large meteoroid striking the Earth. Chances of the first two bodies striking us in the next 100 years, the paper determined, were only 1 in 1000. An encounter with the third, however, would be more likely (this occurs about once every two decades) and'"0*although the meteoroid would explode in the atmosphere, less advanced nations might mistake the explosion for a nuclear attack. Asteroids and comets are still monitored, notwithstanding the low odds of a collision. Asteroids lend themselves to search methods because they follow an Earthlike orbit, but the latter have an elliptical orbit difficult to track. Also presented to the Baltimore meeting were the results of the findings of a joint U.S./Brazilian atmospheric study conducted in July and August 1985 by NASA and the Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais. Analysis of the study concluded that gases from the rain forests in the Amazon Basin in Brazil set off a chain of chemical reactions that eventually impact global air quality and the Earth's radiation budget. Trace gases in the troposphere resulting from biological activity in forest soil and vegetation were measured with instruments aboard NASA's Electra aircraft. (NASA Release 8663; 8664)
Martin Marietta announced plans to enter the private launching business with its Titan class rockets. The Titan was the largest of all U.S. expendable rockets, and spokesman Jack Boyd said that he hoped to market the launch for dual payloads. The corporation had previously submitted a formal request to the Air Force for use of its launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Florida. (W Post, Aug 20/86; LA Times, Aug 20/86)
An official from the Pentagon warned members of Congress that a oneyear delay in the Shuttle launches would create a backlog of 10 military missions and a 2year delay would raise that number to 21. He and others viewed this a "national emergency." The Air Force Undersecretary further pointed out a need for a replacement Shuttle and 10 additional expendable launch vehicles. Congressional committees, however, had not yet decided how the cost, if approved, would be shared by the Air Force and NASA. (B Sun, Mar 27/86; W Times, Mar 27/86)
The Senate Appropriations Committee approved a plan for a new orbiter that diverted $2.9 billion in defense funds for a reserve to be used by NASA. The proposal asked the Navy to reduce production of the F/A18 fighter and delay construction of a Trident submarine, the Air Force to delay construction of the C17 transport plane, the Army to buy fewer M1 tanks, and defense contractors to shoulder the burden of the cost of tools in its manufacturing. Although the plan called for NASA to oversee construction, the Air Force would launch and operate the new Shuttle. (W Post, Sep 11/86; Sep 12/86; WSJ, Sep 11/86; LA Times, Sep 17/86)
NASA announced an international joint effort to investigate ozone depletion over the Antarctic. NASA was to be joined in this effort by other Federal science agencies; the Chemical Manufacturers Association; scientists from Harvard University, the University of Denver, and the University of Washington; and the governments of Argentina, Chile, France, Great Britain, and New Zealand. A specially equipped ER2 plane and a modified DC8 airliner were to make a number of flights through the ozone hole between August 17 and September 29, 1987, to see whether manmade chemicals, nature, or both are destroying the ozone. The findings will be examined by an international panel of policy makers meeting in Montreal, Canada, in September 1987. (NY Times, July 30/87; W Post, July 29/87; W Times, July 29/87)
NASA Assistant Administrator for Commercial Programs Isaac T. Gillam named 28 teams that have submitted proposals to establish Centers for the Commercial Development of Space. The objective of the Centers would be to stimulate research in the microgravity environment of space. This research was expected to lead the development of new products that have commercial value. The proposed research fields include space power, space propulsion, remote sensing, communication technology, and bioscience. The overwhelming majority of the proposals came from American universities. (NASA Release 8769)
The panel, headed by retired Air Force General Alton D. Slay, praised NASA's toptobottom review of hundreds of items and procedures that could cause another disaster. It added, however, that several analyses of possible equipment failure and of items considered critical to safety would not be completed until the summer of 1987. The panel recommended that NASA rank the most critical safety items, based on the likelihood of their failure, and that it closely link the engineering changes and the hazard analyses. (NY Times, Jan 15/87; W Post, Jan 16/87; UPI, Jan 16/87)
NASA announced the selection of General Electric, AstroSpace Division, Princeton, New Jersey, for negotiations leading to the award of a costplusawardfee contract for design, fabrication, instrument integration, and launch operation support of the Global Geospace Science (GGS) Wind and Polar missions. The two GGS laboratories, with their complement of scientific instruments, were to examine the flow of energy from the Sun through the Earth's geospace environment. This project was to be part of the overall scientific investigations within the International SolarTerrestrial Physics Program. The contract would provide for delivery of the Wind laboratory to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida, for launch readiness on December 30, 1992, and delivery of the Polar laboratory to Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, for launch readiness on June 30, 1993. Each laboratory would be launched on a government`"furnished expendable launch vehicle. (NASA News, Nov 23/88)
NASA officially transferred custody of Launch Complex 17 and East Coast Delta launch operations to the U.S. Air Force. Since 1960, NASA had conducted 143 Delta launches from the twopad Complex, located at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida. Under Air Force stewardship, Complex 17 would continue to be used to launch Delta medium class vehicles. The Air Force had procured 20 new Delta IIs for Department of Defense payloads. The first launch was scheduled for later in 1988. In addition, at least eight commercial Delta IIs would be launched by McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Company, Huntington, Beach, California, from Complex 17 between 1989 and 1992. (NASA Release 8899)
Dr. C. Howard Robins, Jr. was named NASA Associate Administrator for Management, effective January 9. His primary responsibility was to help strengthen NASA's core organizational and infrastructural capabilities. Robins, a 30year NASA veteran, would replace Manuel Peralta, who left NASA to become president of the American National Standards Institute. (NASA Release 891, Jan 5/89; W Times, Jan 11/89)
An unarmed Air Force Midgetman missile went off course and was destroyed shortly after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base. The missile began to tumble 70 seconds into the flight during its second stage burn, causing the range safety officer to transmit a selfdestruct command. The Midgetman, which was undergoing its first flight test, had been programmed to deliver a dummy warhead 4,600 miles over the Pacific Ocean to the Kwajalen Atoll test range. Despite the failure, the test was declared a partial success by the Air Force. (NY Times, May 12/89; WSJ, May 12/89; USA Today, May 12/89; W Times, May 12/89)
A group of U.S. and Canadian astronomers announced that they had discovered evidence of vigorous activity in a whitedwarf star previously thought to be a stellar "corpse." This new and unexpected behavior may offer astronomers new insight into how stars are born, evolve, and ultimately die. The whitedwarf star, catalogued as 0950+139, lies at the center of the faint nebula called EGB6 and is located about 1500 light years from Earth in the direction of the constellation Leo. The findings were presented at the 173rd meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Boston, Massachusetts. (NASA Release 893, Jan 11/89)
Astronomers at Cornell University announced the discovery of an apparent galaxy in the making, challenging conventional theory that galaxies formed only during the early history of the universe. The galaxy observed by Cornell astronomer Martha Haynes and Ricardo Giovanelli appeared to contain no fully developed stars and to consist of only protostellar material, mainly hydrogen. The observed galaxy, named UGC7394, was 65 million light years distant. (UPI, Aug 29/89; WSJ, Aug 29/89; W H&Times, Aug 29/89; B Sun, Aug 29/89; C Trib, Aug 29/89)
A team of astronomers reported that they had discovered evidence of "brown dwarfs," large celestial objects that are intermediate in size between planets and stars. The findings,' 0*presented at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, showed evidence of at least nine brown dwarfs orbiting stars in the constellation Taurus. The observed objects were believed to be from 5 to 20 times the size of Jupiter. Evidence of brown dwarfs was expected to help account for some of the "missing" dark matter believed to exist in the universe. (W Post, Jun 15/89; P Inq, Jun
A team of astronomers from the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) and Princeton University announced the discovery of the oldest and most distant object yet observed in the universe. The object was reported to be a quasar at a distance of 10 to 15 billion lightyears from Earth, which may have formed when the universe was only about a billion years old. The discovery challenged conventional theories on the timetable for the formation of galaxies and galacticsized bodies in the early universe. Previous observations had placed the age of most quasars at about 3 billion years after the Big Bang. The new observations were expected to produce major revisions in theories of how matter coalesced during the early universe. (NY Times, Nov 20/89; W Post, Nov 20/89; W Times, Nov 20/89; P Inq, Nov 20/89; B Sun, Nov 20/89)
The last Titan 34D launch vehicle in the Air Force's inventory was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force station in Florida, carrying a classified Department of Defense payload. This was the final launch of the Titan 3 series launch vehicles, which were being replaced by the more powerful Titan 4. (SSR 1989 069 AD; UPI, Sep 4/89; NY Times, Sep 5/89; W Post, Sep 5/89; USA Today, Sep 5/89; C Trib, Sep 5/89; LA Times, Sep 5/89; W Times, Sep 5/89)
The Office of Technology Assessment warned that Space debris could make space activity too risky in 20 to 30 years if the most traveled orbits continue to be littered. With the average collision velocity in low Earth orbit 6.2 miles per second, an object having 1/35th the weight of an aspirin tablet has the impact of a .30caliber bullet, they said. The Air Force tracks such debris to advise NASA before Shuttle missions, but no course change has ever been deemed necessary. (W Post, Oct 12/90; C Trib, Oct 14/90)
In a flight test that concluded in August, NASA, the Air Force, and Boeing Commercial Airline Group announced betterthanexpected findings taken from the results of modifying a 22foot section of a Boeing 757 wing. The design reduced drag in what could equate to 10 percent if the entire span of both wings had been modified. A 1percent reduction would have amounted to a $100 million annual savings in fuel costs for the U.S. airline industry. (NASA Release 90115)
The Air Force and NASA entered their final stage of a $250 million, tenyear experiment for the X29 program, scheduled to be completed in March 1991. The test plane was designed to be 30 percent unstable and was dependent upon a sophisticated flight control system to produce and maintain stability. Glenn Spacht of Grumman Corporation, developer of the X29 and producer of the F14, said, "When applied to the F14, the plane will get better handling qualities, survivability, maneuverability, and antispin characteristics....The F14 can certainly reap the benefits of the X29." (Def News, Jun 25/90)
A joint NASA/U.S. Geological Survey team of American scientists planned to work with a Soviet Science team to study volcanoes along Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, part of the Pacific's "Ring of Fire." The study would mark the first time Western scientists had been allowed in the region. (NASA Release
Three SR71 Blackbird aircraft, reconnaissance planes being retired by the Air Force, were Scheduled to arrive in February at Edwards Air Force Base in California, for "flyable storage." NASA hoped to use the highspeed aircraft, capable of Mach 3 at 80,000 feet, for tests relating to the Space Plane later in the year. Daily News, Jan 30/90; NASA Release 9024)
The Air Force Eastern Space and Missile Center became the 45th Space Wing on November 12. The East Coast launch organization was responsible for facilities at Patrick, Cape Canaveral, Antigua, and Ascension. (Fla Today, Nov 13/91)
At a press conference associated with the American Astronomical Society meeting in Seattle, Ted Stecher, Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UIT) Principal Investigator, announced that UIT team members had identified hundreds of newly found young stars in the Large Magellanic Cloud. Several of these hot stars might eventually become supernovas. (NASA Release 91-84)
The Astro three ultraviolet and one x-ray telescopes carried by Columbia showed no traces of the decay processes of tiny invisible particles known as neutrinos, it was announced at the American Astronomical Society conference. These particles are connected with the Big Bang theory. (NY Times, Jan 18/91; W Post, Jan 18/91; LA Times, Jan 18/91; C Trin, Jan 20/91; CSM, Jan 23/91)
Construction of NASA's Ames-Dryden Integrated Test Facility at Edwards Air Force Base was 18 months behind schedule and $3.1 over its original cost estimate because three successive contractors pulled out of the job, NASA said. Efforts were underway to find a new contractor. NASA spokesman Don Haley asserted that the construction delays had not hindered aircraft tests. (Los Angeles Daily News, Apr 15/91; Californian, Apr 19/91)
NASA unveiled a three-dimensional view of Venus created from images recorded by the Magellan spacecraft. Magellan detected a five-mile high volcano known as Maat Mons, about the size of Earth's largest volcano, Hawaii's Mauna Kea. (P Inq, Oct 30/91; W Post, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; W Times, Oct 30/91; NY Times, Oct 30/91; Fla Today, Oct 30/91; C Trin, Oct 30/91; AP, Oct 30/91)
Newsweek carried a feature article about NASA's discoveries regarding the heavens: quasars, galaxies, black holes, dark matter, and the like, as presented at the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Special credit was given to the instruments NASA developed to explore space. The mysteries remaining to be explored were highlighted and the new telescopes being installed to catch infrared rays to help solve some of the mysteries. (Newsweek, Jun 3/91)
NASA announced that on June 29 its 114th Scout launch vehicle placed an Air Force Radiation Experiment into a 450 nautical mile polar orbit. The launch occurred from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, and was delayed one day by bad weather. (NASA Release 91-102)
The Defense Department lifted military secrecy from Shuttle missions, not because of decreased Soviet threat or the nature of the payload but because of the cost of security. The move was expected to save the government $80 million. Security would be applied more selectively because the Soviet Union and the American public were considered to be familiar with the nature of most space flights to date. Discovery would carry a payload known as Cirris, for Cryogenic Infrared Radiation Instrumentation for Shuttle, designed to determine the feasibility of the space-based detection of enemy aircraft and missiles. (NY Times, Apr 22/91; P Inq, Apr 23/91)
Jim Gunn, an astronomer at Princeton University and designer of equipment for the Digital Sky Survey, was planning a map of the universe that would fit in a desk drawer. Based on Gunn's work on the Hale telescope in California, the Sky Survey's 100-inch "smart" telescope would perch on top of the Sacramento Mountains in New Mexico. (W Times, Feb 8/91; LA Times, Feb 17/91)
Republican Congressman from California Tom Campbell said he would not object to the closing of a military installation in his district provided that it was "fair." In this connection he would not oppose the proposed closing of Moffett Field, from which NASA tests aircraft and spacecraft in wind tunnels and simulators and the Navy flies its P-3 Orion antisubmarine warfare missions over the Pacific. Local officials and business people argued that closure of the field would cause Lockheed Missiles and Space Company to move elsewhere, taking its 25,000 employees, in addition to the some 12,200 jobs lost from the Navy. (W Post, Apr 22/91)
NASA's Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) program was featured in the Christian Science Monitor. Harvard University professor Paul Horowitz, designer of the Planetary Society equipment, was cited as an enthusiastic listener for signals from space over the past eight years. (CSM, Dec 4/91)
The press reported that NASA had staged a mock emergency landing in preparation for Columbia's touchdown at Edwards Air Force Base, California. (USA Today, Jun 14/91; AP, Jun 14/91)
Findings presented at the American Astronomical Society's Division of Planetary Sciences conference suggested that Mercury had an ice cap on its north pole, even though it was the planet nearest the sun. The findings surprised the California Institute of Technology scientists who discovered them and were based on August experiments, the first radar photographs of an entire hemisphere of Mercury. The brightest reflection on the planet's north pole indicated a highly reflective substance such as ice over an area of an estimated 150 square miles. (AP, Nov 6/91; B Sun, Nov 7/91; P Inq, Nov 8/91; LA Times, Nov 11/91)
The New York Times reported that fuel cells, first developed for use in space in the 1960s, were being used increasingly in commercial plants. A fuel cell is a device that converts the energy of a fuel directly to electricity and heat, without combustion. The United States had developed an experimental plant in San Ramon, east of San Francisco, and other plants were considering use of the new technology. (NYT, Jun 30/91)
The Los Angeles Air Force Base at El Segundo was omitted from the list of proposed base closings of the Department of Defense. The base houses the Air Force Space Systems Division, a 3,200-employee unit that oversees military contracts for procurement of space hardware. (LA Times, Apr 13/91)
The crew of Atlantis talked with American schoolchildren while in orbit over the United States. (AP, Apr 6/91; W Post, Apr 7/91; B Sun, Apr 7/91; NY Times, Apr 7/91)
The New York Times reported that the United States would announce today at a scientific meeting in New Mexico its intention to buy an advanced Soviet nuclear reactor, known as Topaz 2, built to power systems in space. The United States at present has no working nuclear reactors in orbit and this purchase constitutes a high point in East-West cooperation on technical matters. Topaz 2 is designed to operate up to five years in space and will be set up in the Albuquerque area. It was to be tested by the University of New Mexico, the Sandia National Laboratory, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Air Force Phillips Laboratory. The Topaz 2 can generate from 6,000 to 10,000 watts of electricity. (NY Times, Jan 7/91)
The oldest B-52 bomber, which serves as a test-bed aircraft for the NASA Ames-Dryden facility at Edwards Air Force Base, and was built in 1952, may be facing retirement. Difficulties in obtaining spare parts were a major consideration according to Jack Levine, director of NASA's Flight Projects Division. NASA would like to substitute a newer B-52, such as the G model delivered in the early 1960s, for which spare parts are readily available. (Antelope Valley Press, Mar 24/91)
The media covered preparations of the Discovery crew for the first Shuttle night landing at Cape Canaveral, scheduled for September 18. As it developed, the bad weather forced a diversion of the Shuttle from Florida, and the actual landing occurred the night of September 18 at Edwards Air Force Base, California. Reportedly, preliminary findings were that the Shuttle was in good shape after its landing. (USA Today, Sep 17/91; AP, Sep 17/91; UPI, Sep 17/91; W Times, Sep 18/91; USA Today, Sep 18/91; W Post, Sep 18/91; C Trin, Sep 18/91; AP. Sep 18/91; UPI, Sep 18/91; P Inq, Sep 19/91; NY Times, Sep 19/91; W Times, Sep 19/91; WSJ, Sep 19/91; W Post, Sep 19/91; USA Today, Sep 19/91; LA Times, Sep 19/91; AP, Sep 19/91; B Sun, Sep 19/91)
The paper carried an article featuring Ali Abu Taha, whom it described as "telling NASA things it would rather not hear" over the preceding five years. He filed suit against NASA, Rockwell International (maker of the Shuttle's orbiter), and the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. However, the U.S. District Court in Alexandria, Virginia rejected his three suits. (Washington City Paper, Oct 11/91)
A team of American and British astronomers detected the flare of a supernova almost halfway to the edge of the known universe--five billion light-years away, the most distant such supernova ever observed. Light from the supernova was expected to help astronomers grapple with the questions of whether the universe is infinite and will expand forever or whether it is finite and will eventually slow down and collapse. (NY Times, Nov 15/92)
In a carefully hedged report, the General Accounting Office said that crucial American high-technology industries including consumer electronics and robotics may have lost ground in the 1980s to foreign competitors, particularly Japan. The sectors examined were: semi-conductors, semiconductor equipment, supercomputers, pharmaceuticals, telecommunications, fiber optics, robotics, consumer electronics, civilian aircraft, advanced materials, and flexible manufacturing systems. (NY Times, Nov 18/92; LA Times, Nov 18/92)
Congress planned to give the fledgling U. S. commercial space business a boost next year by pumping $10 million into launch site improvements. Most of that money was expected to be spent on upgrades to Cape Canaveral Air Force Station facilities. (Fla Today, Oct 8/92)
A Japanese amateur astronomer detected Comet Swift-Tuttle on its return to the inner solar system. Swift-Tuttle, last seen during the American Civil War, is currently the longest predictable periodic comet, returning approximately every 130 years. (W Post, Sept 29/92; NY Times, Sept 30/92)
Gerard K. O'Neill, a visionary Princeton physicist who popularized the idea of colonizing space, died in Redwood City, California. O'Neill, 65, was the author of The High Frontier, a 1977 book that proposed the construction of giant solar-powered cylinders in which as many as 20 million people could live in space. (P Inq, Apr 29/92)
NASA and a contractor team headed by Rockwell International said they were conducting supersonic laminar flow experiments using two General Dynamics F-16XL demonstrators on loan from the U. S. Air Force. (AvWk, Nov 2/92)
In a letter to the British journal Nature, two American scientists at the University of Arizona's Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, David Kring and Willima Boynton, said that they had found what they believe to be the location where a gigantic object from outer space crashed into the Earth 65 million years ago, possibly ending the age of the dinosaurs. The site is a buried crater 110 miles across on the Yucatan Peninsula in Mexico. (The Sun, Jul 9/92; WSJ, Jul 9/92)
General Dynamics Corporation said its space systems unit had won a $112.6 million Air Force contract to modify space-launch facilities at Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. (WSJ, Nov 6/92)
The Air Force reported that a YF-22 Advanced Tactical Fighter, prototype of the planned F-22, had slammed onto the main runway of Edwards Air Force Base with its wheels retracted during a practice approach. The radar-eluding plane, designed to be the hottest air combat fighter going into the 21st century, slid several thousand feet and burned for 90 seconds. A Lockheed pilot escaped with only minor injuries. (B Sun, Apr 29/92)
Ceremonies at Edwards Air Force Base marked the 50th anniversary of the birth of the jet age. On October 2, 1942, Bob Stanley first flew the XP-59 above Rogers Dry Lake Bed at Muroc Air Base (now Edwards Air Force Base). (Antelope Valley Press, Oct 2/92)
To help bolster the competitiveness of American industry, NASA and the Department of Energy announced that they had formed a partnership to enhance the transfer of technologies developed in their laboratories to American enterprise. Areas of cooperation included outreach to business and non-profit research organizations, access to federal technology resources, training and education, dissemination of scientific and technical information, and technology transfer policy and program analysis.
The New York Times reported that a radio telescope spread across 5,000 miles had been finished.  The new telescope, called the Very long Baseline Array (V.L.B.A.), has 10 antennas scattered across United States territory from the central Pacific Ocean to the Caribbean. All 10 antennas are very well synchronized as a single telescope of gigantic size, an arrangement that gives the V.I.B.A. far sharper vision than that of any other telescope. The telescope's revolving power is such that an observer in New York City would be able to read a newspaper in San Francisco. The V.I.B.A. was to be used to probe the depths of time and space. (NY Times, Aug 17/93)
NASA's exhibit at the Experimental Aircraft Association Fly-in Convention and Sport Aviation Exhibition at Oshkosh, Wisconsin on July  29-August 6, was scheduled to focus on general aviation technology. The exhibit was to explain how NASA was addressing the challenges of aircraft in every speed regime. It also planned to stress how NASA's "customers," that is, the government, industry, universities, and, ultimately, the American taxpayer, benefitted from the agency's advances in aeronautics.  (NASA Release 93-128)
Scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (M.I.T.) reported that a powerful new x-ray camera had been shot into orbit just in time to focus on the newly discovered supernova. The scientists reported that the camera was providing very detailed information about the cosmic explosion. The M.I.T. camera was one of several Japanese and American instruments put into orbit aboard a Japanese spacecraft launched on February 20. (NY Times, Apr 13/93)
Harris B. Hull, 83, a retired Air Force brigadier general and former special assistant to the administrator of NASA, died January 29 at Sibley Memorial Hospital in Washington after a heart attack. General Hull was assigned to NASA in 1963. After retiring from the Air Force in 1964, he remained with NASA until retiring in 1986. (W Post, Feb, 1/93; NY Times, Feb 2/93)
The San Francisco Chronicle reported that NASA was renewing its interest in aeronautics.  In 1992, aeronautics accounted for about 8 percent of NASA's $14.3 billion budget; if the agency got the funding it had requested, NASA planned to spend $8.6 billion on aeronautics from 1994 though 1998--an increase of 50 percent. (San Francisco Chronicle, Aug 11, 1993; LA Times, Aug 25/93)
Speaking to a meeting of the American Astronautical Society, Representative Alan Mollohan warned that unless NASA could prove it contributed to U.S. economic competitiveness, politicians would view it as a "Cold War anachronism." According to an article in Space News, Mollohan's comments reflected the view of both the White House and members of Congress. The message: change or become irrelevant. (Space News, March 15-21)
America's technological leaders were scheduled to meet  in Anaheim, California, from December 7-9 1993, to explore innovative ideas that could be used to solve engineering problems, create new products and industry opportunities, and facilitate the transfer of government-sponsored technologies to American industry. TECHNOLOGY 2003, the fourth annual national technology transfer conference and exposition, was sponsored by NASA, "NASA Tech Briefs" magazine, and the Technology Utilization Foundation. (NASA Release 93-212)
The media reported that NASA and the astronomical community had differing views on an orbiting billboard that would beam a moon-sized message back to Earth. NASA spokesman Charles Redmond said that the "space billboard" was in line with the space agency's aims, that is, to encourage commercial development of space. A quite different view was expressed by Carl Sagan, a well-known U.S. astronomer and university professor, who called the project an "abomination" and said that it was "the thin edge of a wedge which may  destroy optical ground-based astronomy...."  An American Astronomical Society spokesman said the billboard would hamper Earth-based astronomy, add to the growing pollution of the night sky by light, and even infringe on everyone's enjoyment of nature's sunsets." (RTw, May 17/93)
The Washington Times reported that a conference of scientists and policy makers had discussed the question of what to do with the "junk science" that makes its way into public policy. The conference, which was held in the Washington, DC area, was sponsored by the International Institute of George Mason University and the Science and Environmental Policy Project. (W Times, May 25/93)
Robert M. Rados, 73, a retired NASA meteorologist, died of cardiac arrest February 3 at Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, D.C.
NASA released four new images gathered by the Cosmic Background Explorer. The images, which were released at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, showed infrared sources such as dust within the Solar System, stars in the Milky Way Galaxy, and dust and stars in other galaxies. The images were created from Diffuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) data. (NASA Release 92-256)
NASA announced that it was adapting an existing, cutting-edge x-ray system to improve inspections of aging aircraft while saving American industries money. The x-ray system, which combines TV-like scanning by x-ray beams with digital data acquisition, was originally intended for medical, dental, and other industrial purposes.  NASA was to adapt the system to inspect aircraft wings, turbines, and propeller blades for corrosion, cracks, and disbonding.  The system was developed by the Digiray Corporation. (NASA Release 93-137)
NASA announced the solicitation of proposals for the Technology Reinvestment Project, a $471 million federal interagency effort to develop and deploy dual-use technologies and at the same time give a competitive advantage to American companies. (NASA Release 93-85)
Researchers writing in the current issue of the journal Nature announced that they had detected a guitar-shaped nebula attached to the fastest known star in the galaxy; the star is at the tip of the neck of the "guitar." The speed of the star, a pulsar, which scientists calculated travelled at least 500 miles per second through the Milky Way galaxy, created a "bow-shock" wave in the rarified gas of outerspace. The shock wave heated the gas it encountered and made it give off energy, now appearing as the outline of the star's wake. The wake was detectable only with the world's most powerful telescope, according to Cornell University astronomer James M. Cordes. (W Post, Mar 15/93; Time, Mar 22/93)
NASA announced that scientist Dr. Robert Watson would receive the Scientific Freedom and Responsibility Award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) on February 15.
Aviation Week & Space Technology reported that Lockheed was leading a six-member industry team in an effort to develop an unsolicited National Aero-Space Plane (NASP) proposal for the Air Force. The team was to recommend scrapping the NASP in favor of a much lighter hypersonic research vehicle called NORA, for National Orbital Research Aircraft. NORA's $5 billion price tag was far less than the $10-15 billion slated for the NASP. (AvWk, Mar 8/93)
A modified troop and cargo plane described as a "flying laboratory" crashed and burned after taking off from Dobbins Air Force Base in suburban Atlanta. The seven people aboard, all Lockheed employees, were killed. The plane, a modified troop and cargo plane, was used by Lockheed for testing new technologies.
NASA announced that recent discoveries from the agency's Extreme Ultravioilet Explorer (EUVE) would be presented at the National Meeting of the American Astronomical Society, University of California at Berkeley on June 7 and 8.
The government-backed computer chip consortium Sematech announced Thursday that it had produced chips with electrical devices just 0.35 microns wide using American production equipment. The announcement indicated that the American chip industry was coming back on track technically. The state-of-the-art in chip production was 0.6 microns; however, Japanese companies recently began demonstrating their ability to produce 0.35 chips. Achieving 0.35 micron capabilities by the end of 1992 was one of Sematech's goals at its founding in l987. (LA Times, Jan 22/93)
The New York Times reported that at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society, Dr. Douglas N.C. Lin of the University of California at Santa Cruz had described the Milky Way as practicing "galactic cannibalism." Lin explained that the gravitational force of matter in the vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy was causing the Milky Way to consume the stars and gases of its nearest galactic neighbor, the Large Magellanic Cloud 160,000 light-years away. (NY Times, June 8/93; LA Times, June 8/1993; USA Today, June 8/93; B Sun, June 8/93; P Inq, June 8/93)
A conference committee of the Senate and House eliminated $12.3 million earmarked for the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project. Angry astronomers began seeking private funds to continue their work, which had been underway for barely a year. (SF Chron, Oct 6/93; NY Times, Oct 7/93; San Francisco Examiner, Oct 4/93)
NASA announced that together with the American Geophysical Union it was honoring pioneer space scientist James A. Van Allen on his 80th birthday. Dr. Van Allen, Professor Emeritus at the University of Iowa, over a 50-year period studied planetary magnetospheres and cosmic rays. He discovered the belt of radiation around the Earth that bears his name. (NASA Release 94-81; Fla Today, May 25/94)
An interview was published with retired Princeton physicist Freeman Dayson in which he strongly criticized NASA. He advocated that NASA be dismantled like AT&T, feeling it was overly expensive and inefficent. Instead, science should be done by individuals following their own curiosity and creativity. (CSM, Dec 7/94)
Although Congress killed NASA's search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) program, the subject survived as Project Phoenix. The SETI Institute in Mountain View, California, indicated existing contributions of $4.4 million of the $7.3 million needed for the project. NASA renamed the project High Resolution Microwave Survey to reflect the technology's ability to screen out Earth-based radio interference while listening for cosmic signals on millions of channels at once. (CSM, Feb 2/94; W Post, Feb 15/94)
NASA announced that the fifth annual technology conference and exposition, Technology 2004, would be held November 8-10 at the Washington Convention Center, Washington, D.C. (NASA Release 94-184)
University of Maryland radio astronomers indicated they had spotted water clouds near the center of a galaxy called Markarian 1, which is about 200 million light years away in the constellation Pisces. The finding was reported at the Minneapolis meeting of the American Astronomical Society. At that meeting, Johns Hopkins University astronomers reported several days previously having "very strong" evidence of a black hole at the center of the Andromeda galaxy. (B Sun, Jun 2/94; P Inq, Jun 3/94; W Post, Jun 3/94; USA Today, Jun 3/94; NY Times, Jun 3/94)
Two American scientists, Clark Chapman and David Morrison, wrote in Nature magazine that society might want to decide whether to pay for a sky survey to track comets and asteroids that could crash into the Earth with catastrophic results, so that governments could use nuclear arms to smash or divert them. NASA proposed a Spaceguard Survey to map all asteroids large enough to cause global catastrophe. It would cost $50 million to set up and $10 million in annual operating costs. (Reuters, Jan 5/94)
A robot alfalfa harvester is a joint project of Carnegie Mellon, NASA, and the New Holland farm equipment company. Although America lost the robot wars in the last few decades, many new applications are now seen. (NY Times, Oct 7/95; AvWk, Jun 26/95)
The claim of a new discovery by three NASA astronomers was refuted by a galaxy expert who was invited to their press conference. At a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona, the astronomers claimed to have discovered six dwarf spiral galaxies, which they also claimed astronomers long thought existed but had never found. The Canadian galaxy expert claimed that dwarf spirals had been discovered by astronomers in the 1950's. (AP, Jan 11/95; Reuter, Jan 10/95)
Astronomers detected a gigantic mass, equivalent to 40 million Suns, in a distant galaxy that they believe to be a black hole. The discovery, announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Tucson, Arizona, was made by a team of American and Japanese scientists using a computer-linked system of 10 radio telescope dishes stretching from the Virgin Islands to Hawaii known as the Very Long Baseline Array. Since black holes, by definition, emit no visible light or other radiation, astronomers infer their presence by their strong gravitational pull on surrounding stars.  The discovery was made by observing the rotation of a disk of gas and dust surrounding a galactic nucleus. (NY Times, Jan 12/95; W Times, Jan 12/95; W Post, Jan 12/95, AP, Jan 12/95; H Chron, Jan 12/95; CSM, Jan 13/95)
At the High Energy Astrophysics Division of the American Astronomical Society, astronomers working with NASA’s Rossi X-ray Timing Explorer (RXTE) spacecraft announced the discovery of the fastest vibrations ever recorded in a star system. The vibrations occur when massive neutron stars begin to die out, expelling the outer layers of their solid crusts and creating powerful x-rays. The astronomers working with the RXTE recorded x-rays flickering at up to 1,130 times per second. Scientists were unsure why this process occurred. According to NASA, “the possibility that the RXTE has detected actual waves in neutron stars or a very fast rotation period of one such star is of great scientific interest.”(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Discovers Fastest Stellar Vibrations Yet,” news release 96-81, 30 April 1996; Associated Press, “NASA Instrument Detects Fastest Vibrations Yet Seen in Universe,” 30 April 1996.)
In its annual contest, Popular Science magazine honored NASA’s experimental flight-control system as one of the best technological developments of 1996. NASA had installed the system, developed for the use of NASA and the U.S. Air Force, in a remotely piloted aircraft called LoFLYTE (Low Observable Flight Test Experiment). On board the aircraft, the system used techniques involving neural networks to “learn” to fly, actually acquiring flight skills by mimicking the actions of the pilot controlling the plane from the ground. Neural networks are systems that learn skills by doing them. Scientists hoped the technology might eventually have an impact on commercial and military aviation.(NASA, “Aircraft Flight-Control System Wins ‘Best of What’s New’,” news release 96-233, 12 November 1996. 155 David Colker, “Pilotless Test Plane Blown Up After It Veers Off Course,” Los Angeles Times, 13 November 1996; Jim Skeen, “Pilotless Aircraft Crashes at Edwards,” Antelope Valley News (Palmdale, CA), 13 November 1996.)
Astronomer and Pulitzer Prize winner Carl Sagan died after a long fight against a bone marrow disease; he was 62 years old. Since 1971, Sagan had directed Cornell University’s Laboratory for Planetary Atmospheres and Surfaces, where he forged his reputation as an expert in exobiology. Sagan helped plan the Mariner, Viking, and Voyager missions, receiving NASA’s Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement in 1972. Sagan also helped popularize modern science with his widely viewed television series Cosmos. Sagan described the television series as an endeavor “to show that science is a delight and to end people’s artificial alienation from it.” Sagan’s The Dragons of Eden (1977) won the Pulitzer Prize. Throughout his work, Sagan had also argued for the possibility of extraterrestrial life.(Cornell University, “Carl Sagan, Cornell Astronomer, Dies Today (Dec. 20) in Seattle,” news release, 20 December 1996; United Press International, “Astronomer Carl Sagan Has Died,” 20 December 1996.)
NASA launched its Fast Auroral Snapshot (FAST) Explorer from a test range near Vandenberg Air Force Base in California. Engineers had designed the FAST vehicle to travel about 1,500 miles (2,400 kilometers) above Earth, measuring energetic particles, and magnetic and electric fields, at high altitudes where auroras form, to explore the “physical processes that produce aurora borealis and aurora australis.” NASA’s Small Explorer Project, tasked with providing frequent and low-cost research missions for astrophysics investigations, had carried out the FAST mission as the second in a series of five missions.(NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “FAST Status Report #1: Spacecraft Successfully Launched,” news release, 21 August 1996; Bruce Smith, “Fast Launched Successfully,” Aviation Week and Space Technology 145, no. 9 (26 August 1996): 71.)
NASA marked the 50-year anniversary of the Bell X-1 aircraft’s first flight, which took place at the site of Edwards Air Force Base, home of NASA’s DFRC. According to Jay Miller, the author of The X-Planes: X-1 to X-33, the X-1 had given flight researchers and engineers their first full- scale tool to study transonic aerodynamics. The Bell Aircraft Corporation, the U.S. Army Air Forces (predecessor of the U.S. Air Force), and NASA’s predecessor, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, had collaborated to get the first test plane off the ground. The X-1 test not only provided aeronautical data, but also pioneered the test methods later adopted by DFRC flight researchers.
NASA and the U.S. Air Force unveiled to the public an “intelligent” aircraft, using a computerized system to “learn as it flies.” Researchers had engineered the hypersonic aircraft to take inventory of flight maneuvers performed while operating under remote control, eventually using its acquired knowledge to develop the capability to fly itself. According to the flight researchers, the aircraft’s control system would create a continually altering set of “control laws,” to optimize flight performance. After the aircraft had perfected its system, it could assist pilots in performing such tasks as landing partially damaged planes. The intelligent aircraft could also enable flight at speeds and altitudes that human pilots could hardly ever achieve, while still maintaining adequate control of an aircraft.(NASA, “Intelligent Test Aircraft Unveiled in Wisconsin Today,” news release 96-154, 2 August 1996.)
Fred C. Adams and Gregory P. Laughlin, astrophysicists at the University of Michigan, presented their theory of a “Dying Universe,” at the American Astronomic Society conference. Adams and Laughlin had projected the future of the universe based upon quantitative theory, concluding that the Earth would die out with a whimper. According to their theory, the Sun will eventually die out, and the light of all stars will vanish. The projection was so far off in the distance (10,000 trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion years from now) that it drew a mixture of criticism, amusement, and intrigue from the scientific community. Adams and Laughlin insisted that recently acquired insights into cosmic evolution had allowed them to draw conclusions about the end of the universe, albeit in broad terms. Previously, scientists had lacked even the basic data and theoretical framework necessary to undertake the task. The two researchers emphasized that they made no claim to foresee when the universe would end, but rather offered the first long-term, science-based deduction on how the universe would evolve through four periods of expansion⎯the star-filled era (the present), the degenerate era, the black- hole era, and the dark era. The ultimate result of such a progression was too difficult to estimate, according to the scholars.(John Noble Wilford, “At Other End of ‘Big Bang’, Finale May Be Big Whimper,” New York Times, 16 January 1997; Tim Friend, “We’ve Got 100 Trillion Years Until ‘Lights Out’ in Universe,” USA Today, 16 January 1997; Associated Press, “End of It All,” 16 January 1996.)
NASA announced that an intense wave of gamma rays, emanating from a magnetar 20,000 light- years away from Earth, had struck Earth’s atmosphere on 27 August. Stanford University professor Umran Inan remarked that the occurrence, which had a measurable effect on Earth, was extremely rare, since the event occurred outside the solar system. The radiation wave was “so powerful that it blasted sensitive detectors to maximum or off scale on at least seven scientific spacecraft in Earth-orbit and around the solar system.”(NASA, “Tremendous Gamma-Ray Flare Blasts Earth,” news release 98-172, 29 September 1998.)
The Organization of American Historians presented the 1998 Richard W. Leopold Prize to Andrew J. Butrica for his book, To See the Unseen: A History of Planetary Radar Astronomy. The organization awarded the biennial Richard W. Leopold Prize “for the best book written by an historian connected with federal, state, or municipal government in the areas of foreign policy, military affairs, the historical activities of the federal government, or biography in one of these areas.” Butrica’s book, a comprehensive history of planetary radar astronomy, was a publication of the NASA History Series produced by the NASA Headquarters History Division’s Office of Policy and Plans.(NASA, “NASA History Wins Prestigious Prize,” news release 98-53, 3 April 1998.)
NASA announced the arrest of “the suspected leader of a group of computer hackers who broke into the network of a NASA laboratory.” Law enforcement agents accused twenty-year-old Calldan Levi Coffman of Carson, Washington, suspected leader of a group called ViRii, of infiltrating the networks of various corporations, universities, and other government agencies, in addition to breaching the security of computer systems at NASA’s JPL last June. NASA’s Computer Crimes Division had worked with other government agencies, including the U.S. Naval Intelligence Service, the U.S. Air Force Office of Special Investigations, and the FBI, to uncover a link between Coffman’s group and Israeli hacker Ehud Tenenbaum, known as The Analyzer. Law enforcement officials suspected Tenenbaum of organizing a confederation of hacker groups, including his own group and Coffman’s group.(Associated Press, “NASA Hacker,” 18 March 1998; Billington for United Press International, “Hacker ‘Confederacy’,” 20 March 1998.)
James K. Yungel, a NASA scientist studying Earth remote sensing, discussed a joint project underway at Monterey Peninsula Airport, involving NASA, the U.S. Geological Survey, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The researchers had parked at the airport a Twin Otter airplane, with a scanning laser system and a global-positioning-satellite receiver, to make precise measurements of the West Coast, mapping the changes El Niño had caused along the coastline. The goal of the survey was to create “the most highly detailed map yet of the West Coast,” increasing scientists’ ability to predict erosion over the next decade.(Michael McCabe, “NASA Mapping West Coast in Wake of El Niño: Most Rigorous Survey Ever Should Help Predict Erosion,” San Francisco Chronicle, 17 April 1998.)
The U.S. Air Force announced that it had postponed indefinitely Brigadier General F. Randall Starbuck’s departure from his command of the 45th Space Wing, with responsibility for all military and commercial launches from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. The Air Force spokesperson did not state the reasons for the change. Starbuck was to report on 3 June as Director of the Expeditionary Forces Management Team at Langley Air Force Base in Virginia. His replacement, Brigadier General Kevin P. Chilton, a former Space Shuttle Commander, was to report on 3 June to Patrick Air Force Base, to replace Starbuck as Commander of the 45th Space Wing.(Robyn Suriano, “Starbuck Staying Put at Helm of 45th Space Wing,” Florida Today (Brevard, FL), 18 May 1999. 711 NASA, “Nobel Prize Winner To Lead NASA Astrobiology Institute,” news release 99-61, 18 May 1999; Warren E. Leary, “Search for Life Beyond Earth Gets a Leader,” New York Times, 19 May 1999.)
NASA announced the discovery of a “mysterious class of ‘middleweight’ black holes.” Two teams of astronomers studying x-ray light at NASA and Carnegie Mellon University had independently found evidence of this new class of black hole. Astronomers did not know what process had formed the newly discovered black holes, 100 to 10,000 times as massive as the Sun and located in spiral-shaped galaxies throughout the universe. Before this discovery, astronomers had known of only two types of black holes: 1) stellar black holes, formed from the “remains of dead stars several times heavier than the Sun” and compressed to a “diameter of a few miles or less”; and 2) supermassive black holes, which have masses equal to 1 million to 1 billion Suns and likely formed in the “early universe from giant gas clouds or from the collapse of clusters of immense numbers of stars.” Edward H. Colbert and Richard F. Mushotzky of NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) had observed hints of the black holes while studying x-rays from 39 nearby galaxies. Andrew Ptak and Richard Griffiths of Carnegie Mellon University had studied x-ray light in galaxy M82, which was not one of the set of galaxies that the Goddard team had studied. Both teams had identified unique x-ray light indicative of a class of black holes that was neither stellar nor supermassive.(NASA, “Astronomers Discover ‘Middleweight’ Black Holes,” news release 99-51, 13 April 1999.)
U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) announced the findings of a U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO) investigation into NASA’s computer security. Thompson had requested the study, which found that government specialists were able to penetrate several mission-critical systems and could have stolen, modified, or destroyed system software and data. GAO had found that 135 of the 155 mission-critical systems reviewed did not meet all of NASA’s requirements for risk assessment. Specifically, NASA had not conducted an Agency-wide review of information-technology security since 1991; 60 percent of reviewed systems had not been independently audited for security or weaknesses; NASA had no security training program; and NASA field centers did not report security incidents to a central location. GAO had also found that NASA had no policy for determining what type of information its staff could post on public Web sites, rendering it vulnerable to Internet attacks. NASA also had no policy for protecting mission-critical systems from well-known Internet threats.(Federal Document Clearing House, “Thompson Says NASA Must Tighten Computer Security,” government news release, 20 May 1999; U.S. General Accounting Office, “Information Security: Many NASA Mission-Critical Systems Face Serious Risks” (report no. GAO/AIMD-99-47, Washington, DC, May 1999), http://www.gao.gov /archive/1999/ai99047.pdf (accessed 7 February 2008).)
SPACEHAB Inc., the first company to “commercially develop, own, and operate habitable modules that provide laboratory facilities and logistics re-supply aboard NASA’s Space Shuttles,” and leading global provider of commercial payload-processing services, participated in a Brazilian industry conference. Brazsat, a Brazilian commercial space company, hosted the Third Commercial Space Workshop, in Rio de Janeiro on 23 and 24 August. North American, South American, and European industry and government leaders attended the workshop, where SPACEHAB’s Chief Executive Officer Shelley A. Harrison delivered one of two keynote addresses. Participants at the workshop, which had the theme “Commercial Space Technologies and its Benefits in the New Millenium,” presented “state-of-the-art space technologies, research spin-offs and applications in areas of microgravity research, remote sensing, telecommunications satellites, distance learning, telemedicine and other disciplines” of human spaceflight.(SPACEHAB Inc., “SPACEHAB Participates in Key Brazilian Industry Conference: SPACEHAB CEO Addresses Industry Officials on Essential Space Initiatives,” news release, 31 August 1999, http://www.spacehab. com/news/1999/99_08_31.htm (accessed 3 March 2008).)
NASA Inspector General Roberta L. Gross released a report estimating that NASA had “spent [US]$3 million in ‘excessive costs’” on its Houston-to-Moscow air-charter program. The investigators criticized the program, saying it was more expensive than commercial travel. An investigation had revealed that the flights, which typically used Boeing 727s seating 143 travelers, sometimes carried as few as nine people. The charter flights originated in Houston and usually stopped in Huntsville, Alabama, and Washington, DC, before continuing on to Moscow. A few weeks before the release of the report, NASA’s Office of Space Flight had rejected a recommendation from the Inspector General to terminate the service, arguing that the program “provided ‘tangible and intangible’ benefits to workers on the International Space Station [ISS].” NASA had developed the program as a cost-saving measure and as an alternative to contracting with the U.S. Department of Defense to transport employees involved with the multibillion- dollar space station program. The Inspector General found that the chartered flights averaged around 50 people; NASA had estimated a 90-passenger threshold for the program to realize savings. In response to the demand of U.S. Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Chairperson Fred Thompson (R-TN) that NASA “halt this waste immediately,” Administrator Daniel S. Goldin announced that NASA would terminate the program “as soon as practical.”
Vladimir Petrovsky, a member of the Russian Academy of Military Sciences, condemned the United States’ 2 October testing of its proposed missile defense system, noting that testing could “aggravate relations not only between the United States and the Asian-Pacific region, but also between Japan⎯a U.S. ally in the development of the system⎯and other countries.” Russia had refused to amend the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which would have permitted the United States to develop a full-fledged missile defense system. Preventing either country from developing missile defense systems, the Cold War–era treaty acted as a deterrent by keeping both the Soviet Union and the United States vulnerable to attack. Officials in Washington, DC, stated that DOD was testing a missile defense system intended to destroy lone missiles launched by rogue states or terrorists, not a system meant to protect against a multi-missile attack from a major nuclear power.(Associated Press, “Missile Test.”)
Space.com, an Internet site devoted to covering the news and science of space, appointed Sally K. Ride as its President. Lou Dobbs had begun Space.com in July 1999, after resigning as president of CNN’s Financial News. Ride, the first American woman in space, had worked closely with Dobbs as he launched the site. The position was her “first foray into the cyberspace after a long career in space research, policy, and education.(Andrea Orr for Reuters, “Space.com Names Space Woman as Company President,” 21 September 1999.)
billion years old, astronomers expressed their excitement that the benchmark discovery would enable them to observe the universe in its formative stages.(Associated Press, “Quasar Discovered by Student May Be Most Distant Ever Seen,” 15 April 2000; Kevin Coughlin, “Young Princeton Expert Finds Piece of a Fledgling Universe,” Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 14 April 2000; Washington Post, “Most Distant Object Observed,” 17 April 2000.)
At the American Astronomical Society convention, scientists Karl Gebhardt and Douglas O. Richstone announced that an extensive survey of more than 30 galaxies had revealed that black holes reach their large size through gradual growth. Previously, some research had suggested the opposite⎯that black holes were simply “born” big. Using the HST, Gebhardt and Richstone had led a team of astronomers in determining the size of black holes in different galaxies. They found that, although small galaxies tend to have smaller black holes, the largest known galaxies have mammoth black holes. The astronomers suspected that the black holes had “grown up” along with the galaxies where they resided, feeding on gas and stars to acquire increasing mass. Although further research must determine the precise correlation between black hole and galaxy size, the scientific community greeted news of the discovery with great interest. The HST had not only made the discovery possible but had provided the opportunity for scientists to continue “black hole hunting,” to tabulate more exact answers.(NASA, “Black Holes Shed Light on Galaxy Formation,” news release 00-88, 5 June 2000. 267)
Terrorists hijacked four U.S. planes, subsequently crashing them in New York City, Pennsylvania, and Washington, DC. The incidents led to the deaths of nearly 3,000 people. The federal government immediately responded by grounding all commercial air traffic, and NASA closed its major facilities throughout the country.(Mark Carreau, “Cautious NASA Shuts Down Johnson Space Center, Other Major Facilities,” Houston Chronicle, 12 September 2001; U.S. Department of Transportation, “Statement of Secretary of Transportation Norman Y. Mineta,” news release 93-01, 11 September 2001.)
For the first time, NASA and the Canadian Space Agency made available the data gathered by the Terra spacecraft, carrying the technologically advanced Measurements of Pollution in the Troposphere (MOPITT) experiment. The data, released at the American Geophysical Union meeting, revealed more clearly than any previous readings the presence of immense clouds of carbon monoxide over Africa and South America. The readings also charted dense air-pollution plumes over Southeast Asia. The MOPITT data pointed to natural factors such as forest fires, as well as human contributors such as industrial pollution, as causes of the increased carbon- monoxide readings. The scientific community greeted the release of the new data, and the promise of more to come, with excitement, because the MOPITT data would be vital in the quest to understand Earth’s changing climate. According to one researcher who was already mining the MOPITT data for an extensive study, the new data had the potential “to improve our understanding of the linkages between air pollution and global environment change.”(NASA, “NCAR NASA/CSA Monitor Provides Global Air Pollution View from Space,” news release 01-102, 30 May 2001.)
1993and to overcome its major management challenges, which GAO and NASA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) had previously identified. The GPRA required each government agency to develop an annual plan, which must include its performance goals, the resources required to achieve them, and the measures it would use to assess its performance. In its examination of NASA’s FY 2002 performance plan, GAO had determined that NASA had successfully met its stated goals. NASA’s goals for the fiscal year had included expanding commercial development of space and deploying and operating the ISS safely and cost-effectively. However, GAO’s report also stated that NASA’s performance plan had not explained the reasons that NASA had changed its previous performance goals to those stated in the FY 2002 performance plan. In addition, GAO questioned NASA’s measurements of its performance in meeting the stated goals and gave mixed assessments of NASA’s performance in the areas of human-capital management and information security. In its response to the report, NASA concurred with GAO’s findings but it also defended the explanations and measurements of its performance goals, as outlined in its FY 2002 performance plan.(U.S. General Accounting Office, “NASA: Status of Plans for Achieving Key Outcomes and Addressing Major Management Challenges” (report no. GAO-02-184, Washington, DC, November 2001), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/ d02184.pdf (accessed 8 December 2008).)
The New York Times revealed that, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 11 September, the U.S. government had changed the rules of engagement regarding the circumstances in which the U.S. military could shoot down civilian aircraft. The newspaper had interviewed U.S. Air Force General Ralph E. Eberhart, who had provided some cursory details of the military’s rules of engagement for civilian aircraft. Before 11 September, the DOD had no formal rules concerning military engagement of a hijacked airplane when the flight had originated within the United States. However, on an unnamed date after 11 September, White House officials and the Joint Chiefs of Staff had approved new rules, stipulating that the U.S. military could down an aircraft that presented a security threat, but that the President of the United States or one of four specified U.S. Air Force generals must authorize such an action. The new rules also detailed measures taken by the North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) and the FAA for better joint surveillance of the nation’s airspace. Those measures included NORAD’s positioning of mobile ground radars around the country and a direct telephone line between the two agencies.(Eric Schmitt, “Generals Given Power To Order Downing of Jets,” New York Times, 27 September 2001.)
NASA launched the Genesis solar research spacecraft from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station in Florida. Genesis would collect samples of solar wind to assist scientists in studies of the formation of Earth’s solar system. Scientists believed that the plasma in solar wind might contain material similar to or identical with the material that formed the solar system. The 633-kilogram (1,400-pound) spacecraft was equipped with four instruments: a wide-angle ion collector, a concentrated ion collector, an ion spectrometer, and an electron spectrometer. Donald S. Burnett of California Institute of Technology was Principal Investigator and Project Scientist for Genesis.(Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 574, 1 September 2001, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx574.html (accessed 7 November 2008); NASA JPL, “Genesis, Search for Origins: Why Study the Sun?” http://genesismission.jpl.nasa.gov/gm2/science/solarwind.htm (accessed 7 November 2008).)
The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics to former NASA scientist Wolfgang Ketterle and two other scientists, Eric A. Cornell and Carl E. Wieman. Ketterle was a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Principal Investigator for NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) in Washington, DC. The three scientists received the Nobel Prize for their work in discovering a new state of matter called Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), named after the two physicists who had made the initial theoretical calculations of such matter. BEC consists of atomic particles that all have the same energy and that researchers can oscillate in a controlled manner. Cornell and Wieman had created a pure condensate of rubidium atoms, and Ketterle had independently produced BEC with sodium atoms. However, Ketterle’s condensates had also enabled further investigation of the new type of matter, because his condensates contained more atoms than those of Cornell and Wieman. In addition, Ketterle had produced other research that further advanced understanding of the phenomenon.(Nobel Foundation, “The Nobel Prize in Physics 2001,” http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/ laureates/2001/press.html (accessed 23 November 2008).)
At the American Physical Society Spring Meeting, a team of cosmologists announced that they had discovered the “music of creation,” using an extremely sensitive microwave telescope. The researchers presented their discovery of the sound waves that had rippled through the universe some 14 billion years ago. The team of the Balloon Observation of Millimetric Extragalactic Radiation and Geophysics (BOOMERANG) project had gathered the data from a telescope aboard a balloon, which circumnavigated Antarctica at an altitude of 23 miles (37 kilometers). According to Team Leader Paolo deBernardis, the beginning of the universe left behind a residue of light and sound, providing scientists with hints about the details of the Big Bang: “The early universe is full of sound waves compressing and rarefying matter and light, much like sound waves compress and rarefy air inside a flute or trumpet.” The BOOMERANG team’s findings provided a new means of examining the early universe and new evidence to use in calculating how it changed. Scientists praised the discoveries as “stunning and humbling” evidence that cosmologists were using the correct model to describe the early universe.(NASA, “New Boomerang Findings Reveal ‘Music’ of the Early Universe,” news release 01-87, 29 April 2001; Kathy Sawyer, “Astronomy Peers into Face of Infant Universe,” Washington Post, 30 April 2001.)
Wallace D. Hayes, an aeronautical engineer and longtime Princeton University professor, died at age 82 after a long battle with Parkinson’s disease. His colleagues referred to Hayes as “a giant in his field,” Hayes had helped design the first planes that could safely break the sound barrier. Hayes’s 1959 book Hypersonic Flow Theory had outlined the scientific principles behind hypersonic flight, as well as the necessary technology to accomplish it. Although decades passed before his theories produced functional aircraft, many consider Hayes the father of high-speed flight. According to Robert Probstein, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, “Every supersonic aircraft, in my opinion, owes to him their design.” Hayes had worked with NASA and a handful of elite American universities during his stellar career. In his association with NASA, he had worked to limit sonic booms from supersonic jets, an achievement that enabled supersonic jets to travel freely over populated areas.(Mark Mueller, “Aerospace Pioneer Wallace Hayes DiesObituary,” Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ), 11 March 2001. 29 Vladimir Isachenkov, “Russia to Insure Mir Descent Negotiating $200 Million Spacecraft Policy,” Chicago Sun- Times, 7 March 2001.)
The American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, the world’s leading professional society in the field, elected Charles Elachi, Director of NASA’s JPL, as a fellow in the society. In his research concerning geological analysis of Earth, Elachi had developed 45 flight missions and instruments, including radar remote-sensing techniques used to study Venus.(NASA JPL, “JPL Director Honored by Leading Aeronautic Institute,” news release, 25 February 2002. 60)
George W. S. Abbey, Special Assistant to NASA’s Administrator and former Director of NASA’s JSC, announced his retirement from NASA effective 3 January 2003. Abbey had begun his career at JSC in 1964 as a U.S. Air Force officer. He had served as Director of JSC and had become a high-level manager for the ISS project. In 2001 he had left the post because of the soaring costs of the ISS.(NASA JSC, “Statement by General Jefferson D. Howell Jr. on the Retirement of Former JSC Director George W. S. Abbey,” news release J02-111, 7 November 2002; Houston Chronicle, “Longtime NASA Official Retires,” 8 November 2002.)
NASA and U.S. Air Force officials announced that they had agreed with a study team’s recommendation that NASA and the Air Force continue to assess the construction of a joint reusable launch vehicle (RLV) demonstrator. After spending 120 days examining the two organizations’ shared requirements and their technologies to access space, the team’s most critical recommendation had been that NASA and the Air Force should cooperate in assessing the construction of an RLV demonstrator for their joint operations. In addition, the study team had recommended that engineers eventually develop the demonstrator into a crew-operated vehicle for NASA and a cargo vehicle for the Air Force. NASA and the Air Force also agreed that experienced Air Force personnel should continue to work with NASA in joint study efforts, to refine their concepts of operations, requirements, and figures of merit, and to design reference missions.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Forge Ahead with Reusable Launch Technology,” news release 02-87, 21 May 2002.)
The U.S. Air Force 45th Space Wing transferred operation of Launch Complex 47 at Cape Canaveral Air Station to the Florida Space Authority (FSA) by means of a licensing agreement under the Commercial Space Transportation Act. J. Gregory Pavlovich, Commander of the 45th Space Wing, stated that the transfer of operations was a positive development, remarking that, although the Air Force had previously scheduled the launchpad for deactivation, licensing it to the FSA would enable Launch Complex 47 to remain available for educational use for years into the future. Under the agreement, Brevard Community College could offer as many as 200 educational launch opportunities over the following five years, allowing for hands-on technical education that would help motivate students to join the aerospace workforce.(Jim Banke, “Florida Space Authority Will Run Cape Launch Pad for Education,” Space.com, 7 November 2003, http://www.space.com/missionlaunches/fsa_cx47_031107.html (accessed 17 March 2009).)
The U.S. Air Force Space Command announced its planned elimination of 1,125 positions over the next seven years, as part of a service-wide, post-September 11 initiative to reduce staffing levels. The move would free it to “pour more resources into the Air Force’s ‘highest priority missions’,” such as special operations and intelligence. The plan called for the elimination of 314 civilian and 442 military positions by October 2004, at both senior and lower levels. U.S. Air Force Major Sean McKenna, a Space Command spokesperson, commented that the reductions did not indicate that the Air Force had assigned lower priority to space.(Jeremy Singer, “Air Force Space Command To Cut Staff,” Space News, 13 March 2003.)
NASA announced that 12 new teams would join the NASA Astrobiology Institute (NAI), a research consortium studying the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life on Earth and in the universe. The new teams, with members from the Carnegie Institution of Washington, DC; Indiana University in Bloomington; Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts; SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence) Institute in Mountain View, California; and NASA’s ARC and GSFC would join the four lead teams that NASA had selected in 2001. The five-year awards, with annual funding levels of US$1 million, would commence in the autumn of 2003 when the agreements with the NAI’s 11 founding teams had concluded. Six of the new teams were among the founding member teams.
NASA announced that it had positively identified the remains of all seven members of STS-107 at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware, and that officials in Angelina County, Texas, had signed the death certificates. Eileen Hawley, spokesperson for NASA’s JSC in Houston, said that officials had released the crew members’ remains to their families for private memorial services. NASA had already returned the remains of Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon to Israel, where burial services had taken place on 11 February.(NASA JSC, “Columbia Astronaut Remains Identified,” news release H03-070, 13 February 2003, http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/2003/h03-070.html (accessed 14 August 2008); Associated Press, “Remains of All Shuttle Astronauts Identified,” 14 February 2003.)
In a newly released survey, U.S. federal government employees ranked NASA as the best place to work in the federal government. The Office of Personnel Management had collected the data during a 2002 survey of federal employees, and the nonpartisan Partnership for Public Service and American University’s Institute for the Study of Public Policy Implementation had produced the rankings. According to the survey, in eight out of 10 categories related to employment satisfaction, federal employees had ranked NASA first―federal employees had ranked NASA as the best place to work for women, for racial minorities, and for individuals under 40 years of age.(Stephen Barr, “NASA Soars to Top of Satisfaction Ratings Among Various Workers,” Washington Post, 16 April 2004.)
The GAO published an assessment of the efforts of the DOD and the military services to develop personnel for space-related national security matters and to integrate those personnel into their forces. In the National Defense Authorization Act for FY 2004 (Pub.L.No. 108-136), the U.S. Congress had required the DOD to create a strategy to develop and integrate personnel who were capable of operating space-based systems and of developing space-related concepts, doctrine, and technology. In addition, Congress had required GAO to assess those efforts. In its report, GAO stated that the DOD did not have a plan to implement its strategy for developing and integrating space personnel. GAO also found that the military services varied in the extent to which they had implemented plans to develop and manage their space personnel. The report included recommendations to address these issues.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Defense Space Activities: Additional Actions Needed to Implement Human Capital Strategy and Develop Space Personnel” (report no. GAO-04-097, Washington, DC, 11 August 2004).)
Commercial airlines Air France and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines announced that they would merge, creating the world’s largest airline, in terms of revenue. Under the terms of the merger, the two companies would trade stock shares, with KLM shareholders tendering almost 42 million sharesnearly 90 percent of the company’s capital. Air France would issue approximately 46 million new shares to KLM shareholders, reducing the French government’s interest in the airline from 54 percent to less than 45 percent of total shares. The combined annual revenue of the two companies would be nearly US$23 billion, eclipsing the US$17.4 billion annual revenue of American Airlines, which had previously received the highest revenue of any airline.(Los Angeles Times, “Air Frances Completes Deal with KLM Royal Dutch,” 5 May 2004.)
Aera Corporation, which had competed as American Astronautics in the X Prize private spaceflight competition, signed a five-year launch support agreement with the U.S. Air Force, securing access to Cape Canaveral Air Station in Florida. Although Aera had yet to launch a single test vehicle, the company planned to launch paying customers by the end of 2006. Aera’s President and Chief Operating Officer Lewis Reynolds explained that the company had used computer-based modeling for most of its testing and had done very little testing of actual physical components for the spacecraft. The company intended to apply for a FAA launch license within 30 days and to secure a manufacturing facility for its seven-seat spaceship, the Altairis, by the end of April.(Alan Boyle, “Dark Horse Makes Bold Claims in Space Race,” MSNBC.com, 8 March 2005, http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7121988// (accessed 2 September 2009).)
The National Institute of Aerospace (NIA) in Hampton, Virginia, released a report commissioned by the U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice and Science, which had concluded that, to keep pace with Europe, the U.S. government would need to spend more on aeronautics, not less. The report, “Responding to the Call: Aviation Plan for American Leadership,” recommended that, over the next five years, the U.S. government should restore NASA’s aeronautics funding to 1998 levels, a goal that implied a spending level approximately twice that of President George W. Bush’s proposal for FY 2006. The study team comprised more than 250 of the nation’s top aviation experts representing industry and academia. NIA President and Executive Director Robert Lindberg remarked that the United State’s aviation capabilities had eroded, despite the position of aviation as a critical component in the U.S. balance of trade. The report of more than 1,000 pages provided detailed investment plans, budgets, and needs assessments for seven aeronautics sectors: airspace systems, aviation safety and security, subsonic aircraft, supersonic aircraft, hypersonic technologies, rotorcraft, and workforce and education.(National Institute of Aerospace, “NIA Releases Congressionally-Requested Aviation Plan,” 3 May 2005, http://www.nianet.org/pressreleases/AviationPlan_050305.php (accessed 16 September 2009); Allison Connolly, “Survey: NASA Can’t Afford To Fall Behind in Aeronautics,” Virginian Pilot (Hampton Roads, VA), 4 May 2005. 788 BBC News, “First Marsis Radar Boom Deployed,” 6 May 2005; Maggie McKee, “Mars Express To Deploy ‘Divining Rod’ at Last,” New Scientist, 4 May 2005.)
NASA announced the establishment of the Exploration Systems Advisory Committee (ESAC), composed of leading experts from government, academia, and industry. NASA named Lester L. Lyles, a former commander of the U.S. Air Force Materiel Command to chair ESAC. Lyles had extensive experience managing large, high-technology organizations involving aeronautical and astronautical research, development, acquisition, and logistics. The committee would provide advice and recommendations to NASA’s Associate Administrator for Exploration Systems, including input regarding plans, policies, programs, and other matters pertinent to the directorate’s responsibilities.
NASA’s implementation of its Integrated Financial Management Program (IFMP)NASA had begun implementing the IFMP in 2000 as a single accounting system to replace 11 separate accounting systems. At the request of the U.S. Congress, in 2003 GAO had examined NASA’s progress on IFMP implementation and had recommended that NASA make 45 changes to the program. In its assessment of NASA’s efforts to implement those recommended changes, GAO stated that NASA had made slow progress and still needed to implement most of the recommendations. The report also stated that NASA’s financial management problems were in danger of threatening its capacity to manage its programs and to allocate its budget to projects and programs. NASA responded that it had made significant improvements under the IFMP and had made progress on more of GAO’s recommendations than GAO had indicated in its report.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Business Modernization: Some Progress Made Toward Implementing GAO Recommendations Related to NASA’s Integrated Financial Management Program” (report no. GAO-05-799R, Washington, DC, 9 September 2005); Tamara Lytle, “NASA Still Can’t Balance Its Books, Auditors Say,” Orlando Sentinel (FL), 28 October 2005.)
years of U.S. civil aeronautics research and technology should provide a foundation for achieving six strategic objectives, including improved safety and reliability and increased capacity, efficiency and performance. The report provided a list of 51 high-priority aeronautics research and technology challenges for NASA. To achieve the goals outlined in the report, the committee recommended that NASA cooperate more with public and private organizations, to share facilities and tools for key projects, and with other federal agencies that support aeronautics research, such as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).(National Academies Office of News and Public Information, “U.S. Should Strengthen Foundation for Future of Air Transportation,” press release, 5 June 2006, http://www8.nationalacademies.org/onpinews/newsitem.aspx? RecordID=11664 (accessed 15 September 2010); see also National Research Council, Decadal Survey of Civil Aeronautics: Foundation for the Future (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006), http://www.nap.edu/ catalog/11664 (accessed 16 September 2010).)
The U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) issued its report, “NASA’s Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements.” The report concluded that, although Deep Space Network (DSN) “is able to meet most of the requirements of its current workload, serious questions exist as to whether it will be able to keep up with both near-term and future demands.” The report also found that “system infrastructure, which has been marked by extensive deferred maintenance, is aging and is likely to become increasingly fragile and subject to breakdown at a time when demand is anticipated to increase.” Managed by NASA’s JPL, DSN comprised communications antennas measuring up to 70 meters (229.6 feet), located in California, Australia, and Spain. Established in 1959, DSN supported an average of 35 to 40 deep space missions each year. However, the number of new deep space missions continued to increase, and existing “legacy” missions, such as Voyager missions, had remained in operation longer than initially planned. Therefore, NASA projected that, by 2020, DSN would have to support twice as many missions as currently. In a written response to GAO’s report, NASA Deputy Administrator Shana L. Dale stated that, although “no mission had been unable to meet its mission requirements due to a lack of capability in the DSN, NASA shared GAO’s concerns about the future capacity and capabilities of the system.” She also noted that NASA had initiated a study to review the management structure for all of NASA’s space communications activities.(U.S. Government Accountability Office, “NASA’s Deep Space Network: Current Management Structure Is Not Conducive To Effectively Matching Resources with Future Requirements” (report no. GAO-06-445, Washington, DC, 27 April 2006), 2, 22, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d06445.pdf (accessed 24 June 2010); Brian Berger, “GAO Warns Deep Space Network Ill-Equipped To Meet Future Demands,” Space News, 23 May 2006.)
NASA’s Associate Administrator of the Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate, Lisa J. Porter, announced a comprehensive restructuring of NASA’s aeronautics research programs. Speaking at an American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics conference, Porter stated, “NASA is returning to long-term investment in cutting-edge fundamental research in traditional aeronautics disciplines. We are investing in research for the long term in areas that are appropriate to NASA’s unique capabilities and meeting our charter of addressing national needs and benefiting the public good.” The four major programs restructured were fundamental aeronautics, aviation safety, airspace systems, and the aeronautics test program. Research in fundamental aeronautics was concentrated in four areas: hypersonics, supersonics, subsonic fixed wing, and subsonic rotary wing. The goal for research in fundamental aeronautics would be to produce knowledge, data, and capabilities for both civilian and military applications, and design tools to benefit a broad range of air vehicles. Research in the aviation safety program would address four areas: aircraft aging and durability, integrated vehicle health management, and integrated resilient aircraft control. The primary research responsibility of the airspace system program would be the development of concepts, capabilities, and technologies for high-capacity, efficient, and safe airspace and airport systems. The aeronautics test program would focus on the strategic use, operations, and maintenance of NASA’s wind-tunnel and air-breathing propulsion test facilities at Ames Research Center (ARC), Glenn Research Center (GRC), and Langley Research Center (LaRC).(NASA, “NASA Restructures Aeronautics Research,” news release 06-008, 12 January 2006, http://www.m\nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2006/jan/HQ_06008_ARMD_Restructuring.html (accessed 14 September 2009); Lisa J. Porter, “Reshaping NASA’s Aeronautics Program” (conference presentation, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Reno, Nevada, 12 January 2006).)
GAO released a report recommending that the U.S. Congress and the FAA reconsider the FAA’s roles and responsibilities regarding the burgeoning commercial space tourism industry. In 2004 Congress had made the FAA responsible for regulations to ensure the safety of space tourists. However, Congress had also limited the FAA’s ability to regulate crew and passenger safety until 2012, so that safety regulations would not stifle the budding space tourism industry. The GAO report noted that, although the FAA had performed well in its efforts to ensure that the space tourism industry followed safe procedures, the industry’s rapid growth required the FAA to take a greater role than anticipated in creating safety regulations to for the period before 2012. The report suggested that, to accomplish its goal, the FAA would need additional funds and personnel, including staff with sufficient expertise to evaluate complex launch technologies. Furthermore, the report recommended that Congress reconsider the FAA’s dual role in both regulating and promoting the industry, warning that this dual role presented a potential conflict of interest. The FAA and the Department of Transportation agreed with the report’s findings and recommendations.(Mike Toner, “FAA Put on Guard for Space Tourism,” Atlanta Journal-Constitution (GA), 30 October 2006; U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Commercial Space Launches: FAA Needs Continued Planning and Monitoring To Oversee the Safety of the Emerging Space Tourism Industry” (report no. GAO-07-16, Washington, DC, 20 October 2006), http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0716.pdf (accessed 20 April 2010).)
NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate and the American Helicopter Society (AHS) selected Eric Greenwood II—a graduate student at the University of Maryland, who was studying aerospace engineering with a specialty in rotorcraft acoustics—as the first winner of the
Scientists from MIT and researchers from the U.S. Air Force published a paper in the journal Science explaining their development of oil-repellant materials with aerospace applications. The scientists had used fibers from polymers, combined with a special class of molecules called fluoroPOSS, to create oil-repellant, or superoleophobic, surfaces. The scientists explained that engineers would be able to use the fluoroPOSS-polymer blend to protect parts of airplanes and rockets, such as rubber gaskets and O-rings, which are vulnerable to damage resulting from saturation in fuel.
Engineers successfully tested the main parachute for NASA’s Constellation Program rockets during a drop test at the U.S. Army’s Yuma Proving Ground, validating the results of a test conducted in September. NASA had designed the parachute system to allow recovery and reuse of Ares-1 and Ares-5 first-stage boosters. A U.S. Air Force C-17 aircraft flying at an altitude of 16,500 feet (5,029 meters) dropped the main parachute, which measured 150 feet (46 meters) in diameter and weighed 2,000 pounds (907 kilograms). NASA had outfitted the main parachute with a 42,000-pound (19,051-kilogram) weight that simulated the load of the rocket’s first stage. The parachute and all supporting hardware functioned properly and landed safely 3 minutes after the drop.(NASA, “NASA Conducts Second Test of Main Parachute for Ares Rockets,” news release 07-254, 15 November 2007, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2007/nov/HQ_07254_Ares_Yuma_Parachute_ Test.html (accessed 20 October 2010).)
NASA’s Kepler astronomy probe, named for Johannes Kepler, who had published the laws of planetary motion in 1609, successfully launched into space from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, aboard a United Launch Alliance Delta 2, at 10:49 p.m. (EST). Kepler’s mission was to identify the first Earth-size planets orbiting stars at distances that would permit water to pool on the planet’s surface. Scientists had designed the craft to search for brightness variations in more than 100,000 stars in the Cygnus-Lyra region. Astronomers study brightness variations because, when a planet passes in front of a star, the star’s light appears to dim, enabling them to determine the diameter of the transiting object. The Kepler mission would use a photometer to monitor the same star field over approximately three-and-a-half years, allowing multiple observations of transits of exoplanets in orbits of as long as one year. Ideally, the Kepler probe would observe an object at least three times to confirm the measurement of its orbital period. Mission scientists placed the 1,052-kilogram (2,319-pound) craft in a 372.5-day solar orbit to help the probe maintain a stable pointing attitude.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Rockets to Space in Search of Other Earths,” news release 09-052, 7 March 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/mar/HQ_09-052_Kepler_launches.html (accessed 4 May 2011); Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 665, 1 April 2009, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx665.html (accessed 10 May 2011); Joel Achenbach, “Kepler Lifts Off, on Age-Old Quest: Space Telescope Seeks To Find Other Earths on 31⁄2- Year Mission,” Washington Post, 9 March 2009.)
NASA and the U.S. Air Force announced the designation of three university and industry partners to serve as national hypersonic science centers. The centers’ task would be to promote research in air-breathing propulsion, materials and structures, and boundary-layer control for aircraft able to travel at Mach 5. NASA’s Aeronautics Research Mission in Washington, DC, and the U.S. Air Force Research Laboratory’s Office of Scientific Research in Arlington, Virginia, had selected the partners from more than 60 contenders. The University of Virginia in Charlottesville would host the National Center for Hypersonic Combined Cycle Propulsion and would lead a team specializing in air-breathing propulsion research; Texas A&M University in College Station would be the National Center for Hypersonic Laminar-Turbulent Transition and would specialize in boundary layer−control research; and Teledyne Scientific and Imaging LLC in Thousand Oaks, California, would host the National Hypersonic Science Center for Hypersonic Materials and Structures. James L. Pittman, Principal Investigator for the Hypersonics Project of NASA’s Fundamental Aeronautics Program at NASA’s LaRC in Hampton, Virginia, remarked that NASA’s joint investment with the Air Force of US$30 million over five years would “support basic science and applied research that improves our understanding of hypersonic flight.” Pittman stated that the establishment of the centers signaled a major commitment to advancing foundational hypersonic research and to training the next generation of hypersonic researchers.(NASA, “NASA and Air Force Designate National Hypersonic Science Centers,” news release 09-050, 5 March 2009.)
NASA announced the selection of four proposals to study the risks of space radiation for humans living in space. NASA selected the proposals of New York University School of Medicine, the University of Texas Medical Branch in Houston, Loma Linda University in California, and Georgetown University in Washington, DC. The four institutions would become NASA Specialized Centers of Research. With the establishment of this program, NASA would invest US$28.4 million in the four institutions over a five-year period. At the centers, researchers would study carcinogenesis and the risks of spaceflight to the central nervous system, helping them to begin to develop effective radiation countermeasures for space travelers.(NASA, “NASA Selects Four Proposals To Study Space Radiation Risks,” news release 09-126, 2 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-126_Radiation_Risk_Proposals.html (accessed 22 July 2011). 82 Associated Press, “Delayed Spacewalk Ends Successfully,” 8 June 2009; Clara Moskowitz, “Spacewalkers Prime Space Station for New Docking Port,” Space.com, 5 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6799-spacewalkers-prime- space-station-docking-port.html (accessed 3 August 2011).)
