The European Space Agency in the Netherlands invented new shoes for astronauts to use in orbit. The new shoes, which look like ordinary sneakers, have small suction cups on the bottom of each shoe. The suction cups grip floor, wall, and ceiling and allow the astronauts to walk around in the weightless Shuttle. Up until now, in order to get around astronauts have had to stick their feet into loops placed around the Shuttle. (AP, Jan 22/93)
People with temperature disorders have benefitted from suits developed by NASA for use by astronauts in very hot temperatures.  The suits have been modified for people who need help in keeping their body temperature down in hot weather.  The suits for children are vests stuffed with detachable "cold packs," much like those used to keep food cold in picnic coolers.  Other suits are powered by battery packs and fitted with tubes that circulate coolant. The suits are made of a material known as Thinsulate. (Fairfax County Journal, Aug 31/93)
Shuttle astronaut Mae Jemison was scheduled to make a guest appearance on a "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode during the week of May 31. Very much in demand as a speaker when she was with NASA, Jemison also has had a school named after her in Detroit. (Ap, Apr 4/93, Apr 19/93, May 24/93, May 26/93)
NASA announced that Nasa technology developed to keep astronauts cool on the lunar surface and a NASA patient-monitoring device, originally designed for astronaut heart rate transmittal, were scheduled to be inducted into the U.S. Space Foundation's Technology Hall of Fame on April 16. (NASA Release 93-069)
The media reported that Columbia's astronauts were attempting to find a slight air leak that NASA said posed no danger to the crew. The leak had been detected the previous evening. According to NASA sources, the leak would not affect the duration of the space mission. (AP, Apr 30/93)
A first formal industrial test of a system that uses computer-set lights to adjust a person's sleep patterns got underway in January at a San Diego Gas and Electric Company plant. The system may prove useful in keeping astronauts and night workers alert, easing jet lag, helping older people sleep, and helping teens get out of bed. NASA started using the system in 1991 to adapt astronauts to night launches and shift work.
Guion Bluford Jr., America's first African-American astronaut in space, was scheduled to leave NASA in July to join NYMA, Inc., a Greenbelt, Maryland, engineering and computer software company. (USA Today, June 16/93; NASA Release, 93-113)
NASA rewarded the Columbia astronaut's energy-conservation efforts by adding a day to the Space Shuttle's mission. The extra day would allow scientists to meet and possibly exceed mission goals, which had been jeopardized by equipment problems.
NASA announced that astronaut James P. Bagian, M.D., P.E., was taking a leave of absence from NASA to work as Vice-President of Corporate Development and Medical Affairs at Somanetics Corporation, Troy, Michigan.  Bagian was scheduled to head up the company's clinical research activities. (NASA Release 93-139)
