Shuttle Endeavour lifted off in Mission STS-99, planning to use new radar technology to map Earth’s terrain. Crew included astronauts Kevin R. Kregel, Dominic L. P. Gorie, Janet L. Kavandi, Janice E. Voss, Mamoru Mohri, and Gerhard P. J. Thiele. The astronauts planned to extend the Shuttle Radar Topography Mission antenna from Endeavour’s cargo bay. The 197- foot (60-meter) antenna would gather mapping data necessary to create the most comprehensive map of Earth ever drawn. NASA collaborated with the National Imagery and Mapping Agency in planning the mission and hoped to cover more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface during the 11-day mission.(Associated Press, “Endeavour on Mission To Get Best Map of Earth,” 12 February 2000.)
Astronauts Jeffrey N. Williams and James S. Voss conducted a 6-hour spacewalk to make repairs to the ISS. The pair successfully repaired the station’s construction crane, replaced a failed antenna, and began installing a much larger, Russian-built crane, designed to aid workers in adding the final modules to the ISS. NASA officials highlighted the exercise as a precursor of the maintenance schedule to come: “This spacewalk was a good example of what future spacewalks are going to look like, where we will need to perform maintenance on the space station.” The spacewalk occurred after Atlantis had docked at the space station, but while the hatch doors between the two spacecraft remained shut.(Washington Post, “Spacewalkers Begin Repairs on Orbiting Station; Wobbly Crane Is Secured; Another Awaits Completion,” 22 May 2000; Associated Press, “Outside Repairs Finished, Astronauts Ready To Head Inside Space Station,” 22 May 2000.)
Members of the astronaut crew who had flown aboard NASA’s historic 100th Space Shuttle flight, Mission STS-92, visited NASA’s Michoud Assembly Facility to present Silver Snoopy awards, “the highest accolade that the astronauts corps gives to people who build flight hardware,” to the Lockheed Martin employees who had built the Shuttle’s super-lightweight tank and liquid-oxygen tank. NASA had named the Silver Snoopy award after the Peanuts character, the dog that imagined he was a fighter pilot.(New Orleans Time-Picayune, “Astronauts Thank Lockheed Workers: Company Makes Shuttle Components,” 17 December 2000.)
Sally K. Ride, the first female astronaut from the United States to travel into space, resigned her position as President of Space.com to concentrate on her education career. She had worked with Space.com founder Lou Dobbs, former host of CNN’s Moneyline, since the company’s start-up in June 1999 and had been the company’s president for the past year. Ride would continue her leave of absence from the University of California at San Diego where she is a physics professor throughout the remainder of the fall academic term.(Bloomberg News, “Ride Leaves Space.com Top Post⎯For 1st U.S. Female Astronaut in Space, It’s Back to Education,” 27 September 2000.)
By conserving fuel throughout their mission, the astronauts aboard Shuttle Endeavour were able to prolong their time in space by one extra day, allowing the crew to map the Earth’s terrain, covering several million square miles more than they had originally estimated possible. The extra 9 hours and 10 minutes of mapping allowed the radar flown from Endeavour to survey Australia in detail, making up for time lost when a Shuttle thruster had failed.(Associated Press, “Endeavour Squeezes in Extra Mapping Day,” 21 February 2000.)
NASA announced that it had renamed the Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) spacecraft, already orbiting asteroid 433 (Eros), after Eugene M. Shoemaker, an expert in the study of asteroid craters and their origins who died in 1997. Shoemaker’s work on Meteor Crater in Arizona, during the 1960s, had set the standard for crater investigation. Shoemaker had worked for NASA teaching astronauts about meteors and craters. He died in the Australian outback while researching asteroid-impact craters.(NASA, “NASA Renames NEAR Spacecraft for Planetary Science Pioneer Gene Shoemaker,” news release 14, March 2000.)
