NASA selected 28 research proposals for negotiation of Phase II contract awards in their Small Business Innovation Research Program. The awards were worth $13 million and part of an ongoing effort to stimulate technological innovation, increase the use of the small business sector, and increase the commercialization of federally funded research. (NASA Release 9021)
NASA selected ST Systems Corporation for negotiation to a 5year, $37 million contract for operation and analysis support for Goddard's National Space Science Data Center, Greenbelt, Maryland. NASA also awarded CBI Services, Inc. a $28.2 million contract for work on Ames Research Center's 12foot pressure wind tunnel. (NASA Release C90dd; C 90ee)
Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, announced the selection of Teledyne Brown Engineering for negotiations leading to a $172 million contract for payload mission integration. Under the contract, the company would provide management, personnel, equipment, services, supplies, facilities, and materials for Shuttle/Spacelab missions. Spacelab, carried in the Shuttle's cargo bay, converted the Shuttle into a versatile onorbit research center. (NASA Release
Ames Research Center in California awarded a costplusawardfee $210.8 million contract for software support. Under the contract Sterling Federal Systems, Inc. would provide computational support for problem applications and systems programming, systems design and engineering, software management and maintenance, and modification of existing software. (NASA Release C90y)
NASA's Langley Research Center selected Ball Corporation for a $90 million contract to develop an atmospheric instrument for the proposed Earth Observing System. The instrument, Spectroscopy of the Atmosphere Using Far Infrared Emission, would be designed to study middleatmosphere ozone distribution. (NASA Release, C90i)
NASA announced the selection of 280 research proposals for immediate negotiation of Phase I contracts in their'"0*1990 Small Business Innovation Research program (SBIR). SBIR had aimed at stimulating technological innovation in small business for the past 8 years; the Phase I contracts normally would not exceed $50,000. (NASA Release 90144)
NASA scientists warned that examination of data from the ozone hole over the South Pole showed record depletion. They added that ozone levels throughout the Southern Hemisphere were as low as they had ever been. The ozone hole has been monitored since 1979 with the Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer, an instrument on the GoddardManaged NIMBUS7 spacecraft. (C Trib, Oct 12/90; NASA Release 90137)
Technical assistant Edwin Sherry, from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, explained a minor problem that the Spacecraft Magellan had developed three days earlier and a little more than halfway into its journey to map Venus. A computer chip failure, caused either by electrical corrosion or an electrically charged particle spewed out by the sun, necessitated frequent commands from ground crews to keep Magellan moving in the right direction. The craft's guidance system normally focused on two stars to ascertain and adjust its heading. Sherry explained that some difficulties with the vast array of electronics during flight were expected and that the mission was in no danger. Scientists hoped to send a new program aloft that would allow the ship's computer to bypass the damaged chip. (AP, Jan 4/90) (#'0*.815@8<H? (#'0*.815@8<H?
Scientists and engineers at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, began extensive tests on its recently developed untended planetary rover. An unproven technology was needed for a vehicle on a distant planet controlled by ground crews on Earth inasmuch as roundtrip communication would be anywhere from 8 minutes to 40 minutes. Computer Aided Remote Driving allowed vehicle planning and identification of a 10sofmeterslongobstaclefree path, with a threedimensional display from stereo cameras aboard the vehicle. SemiAutonomous Navigation allowed an operator to determine a nominal extended route tens of kilometers long. (NASA Release 9085)
The Ames Research Center in California awarded a fiveyear, $32.8 million contract to Silicon Graphics for a work station to be used in the Ames Numerical Aerodynamic Simulation Processing System Network. The work station would allow users to analyze and visualize their work in computational fluid dynamics and other largescale scientific simulation and modeling applications.0*(NASA Release C90w)
Surprised NASA scientists released a photograph taken
NASA unveiled its latest research laboratory at Ames Research Center in California. The Human Performance Research Laboratory was designed for study of prolonged space travel. Ground was also broken at the dedication for the new $8.6 million Automated Sciences Research Facility, designed to provide research and technology development in automation and artificial intelligence. (NASA Release 9053)
NASA scientists regained contact with Magellan after a 14hour loss. The spacecraft went into a safe mode, in which it shut down many of its systems and pointed its solar panels toward the Sun because of navigation problems it falsely interpreted. The ship's computer memory was sent back to Earth so scientists could determine the problem in Magellan's program. Scientists were pleased, however, with the first set of pictures taken during Magellan's test run over the planet. They, however, cautioned that Magellan's mission to begin regular mapping by `"August 29 would likely be delayed. (W Times, Aug 20/90; P Inq, (#Aug 19/90; W Post, Aug 18/90; NY Times, Aug 18/90; LA Times, Aug
Victor L. Peterson was named Deputy Director of the Ames Research Center in California. Since joining NASA in 1956, Petersen held several positions at the center. (NASA Release 9036)
Boeing Space Operations, Inc. was awarded a $35.9 million costplusawardfee contract for program assurance engineering support at Ames Research Center in California. Under the contract, Boeing would provide reliability and quality assurance, system safety engineering, test engineering, management, institutional safety, and health and environmental0*services. (NASA Release C90o)
