At a news conference, NASA scientists announced the preliminary findings of Deep Space 1’s 22 September flyby of Comet Borrelly, a type of comet that originates in a region near Pluto. NASA’s Deep Space 1 spacecraft, operating two years past its planned mission duration, had passed within 1,400 miles (2,250 kilometers) of Borrelly, returning the best images and data of a comet ever captured. The encounter was only the second time that a spacecraft had come within such a distance of a comet’s nucleus, as well as the first close flyby of a comet of Borrelly’s type. In 1986 ESA’s Giotto spacecraft had flown within 373 miles (600 kilometers) of Halley’s comet, which belongs to a category of comets that originate from outside Earth’s solar system. In addition, NASA scientists reported that the data captured by Deep Space 1 had substantially enhanced existing scientific knowledge of comets. Scientists found a number of Deep Space 1’s observations surprising, including the discoveries that the comet’s icy jets discharge in tall columns rather than in a diffuse spray, that a cloud of charged particles emanates from off the comet’s center, and that solar wind flows asymmetrically around the particle cloud.(Warren E. Leary, “Probe Sends Postcards from Comet’s Core,” New York Times, 26 September 2001; NASA, “Deep Space 1,” http://nmp.nasa.gov/ds1/ (accessed 17 November 2008).)
A team of astronomers released images taken by NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory, revealing that black holes are present throughout the universe, across space and time, more pervasively than previously estimated. The researchers had found that black holes were even more common millions of years ago than they are today. The scientists had used new x-ray technology to examine galaxies several billion years old. The research had focused on a small sliver of the skya deep fieldthat the Chandra X-ray Observatory had probed looking for black holes and other bodies. Based on the findings in the relatively small sampling, the researchers had estimated that the universe might contain as many as 300 million black holes. Chandra had captured images using exposure times of up to 10 days and focusing on the same region of the sky for more than one year. The astronomers believed that their new images had exposed the early history of the universe, perhaps traveling as far back in time as 90 percent of the way to the Big Bang. In examining this distant patch of sky, the researchers had discovered black holes of all types and masses.
Using data from the European Space Agency’s (ESA’s) Infrared Space Observatory, a team of NASA and university researchers identified three stars that they believed contain enough hydrogen to create a Jupiter-like gas planet. The scientists, from Italy, the Netherlands, and the United States, indicated that the stars Beta Pictoris, 49 Ceti, and HD1235344 have particularly fertile environments, which might eventually form planets. Perhaps most significant, the researchers found a “thousand times more hydrogen” in several stars than scientists had discovered in earlier studies.(W. F. Thi et al., “Substantial Reservoirs of Molecular Hydrogen in the Debris Disks Around Young Stars,” Nature 409, no. 6816 (4 January 2001): 60–63; Associated Press, “Study Finds Nearby Star Systems Capable of Making Big Planets,” 3 January 2001.)
NASA announced several new findings made possible by the Chandra X-ray Observatory. Farhad Zadeh of Northwestern University had used Chandra to locate “a cauldron of 60 million degree gas enveloping a cluster of young stars.” The discovery marked the first time that scientists had located such high-energy x-rays surrounding young stars. Zadeh also noted that the newly discovered cluster, located some 25,000 light-years from Earth and estimated at 1 to 2 million years old, had provided evidence in support of the theory that stellar winds generated by stars can produce very hot gas. In addition to Zadeh’s find, Andreas Zezas of the Harvard- Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics announced that his team of scientists had found new midmass black holes in several starburst galaxiesregions where stars form and explode frequently. Researchers had long hypothesized that such an environment might exist but had previously been able to locate only a few midmass black holes. Zezas credited the powerful Chandra X-ray Observatory with allowing astronomers to examine far-flung galaxies more closely than before. Kimberly A. Weaver of NASA’s GSFC, who had contributed to Zezas’s project, hypothesized that the concentration of midsize black holes could possibly lead eventually to the formation of a single, massive black hole.(NASA, “Star Factory near Galactic Center Bathed in High-Energy X-rays,” news release 01-113, 6 June 2001; John Noble Wilford, “Hot Stellar Winds Captured by X-ray Orbiter,” New York Times, 12 June 2001; NASA, “Chandra Sees Wealth of Black Holes in Star-Forming Galaxies,” news release 01-110, 6 June 2001.)
Lieutenant Governor of Florida Frank T. Brogan and Roy D. Bridges Jr., Director of NASA’s KSC, broke ground on a new research facility located just south of KSC. The new project, officially named the Space Experiment Research and Processing Laboratory (SERPL), joined researchers from the state of Florida, NASA, the Florida Space Research Institute, and the University of Florida. The research center would devote significant resources to ISS research and to examining the commercial potential of space-related research. Bridges described the venture as widely beneficial, saying, “SERPL and the unprecedented opportunities for collaboration that it represents are key to Kennedy’s evolution to a recognized center for technology development. We expect this partnership to pay dividends to NASA, the State of Florida, and the space industry well into the future.(M2 Presswire, “NASA and Florida Join Forces To Develop Space Science Facility,” 9 February 2001.)
For the first time, astronomers detected a supermassive black hole consuming material in the Milky Way. Frederick K. Baganoff of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a team of scientists using NASA’s Chandra X-ray Observatory to observe a source of radio emissions called Sagittarius A* had noticed a rapid rise and decline in x-ray emissions in its vicinity. The scientists, who believed that Sagittarius A* is connected to a black hole in the center of the galaxy, speculated that the emissions emanate from matter falling into the black hole. The Chandra observations had provided the best view yet of the area just outside of the black hole’s event horizon―the point of no return for all matter falling into a black hole. The discovery added significantly to previous research indicating that the Milky Way Galaxy contains a black hole or some other large, dark object.(NASA, “Chandra Catches Milky Way Monster Snacking,” news release 01-179, 5 September 2001.)
Scientists led by Ken Ebisawa of NASA’s GSFC published research that helped resolve a long- standing question about whether the emission of x-rays from the plane of the Milky Way Galaxy was truly diffuse or derived from numerous discrete sources. The scientists had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory to carry out an unprecedented survey of a region of the galactic plane that had no known x-ray point sources, in the deepest examination ever made of hard x-rays in the region referred to as the zone of avoidance. Chandra had revealed 36 new x-ray point sources and an area of diffuse emission. Properties of the new point sources had indicated that they were probably located outside the Milky Way. In addition, Chandra’s survey had indicated that the diffuse x-ray emission revealed the galactic omnipresence of hot plasma with a higher energy density than any other substance in interstellar space.(NASA, “Astronomers Go Behind the Milky Way To Solve X-ray Mystery,” news release 01-161, 9 August 2001; Ken Ebisawa et al., “Origin of the Hard X-ray Emission from the Galactic Plane,” Science 293, no. 5535 (31 August 2001): 1633–1635.)
NASA astronomers linked the world’s two largest telescopes, both located at the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii. Using a process known as interferometry, the scientists used the two telescopes to capture images of a faint star in the constellation Lynx. According to Anne L. Kinney, Director of NASA’s Astronomical Search for Origins program, “combining the light from the two largest telescopes on Earth is a fabulous technical advancement.” Using a tunnel that collects light waves that the telescopes have captured, to combine the images, the two telescopes worked together to allow astronomers to peer farther and more clearly into space than ever before. Scientists hailed the achievement as a significant step toward creating a new class of astronomical telescopes.(NASA, “An Astronomy First: Telescopes Double-Team Hawaiian Night Sky,” news release 01-42, 14 March 2001; Associated Press, “World’s Strongest Telescope Link Created,” 15 March 2001.)
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) announced that Charles Elachi would become Director of its 5,000-employee, US$1.3 billion research facility in Pasadena, California. Elachi, an expert in the field of remote sensing best known for developing radar systems, had assumed JPL’s top post after 30 years of service with NASA. JPL had interviewed more than 70 candidates over eight months before selecting Elachi. Concerning JPL’s challenge to encourage further exploration while meeting tight budgets, Elachi remarked, “It’s basically striking a balance between faster implementation and cheaper implementation and making sure we have success.” Having lost two separate spacecraft headed for Mars in 1999, JPL stood at a critical juncture as Elachi assumed control.(Associated Press, “New Director Named for NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory,” 31 January 2001; Usha Lee McFarling, “30-Year Veteran of JPL Is Chosen as Its Leader,” Los Angeles Times, 31 January 2001.)
Daniel Wang, a University of Massachusetts professor and leader of a study team of astronomers, announced that his team had discovered a giant halo of hot gas spiraling a galaxy similar to the Milky Way and relatively near Earth. The researchers had used the Chandra X-ray Observatory and the HST to observe galaxy NGC 4631, some 25 million light-years from Earth. The discovery not only revealed the increasing power of the astronomical tools at the disposal of scientists, but also contributed to astronomers’ knowledge about the structure and evolution of galaxies. Wang explained the significance of the discovery: “Scientists have debated for over 40 years whether the Milky Way has an extended corona, or halo, of hot gas . . . by studying similar galaxies like NGC 4631, we can get an idea of what’s going on within our own galaxy.” The study’s results also provided new information about how energy and mass spin around galaxies, as well as about the possible effects of rapid star formation.(NASA, “Chandra Detects Halo of Hot Gas Around Milky Way–Like Galaxy,” news release 01-146, 19 July 2001.)
A research team announced the results of a NASA-funded study using microgravity to investigate the properties of everyday materials. Led by Jennifer A. Lewis, the team of researchers had pioneered a new approach to stabilizing particles in fluids, a process they termed nanoparticle haloing. By suspending movement of fine particles in fluids such as paint, Lewis and her colleagues had succeeded in manipulating the complexion of the liquid. Perhaps of greater significance, they had been able to ensure that the fluid did not break down as quickly as it would have done otherwise. The researchers believed that nanoparticle haloing would have wide application, such as in making the fluids more useful and long lasting. As Lewis said, “This designer capability will assist us in developing improved materials.” NASA’s Office of Biological and Physical Research (OBPR) made the project possible, offering grants for studies that might benefit from the use of a microgravity or low-gravity environment to examine the fundamental states and characteristics of materials.(NASA, “Suspended in Space: Researchers Make Important Discovery About Materials,” news release 01-154, 31 July 2001.)
An international team of astronomers led by Kailash C. Sahu of the Space Telescope Science Institute reported the discovery of what appeared to be planet-like celestial bodies clustered around a group of 10 million stars some 8,500 light-years from Earth. The team had used the HST to make their discovery, which formed the basis of their hypothesis that the strong gravitational force of the dense star cluster might have pulled the quasi-planets away from their parent stars. The researchers’ article in Nature prompted both skepticism and praise. Stephen P. Maran, an American Astronomical Society spokesperson, summarized the reason for the excitement surrounding the find: “If it is confirmed, the finding suggests there is something big here that we don’t understand.” In addition, Sahu’s research team reported that they had observed six microlensing events during their study, thereby focusing the attention of the scientific community on Albert Einstein’s theory of microlensing that the gravity of a celestial body can bend the light of a more distant object, thereby acting as a magnifying glass for space exploration.(Kailash C. Sahu et al., “Gravitational Microlensing by Low-Mass Objects in the Globular Cluster M22,” Nature 411, no. 6841 (28 June 2001): 10221024; Kathy Sawyer, “A Dim Discovery in a Bend of Light; Celestial Orbs Detected Through Microlensing May Hold Clues to Stars’ Birth,” Washington Post, 28 June 2001.)
The Pentagon selected an international team of contractors, led by Lockheed Martin, to build the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF), a multi-role fighter plane that the United States, the United Kingdom, and other countries planned to use. The Pentagon planned for the JSF to function as a single, fungible, low-maintenance replacement for the various aircraft that different military branches in the United States and elsewhere had been using. The program, valued at approximately US$200 billion, included three versions of the JSF, to fulfill the different requirements of the various military branches in the United States and Europe. All of the versions would have stealth and supersonic capabilities. BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin, and Northrop Grumman would initially produce 22 aircraft during the system design and development phase; the companies expected to construct nearly 3,000 aircraft under the program.(Lockheed Martin, “Lockheed Martin Team Wins Joint Strike Fighter Competition, Pledges Full Commitment to This Cornerstone of Future Defense Capability,” news release, 26 October 2001, http://www.lockheedmartin.com/news/press_releases/2001/LockheedMartinTeamWinsJointStrikeFi.html (accessed 28 January 2010).)
tdrs_jmedia.htm (accessed 25 November 2008). by Richard S. Ellis of the California Institute of Technology, had combined the natural magnifying power of galaxy cluster Abell 2218 with observations from the HST and the W. M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii to execute the technique successfully. As a result, the team had been able to detect faint light emitted by a small cluster of stars located nearly 13.4 billion light- years from Earth. Based on detectable characteristics of the stars, the scientists believed that a star cluster in its early formation stages had produced the detected light, and that, during the early formation of the universe, the infant star cluster may have combined with other star groups to create galaxies.(Richard Ellis et al., “A Faint Star-Forming System Viewed Through the Lensing Cluster Abell 2218: First Light at z ~ 5.6?” Astrophysical Journal Letters 560, no. 2 (20 October 2001): L119–L122; William Harwood, “Pre- Galactic Star Cloud Is Discovered,” Washington Post, 6 October 2001.)
