NASA and the National Science Foundation (NSF) announced the successful flight test of a newly designed super-pressure balloon prototype intended to carry large scientific experiments to the edge of space on missions lasting a minimum of 100 days. The project’s goal was to design a 22-million-cubic-foot (67-million-cubic-meter) balloon that would carry an instrument weighing up to 1 ton (907 kilograms, or 0.9 tonne) to an altitude of more than 110,000 feet (33,528 meters). The test flight launched a 7-million-cubic-foot (2.13-million-cubic-meter) balloon, the largest single-cell, super-pressure, fully sealed balloon flown to date. The launch took place on 28 December 2008 from McMurdo Station, NSF’s logistics hub in Antarctica. Successfully demonstrating the durability and functionality of its unique pumpkin shape and novel material—a lightweight polyethylene film approximately the thickness of plastic food wrap. The balloon reached a float altitude of more than 111,000 feet (33,833 meters), which it was still maintaining on 8 January, its eleventh day of flight.(NASA, “New NASA Balloon Successfully Flight-Tested Over Antarctica,” news release 09-003, 8 January 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jan/HQ_09-003_Antarctic_Balloons.html (accessed 14 January 2011).)
NASA announced that its Kepler space telescope had detected the atmosphere of HAT-P-7, a known gas-giant planet, within a 10-day period of test-data collection, thereby demonstrating Kepler’s extraordinary scientific capabilities. NASA analysis showed that Kepler’s onboard telescope and light-detecting instruments were at least 100 times more precise than the ground- based instruments that had originally discovered HAT-P-7. The unprecedented precision of Kepler’s measurements of the planet yielded new information about HAT-P-7’s atmosphere, demonstrating Kepler’s accuracy in locating Earth-sized planets. Kepler had launched on 6 March 2009, on a mission to locate Earth-sized, potentially habitable exoplanets.(NASA, “NASA’s Kepler Mission Spies Changing Phases in a Distant World,” news release 09-180, 6 August 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_180_Kepler_First_light.html (accessed 31 August 2011); John Johnson Jr., “NASA Says Kepler Spacecraft Proves It Can Find Earth-Sized Planets,” Los Angeles Times, 7 August 2009.)
NASA named Arthur F. “Rick” Obenschain, Deputy Director of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, to lead the Mishap Investigation Board (MIB) for the 24 February OCO launch failure. As Chair of the MIB, Obenschain would lead four yet-to-be-named members, tasked with gathering information, analyzing the facts, identifying the launch failure’s causes and contributing factors, and making recommendations for actions to prevent a similar incident. As Deputy Director of GSFC, Obenschain shared responsibility for executive leadership and overall direction and management of the Center, in addition to providing executive oversight and technical evaluation for development and delivery for Goddard space systems launches and operations. Previously, Obenschain had headed the Flight Projects Directorate, where he had 25 been responsible for the daily management of more than 40 space and Earth science missions.
NASA announced that it had awarded a contract modification to L-3 Communications Integrated Systems LP of Waco, Texas, to extend through 31 December 2009 the period of performance for further developmental engineering in support of the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) mission. The joint program of NASA and the German Aerospace Center, SOFIA included a high-altitude, airborne, German-built 2.5-meter (100-inch) infrared telescope. Mounted in a cavity in the rear fuselage of a highly modified Boeing-747SP jetliner, the telescope had scientific instruments capable of celestial observations ranging from visible light through the submillimeter, far-infrared spectrum. L-3 Communications was responsible for completing development and testing of the SOFIA Airborne System, including modification, fabrication, installation, integration, and verification of various systems to meet mission requirements. The contract modification covered completion of the SOFIA subsystems, such as the mission-control and communications system; engineering and flight-test support for the telescope-cavity-door-open flight tests and the science programs; and support for reviews leading to NASA’s public aircraft certification. The option modification brought the total value of the contract to approximately US$37.7 million. NASA had not yet exercised the two additional one- year-option periods allowed under the initial cost-plus-award-fee contract with L-3 134 Communications Integrated Systems. The initial contract had taken effect in February 2007.
NASA announced the selection of two scientific proposals to study the Sun and other exotic objects in the universe, such as neutron stars and black holes. NASA would develop the proposals into full missions, as part of its Small Explorer (SMEX) program. The winning proposals were the Interface Region Imaging Spectrography (IRIS) and the Gravity and Extreme Magnetism (GEMS). With Alan M. Title of Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center in Palo Alto, California, as Principal Investigator, the IRIS mission would use a solar telescope and spectrograph to explore the solar chromosphere, a region crucial in the quest to understand energy transport into the solar wind. NASA expected the mission greatly to extend the scientific output of existing heliophysics spacecraft. Jean H. Swank of NASA’s GSFC in Greenbelt, Maryland, would serve as Principal Investigator of the GEMS mission, designed to study the bending of space and curving of light in regions of extreme gravity—near objects such as ultra- dense neutron stars and stellar-mass black holes—and to detect and measure the polarization of the x rays that such objects emit. NASA planned for to launch both projects by 2015, with mission costs capped at US$105 million each, excluding the launch vehicles.(NASA, “NASA Awards Two Small Explorer Development Contracts,” news release 09-141, 19 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-141_SMEX_Selections.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
NASA’s MFSC and the Chandra X-ray Observatory announced that a long observation from Chandra, the SST, and ground-based observatories had identified for the first time the source of energy producing so-called cosmic blobs. The Chandra observations had helped reveal that the so-called blobs are not infant galaxies, as astronomers had previously thought, but more likely “adolescent” galaxies about to stabilize. The telescopes had observed a collection of 29 blobs in one large field in the sky called SSA22. The blobs had become visible from Earth when the universe was approximately 2 billion years old, or 15 percent of its current age. Chandra data had revealed a signature in five blobs indicating the growth of supermassive black holes—a point- like source with luminous x-ray emission. An additional three blobs provided possible evidence for such black holes. Further observations, including Spitzer data, had determined that remarkable levels of star formation dominated several of these galaxies. Calculations had revealed that the radiation and outflows from the black holes, and from the bursts of star formation, were powerful enough to light up the hydrogen gas in the blobs. Scientists stated that, although the gas in the blobs would not likely cool down to form stars, it would add to the hot gas found between galaxies, indicating that SSA22 could evolve into a massive galaxy cluster. James E. Geach of Durham University in the United Kingdom, lead author of the study, which the Astrophysical Journal would publish in its 10 July 2009 issue, remarked that scientists would need to look further back in time to capture data indicating that the blobs were forming galaxies and black holes.(Chandra X-Ray Center, “Galaxies Coming of Age in Cosmic Blobs,” news release, 24 June 2009, http://chandra. si.edu/press/09_releases/press_062409.html (accessed 5 August 2011); Clara Moskowitz, “Secrets of Space Blobs Revisited,” Space.com, 24 June 2009, http://www.space.com/6885-secrets-space-blobs-revealed.html (accessed 8 August 2011); Seth Borenstein, “Telescope Finds Space Blobs Are Pubescent Galaxies,” Associated Press, 25 June 2009.)
In coordination with NASA’s Office of the Chief Engineer and Office of Human Capital Management, NASA’s Innovative Partnerships Program announced the selection of its inaugural group of Innovation Ambassadors. NASA had established the program to target opportunities for creating NASA partnerships and for identifying new sources of innovation outside the traditional aerospace field. NASA anticipated selecting a group of Innovation Ambassadors annually, assigning the selected ambassadors to positions at several leading innovative external research and development organizations in the United States. During these assignments, which would last as long as a year, the selected individuals would share their expertise with their assigned research and development organization while learning about the organization’s innovative products, processes, and business models. Upon returning to NASA, the ambassadors would share new ideas with their NASA colleagues and would implement innovations within their respective NASA divisions. NASA had selected ARC’s Robert S. McCann, who would work with the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center in Palo Alto, California, studying the application of artificial intelligence to health systems management and human-machine teams; JSC’s Eric C. Darcy, who would work with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory in Golden, Colorado, to develop mathematical models for lithium-ion battery performance; GSFC’s Lawrence M. Hilliard, who would work with Primary Simulation, of Silver Spring, Maryland, to apply “laser ball” technology to interactive educational tools; and Kelly J. Snook, also from GSFC, who would work at Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s (MIT’s) Media Laboratory in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to study the use of sound as a means of visualizing and analyzing scientific data.(NASA, “NASA Selects First Innovation Ambassadors,” news release 09-182, 4 August 2009, http://www.nasa. gov/home/hqnews/2009/aug/HQ_09_182_Innovation_Ambassadors.html (accessed 31 August 2011).)
NASA announced its partnership with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia’s King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology (KACST), to collaborate in lunar and asteroid science research. The Saudi Lunar and Near-Earth Object Science Center would become an affiliate partner with the NASA Lunar Science Institute at NASA’s ARC. The partnership fell within the scope of a MOU on Science and Technology, which the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United States had signed in 2008. U.S. Ambassador to Saudi Arabia James B. Smith recognized the partnership as an important advance in the growing U.S.-Saudi program of bilateral science and technology cooperation.(NASA, “NASA Partners with Saudi Arabia on Moon and Asteroid Research,” news release 09-284, 15 December 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/dec/HQ_09-284_NASA-Saudi_statement.html (accessed 16 December 2011).)
NASA released the first comprehensive map of Earth’s solar system, including a map of its location in the Milky Way galaxy. NASA had produced the map using data collected over six months by two detectors on NASA’s Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) spacecraft. The map revealed the local interstellar medium, the region that separates the nearest reaches of the galaxy from the heliosphere. This region acts as a “protective bubble,” shielding Earth’s solar system from the most dangerous cosmic radiation traveling through space. According to IBEX Principal Investigator David J. McComas, of the Space Science and Engineering Division at Southwest Research Institute in San Antonio, Texas, the IBEX sky map marked the first time that scientists could leave the Sun’s atmosphere and begin to understand Earth’s place in the galaxy. The map also enabled astronomers to place in context the observations from NASA’s Voyager spacecraft. Since their launch in 1977, the twin Voyager spacecraft had each traveled into the interstellar boundary. However, the IBEX data showed a ribbon of bright emissions that neither Voyager craft had detected. Launched in October 2008, NASA’s IBEX had a mission to map the heliosphere. The journal Science had published a series of papers outlining the results of the mission.(NASA, “NASA Spacecraft Provides First View of Our Place in the Galaxy,” news release 09-241, 15 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-241_IBEX.html (accessed 30 September 2011); Agence France-Presse, “NASA Probe Helps To Map Solar System,” 16 October 2009.)
NASA’s GSFC selected Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation to build a second GMI for the GPM mission. Ball had designed the identical instruments—GMI 1 and GMI 2—as multichannel, conical-scanning, microwave radiometers, which would serve an essential role in the near-global coverage of GPM. Ball planned to conduct full instrument testing on GMI 1 in mid-2010, with launch aboard the spaceborne GPM core observatory scheduled for 2013. The GMI-2 launch would follow in 2014. Ball had designed the 8-foot-high (2.4-meter-high) GMI instruments to rotate at 32 revolutions per minute, to perform temporal sampling of rainfall accumulations and more frequent and higher quality data collection, using two stable calibration points.(Ball Aerospace and Technologies Corporation, “Ball Aerospace Selected for Second NASA GMI Microwave Imager,” news release, 30 November 2009, http://www.ballaerospace.com/page.jsp?page=30&id=363 (accessed 21 December 2011).)
NASA announced that it had selected six universities to receive research grants totaling nearly US$30 million. The selected universities served large numbers of underrepresented and minority students. The grants would help the universities establish multidisciplinary scientific, engineering, and commercial research centers, capable of making significant contributions to NASA’s programs. Through the NASA Group 5 University Research Center awards program, each university would receive up to US$1 million per year for up to five years, based on their performance and on availability of funds. The awards continued NASA’s commitment to supporting new aerospace science and technology concepts and expanding the nation’s base for aerospace research development. Through these efforts, NASA hoped to achieve a broad-based, competitive capability for aerospace research and technology development. NASA also hoped the awards would help underrepresented minorities obtain advanced degrees in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. Selected from among 35 institutions that had submitted proposals, the six universities to receive awards were California State University in Long Beach, for the Center for Human Factors in Advanced Aeronautics Technologies; Delaware State University in Dover, for the establishment of a NASA Optical Sciences Center for Applied Research; North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University in Greensboro, for the Center for Aviation Safety; North Carolina Central University in Durham, for the NASA Center for Aerospace Device Research and Education; University of Texas in Brownsville, for the Center for Gravitational Wave Astronomy; and University of Texas in El Paso, for the Center for Space Exploration Technology Research.(NASA, “NASA Awards Grants for Research Centers at 6 Minority Universities,” news release 09-213, 16 September 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/sep/HQ_09-213_Minority_University_Grants.html (accessed 15 September 2011).)
NASA’s ARC announced that LCROSS’s observation of its 9 October 2009 impact on the lunar surface had succeeded. During LACROSS’s descent into the Centaur crater, nine instruments on board had captured each phase of the impact sequence. The ultraviolet/visible and near-infrared spectrometer and camera data had revealed a faint but distinct debris plume. LCROSS Principal Investigator and Project Scientist Anthony Colaprete remarked that the ejecta brightness of the plume was at the low end of NASA’s predictions. However, that description could provide a clue to help determine the properties of the material that Centaur had impacted. LCROSS had also captured Centaur’s impact flash in both of its mid-infrared thermal cameras over a couple of seconds. The temperature of that flash would provide valuable information about the composition of the material at the impact site. Although creating a plume had been the key to the mission’s success, LCROSS had not detected a debris plume, initially. The new images, captured by a different camera on board the spacecraft, confirmed that Centaur’s impact had, indeed, created a plume.(NASA Ames Research Center, “NASA’s LCROSS Captures All Phases of Centaur Impact,” ARC news release 16 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/LCROSS/main/LCROSS_impact.html (accessed 30 September)
ATK announced that, together with NASA and industry partners Lockheed Martin Corporation and Orbital Sciences Corporation, it had successfully performed a ground-test firing of the attitude-control motor-thruster system of the launch-abort system (LAS) for NASA’s Orion crew exploration vehicle (CEV). The test, conducted at ATK’s facility in Elkton, Maryland, marked a milestone in the development of the Orion spacecraft. The fifth in a series of ground tests of the craft’s attitude-control motor system, the High Thrust-8 (HT-8) demonstration provided validation that several flight-weight subsystems were performing as designed. According to a contract with Orbital Sciences Corporation, ATK was responsible for the design of the attitude- control motor, which would provide steering for the LAS in the event of a catastrophic failure on the launchpad or during Orion’s initial ascent. Orbital Sciences Corporation was responsible for delivering the LAS motors for Lockheed Martin, the prime contractor for NASA’s Orion Project.(ATK, “NASA and Orion Industry Team Successfully Test Orion Launch Abort System Attitude Control Motor Thruster System,” news release, 1 April 2009, http://atk.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=118&item=911 (accessed 3 June 2011); Guy Norris, “ATK Pad Abort Thruster Test,” Aviation Week, 2 April 2009.)
A team of astronomers published research in the journal Nature, revealing that temperatures on the gas giant exoplanet known as HD 80606b can rise from 980°F to 2,240°F (527°C to 1,227°C) within 6 hours. The researchers had studied infrared measurements collected by NASA’s Spitzer Space Telescope (SST), to determine the amount of heat emanating from HD 80606b as its orbit neared its star. The planet travels around its star along an oblong orbit every 111.4 days—an orbit that scientists described as the most eccentric of any known planet. At its closest point to its star, HD 80606b receives 825 times more irradiation than at its farthest point. The eclipse that occurs in the moment before the planet’s closest approach to its star had enabled the astronomers to measure separately the amount of heat emanating from the planet, distinguishing it from the star’s heat. They had succeeded in measuring precisely how hot the planet becomes as it approaches its star. A computer model using Spitzer data had revealed global storms and shock waves in the planet’s atmosphere every 111 days, as it swings close to its star. The simulation showed that the increasing heat and expansion of the atmosphere produces very high winds—5 kilometers per second (3 miles per second), or more than 11,000 miles per hour (17,703 kilometers per hour)—moving from the day side of the planet to its night side.(Clara Moskowitz, “Extreme Exoplanet’s Wild Ride,” Wired, 29 January 2009; Jeanna Bryner, “Exoplanet Sees Extreme Heat Waves,” Space.com, 28 January 2009, http://www.space.com/6364-exoplanet-sees-extreme-heat- waves.html (accessed 27 April 2011); see also, Gregory Laughlin et al., “Rapid Heating of the Atmosphere of an Extrasolar Planet,” Nature 457, no. 7229 (29 January 2009): 562−564, http://ezproxy.ouls.ox.ac.uk:2346/nature/ journal/v457/n7229/pdf/nature07649.pdf (DOI 10.1038/nature07649; accessed 27 April 2011).)
NASA announced that its Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had captured the first gamma-ray burst (GRB) ever seen in high resolution. The burst, designated GRB 080916C, was the most extreme yet recorded, in terms of its tremendous power and speed. The Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had detected the blast on 15 September 2008, and the Gamma-Ray Burst Monitor aboard the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope had recorded the event. Thirty-two hours after the blast’s detection, a team at the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Garching, Germany, had searched for the explosion’s afterglow. The team at the Max Planck Institute had then captured the field in seven wavelengths, using the Gamma-Ray Burst Optical/Near-Infrared Detector (GROND) on the 2.2-meter (7.22-foot) telescope at the European Southern Observatory in La Silla, Chile. The capture had enabled the Max Planck Institute team to determine that the blast had occurred 12.2 billion light-years away, in the constellation Carina. Fermi team members had used this information to show that the blast had exceeded the power of 9,000 ordinary supernovas and to calculate that, within the jet, gas bullets had likely moved at 99.9999 percent of the speed of light.(NASA, “NASA’s Fermi Telescope Sees Most Extreme Gamma-Ray Blast Yet,” news release 09-033, 19 February 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/feb/HQ_09-033_Fermi_Gamma-ray_Blast.html (accessed 28 February 2011); Press Association (United Kingdom), “Record Radiation Blast Detected,” 20 February 2009.)
Rodger E. Doxsey, head of the Space Telescope Science Institute’s (STScI’s) HST Mission Office in Baltimore, died of cancer at the age of 62. Recruited as an HST Mission Operations Scientist, Doxsey had worked at STScI since 1981, nine years before the launch of HST. Since HST’s launch, Doxsey had been involved in the daily operations of the telescope. He had been responsible for all work necessary to support HST’s scientific operations, planning and scheduling, and calibration of data, and for building scientific mission specifications and issuing all commands necessary to HST’s instruments. Doxsey had worked with GSFC to develop HST’s new scientific instruments. Despite his illness, he had remained involved in the preparations for the final servicing mission to the telescope in May 2009. In 1991 NASA had recognized Doxsey with the highest honor it could give to a nonfederal employee, awarding him its Distinguished Public Service Medal. With this award, NASA noted Doxsey’s “outstanding leadership in developing the concepts of the scientific operations” of HST and in implementing the systems needed to accomplish those ends. In 2004 AAS had awarded Doxsey the Van Biesbroeck Prize for his “outstanding, unselfish dedication” to making HST “one of the most scientifically productive telescopes of all time.” Director of STScI Charles Mattias “Matt” Mountain described Doxsey as the “heart and soul of Hubble” at the Institute, saying that Doxsey “knew everything about the space telescope, from the smallest anomaly to the breadth of the extraordinary science delivered by the telescope.” Doxsey had worked with HST for more than 28 years.(Frank D. Roylance, “Rodger Doxsey, One of Space Telescope Team’s First Leaders, Dies at 62,” Baltimore Sun, 15 October 2009.)
