Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower in speech at Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland, said: “I for one do not fully understand why, in the midst of a plethora of necessary and costly activities, our Nation should be required, urgently, to develop a capacity to put men on the Moon and challenge our principal opponent in doing so. * * *”
NASA invited 12 companies to submit prime contractor proposals for the manned lunar Apollo spacecraft by October 9.
The Carnegie Institution issued annual report containing several findings from its space scientists: Philip Abelson contended that it was a waste of time and money to sterilize vehicles going to the Moon or planets because any life there would be so unlike terrestrial life that it could not be contaminated by Earth organisms; Horace Babcock offered a theory on alternating spiral magnetic fields of the Sun that might explain sunspots, flares, and the 22-year magnetic cycle; other scientists noted growing evidence of major differences in chemical composition of distant stars, indicating a need to revise methods of computing distances to those stars.
NASA Goddard scientists reported that Explorer X had encountered magnetic fields considerably stronger than expected in its elongated orbit which carried it 112,500 miles from Earth (almost halfway to the Moon), although it would take several weeks to analyze acquired data.
NASA announced that Douglas Aircraft had been selected for negotiation of a contract to modify the Saturn S-IV stage by installing a single 200,000-pound-tlirust, Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-liydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine instead of six 15,000-pound-thrust P. & W. hydrogen/oxygen engines. Known as S-IVB, this modified stage will be used in advanced Saturn configurations for manned circuinlunar Apollo missions.
X-15 No. 3 made first flight, a successful test of new automated control system, NASA’s Neil A. Armstrong as pilot in his first flight of XLR-99-engined X-15. At half throttle, X—15 reached speed of 2,502 miles per hour and an altitude of 81,000 feet.
Reported from Moscow that U.S.S.R. was planning to orbit a man around the Moon in 1962, and that the U.S.S.R. had ICBM’s in being with 100-megaton warheads.
Soviet Cosmonaut Gagarin in New Delhi said that “we will not have to wait long” for the first manned flight to the Moon. Gagarin was making a 9-day visit to India.
Two pilots sealed in 8- by 12-foot simulated space cabin for 17-day round trip to the Moon, at the School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex.
NASA selected MIT’s Instrumentation Laboratory to develop the guidance-navigation system for Project Apollo spacecraft. This first major Apollo contract was required since guidance-navigation system is basic to overall Apollo mission. The Instrumentation Laboratory of MIT, a nonprofit organization headed by C. Stark Draper, has been involved in variety of guidance and navigation systems developments for 20 years.
Nationwide Gallup poll released which showed that 38 percent of those questioned thought the United States led in space research, while 38 percent thought the U.S.S.R. led. The same balance also was tabulated on which Nation will be the first to place a man on the Moon.
NASA Apollo briefing held at Space Task Group for all prime contractors interested in submitting bids.
Complete system studies of the Apollo spacecraft system that were begun in November 1960 were completed by three industrial contractors.
Ranger 2 shot postponed indefinitely as the 8-day “window” (i.e., when the Moon, Sun, and Earth were in favorable positions) had ended before technical difficulties could be corrected.
IB stage of the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle would be built by the Boeing Co., NASA announced. The $300 million contract, to run through 1966, called for development, construction, and test of 24 flight stages, plus several for ground tests. Assembly would take place at the NASA Michoud Operations Plant, New Orleans, La. The S-IB would be the first stage of the vehicle that would launch the three-man Apollo spacecraft for direct circumlunar flight or, with rendezvous, for lunar landing.
