Upon returning to Sweden from Moscow, Swedish scientist Bjoern Malmgren reported that two Soviet cosmonauts were being trained in Swedish-built centrifuge for a trip around the moon and back. Malmgren reported Soviet space officials told him the venture was planned for late next year.
Hindu astrologers predicted disaster during the period February 4-5 when five planets, the sun. the moon, and an invisible body called Khentu moved into rough alignment. Predictions of disaster were based on astrological tables. Reaction was so widespread that it prompted Prime Minister Nehru to ridicule the predictions in an address: “I do not know the secrets of nature. We will know them gradually. But what we don’t know, we should not accept blindly. At least what strikes our intelligence as completely absurd should not be accepted.”
mit ordered a Honeywell 1800 electronic computer from Honeywell Electronic Data Processing, for work on Project Apollo navigation system. After installation in 1963, the computer would aid in circuitry design of Apollo spacecraft’s guidance computer and also wollid simulate full operation of spacebome computer during ground tests.
nasa signed $1.55 million contract with Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. for development of spacesuit for Apollo crewmen. As prime contractor, Hamilton Standard has management responsibility of the overall program and wollid develop life-support, back-pack system to be worn by crewmen during lunar expeditions; Latex would fabricate the sllit with Republic Aviation Corp. furnishing human factors information and environmental testing. The suit wollid allow crewman greater mobility than previous spacesuits, enabling him to walk, climb, and bend with ease.
Report released by White House of study committee examining nonprofit research groups. Report stated that Government must continue to rely heavily on private institutions, including nonprofit research groups, to carry out Federal research programs. At the same time, the committee recommended that steps be taken to improve the competence of the Government’s own scientific staffs and laboratories to direct research programs. Late April: faa awarded first seven contracts, totaling $2.66 million, for commercial supersonic transport aircraft, faa Administrator N. E. Halaby said the action was “the first step leading to the development of a safe, practical, economical airplane to carry the traveling public beyond the speed of sound.” During April: Dr. John C. Houbolt, of nasa’s Langley Research Center, writing in the April issue of Astronautics, outlined the possible advantages of lunar-orbit rendezvous for a manned lunar landing as opposed to direct flight from earth or earth-orbit rendezvous. Under this concept, an Apollo-type vehicle wollid fly direct to the moon, go into orbit around the moon, detach a small landing craft which wollid land on the moon and then return to the mother craft, which wollid then return to earth. Advantages wollid be the much smaller craft having to perform the difficllit lunar landing and take-off, the possibility of optimizing the smaller craft for this one function, the safe return of the mother craft in event of a landing accident, and even the possibility of using two of the small craft to provide a rescue capability.
British astrophysicist, Zdenek Kopal, suggested in ars lunar conference at Cleveland that the moon may have an abundant water supply, including geysers and under surface glaciers or permafrost.
nasa announced that the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle, to be used for manned flights around the moon and for manned lunar landings with rendezvous technique, would have five-engined first and second stages. The first stage (S-IB) would be powered by five F-l engines (total of 7.5 million pounds thrust) and the second stage (S—II) would be powered with five J-2 engines (total of 1 million pounds thrust). A third stage (S-IVB) with a single J-2 engine would be used on escape missions.
Chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, Rep. Chet Holifield, stated that he saw a narrowing of the Nation’s objectives in space: “I cannot help but wonder about the sincerity of our entire space effort in view of the trends which I see in our current program. It appears, increasingly, that our goal is gravitating toward a one-snot manned mission to the moon. “This effort is centered around the development of chemical rockets whose limitations, compared to nuclear propulsion, are severe. “. . . The leader in space cannot afford to be so lacking in vision as to fail to appreciate the need for nuclear power. If we are sincere in our effort to be the first on this new frontier, we must maintain a concerted effort to develop nuclear powered machinery for use in space.” Holifield’s views were made known in a statement accompanying publication of testimony taken during September 1962.
Neil A. Armstrong, nasa research pilot, awarded the 1962 Octave Chanute Award by the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias), as the pilot who had contributed most to the aerospace sciences during the year. He was cited for “outstanding contributions in both engineering and piloting capacity in the development of an experimental adaptive control system and in the flight testing of that system in the X-15, No. 3 aircraft.”
Four “hot spots” on the moon were reported discovered by Bruce Murray and Robert Wildey of Cal Tech, using new telescope with heat-sensitive, gold-plated mirror to detect infrared radiation. The two space scientists speclliated that hot spots collid indicate large areas of bare rock exposed on the lunar surface. Spots were discovered during survey of the moon which also revealed the lunar surface gets colder at night than previously believed, —270°F compared to —243°F recorded by earlier heat-measuring devices. Murray said the new evidence collid mean there are prominences of heat-retaining rock protruding through thick dust layer on lunar surface.
nasa selected General Dynamics/Convair to design and manufacture “Little Joe II” launch vehicle to be used to boost the Apollo spacecraft on unmanned suborbital test flights. Little Joe II will be powered by solid-fuel motors in a cluster.
In news conference at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, Gherman Titov forecast cooperative flights to and around the moon if world leaders could come to an agreement on disarmament. He also stated that Soviet Cosmonaut No. 3 was ready to go.
gsfc awarded contract to ibm Corporation’s Federal Systems Division for computer support services for Project Mercury flights, nonrendezvous Gemini, and unmanned lunar flights scheduled for Project Apollo.
In interview in Yugoslav Government newspaper Borba, Soviet Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said U.S.S.R. was planning flight to the moon in 1965. “If some problem arises and a solution is not found immediately, the time is extended.”
ranger iv impacted on the moon at 7:49:53 AM est, ending a 231,486-mi. journey from amr that began with its launching on April 23. Goldstone Tracking Station maintained contact with the 50-milliwatt transmitter in the lunar landing capsule until it passed behind the left edge of the moon. Impact velocity was 5,963 mph, point of impact 229.3° E, 15.5° S, on a part of the moon never seen by man. ranger iv’s instrumentation, which ceased useful operation some ten hours after launch, never functioned again. About the same time as the lunar impact, the Agena B 2nd stage passed to the right of the moon and went into orbit around the sun.
mariner ii flight-path correction was postponed for at least 24 hours, because scientists could not determine if the Venus probe was stabilized on the moon or the earth, jpl scientists received moon-reference indication from mariner ii’s earth-sensing system and earth-reference indication from its high-gain antenna. If mid-course maneuver were executed with moon-lock instead of earth-lock, the probe probably would come within 12,000 mi. of Venus instead of 10,000 mi.
ranger v, its batteries dead, passed within 450 mi. of the moon on its way into orbit of the sun.
nasa selected three companies for negotiation of production contracts for major components of the Apollo spacecraft navigation and guidance system in support of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory initial development of the complex Apollo navigation-guidance system, a contract let last August. Companies selected from 21 bidders, which will work under Manned Spacecraft Center contract were: A.C. Spark Plug Division of General Motors Corp. to fabricate the inertial guidance with associated electronics, ground support, and checkout system, and to assemble and test all components of the system; Raytheon Company to manufacture on-board digital computer; and Kollsman Instrument Corp. to build the optical subsystems including a space sextant, sunfinders, and navigation display equipment.
Dr. Hans-Georg Clamann, Chief of Space Medicine at sam, submitted that a mountain peak near the south pole of the moon may be the ideal location for a lunar hase. Continuous sunlight would provide support for growing vegetation.
Reported that nasa wollid build facilities worth $15 to $18 million at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr), N.M., for testing Apollo spacecraft’s propllision and abort systems. Facilities for flight tests of the abort system and the lunar excursion modllie would be ready in January 1963; static-firing sites for testing propulsion systems would be operational in mid-1963.
U.S. space experiments with regard to the moon may well give scientists new information on “how the Earth and the planets and the Sun were formed,” Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Associate Director of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics of the University of California, said in a Voice of America broadcast. The seismometer to be landed on the moon by nasa’s Ranger, for example, would help determine whether there are “moonquakes” some eight times more frequent than earthquakes, as there should be if the moon contains the same concentration of radioactive elements as the earth.
nasa first made public drawings of three-man Apollo spacecraft to be used in lunar landing development program.
Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, told American Nuclear Society in Washington that peaceful use of atomic explosives had “the potentiality of becoming the first really important and thoroughly economic use of atomic energy.” Feasibility of such use was demonstrated last summer with 100-kiloton thermonuclear explosion at 635-ft. depth in Nevada, the explosion removing about 7,500,000 cu. yds. of earth and leaving crater 1,200 ft. in diameter and 320 ft. deep. Dr. Teller said radioactivity can be controlled so that excavated area can be entered a few weeks after the explosion with no more exposure than in an atomic laboratory. He predicted nuclear explosions on the moon could be used to extract water from chemical compounds in lunar rock.
Balloon-borne Cassegrain telescope was launched from Artesia, N.M., to altitude of about 86,000 ft. by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. Besides the telescope, the 850-lb. payload included interferometer spectrometer to take spectra of moon and planet Venus. Other information obtained on this initial Project Sky top flight concerned amount of water vapor present in upper atmosphere. Third objective of flight was to obtain information required to measure amount of different gases in upper atmosphere of Venus. Instrumentation failure prevented the telescope from orienting on Venus for sufficient length of time.
Dr. Carl Sagan, University of California astronomer, warned scientists at the Lunar Exploration Conference, Blacksburg, Va., of the need for sterilization of lunar spacecraft and decontamination of Apollo crewmen, pointing out that lunik ii and ranger iv probably had deposited a million terrestrial micro-organisms on the moon, possibly contaminating areas around the impact points. Even more serious, he said, was the possibility that lunar microorganisms might be brought to earth where they could multiply explosively.
In concluding lecture in a Forum series on Space Science broadcast on the Voice of America, Dr. Carl E. Sagen of the Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of California (Berkeley), explained that “extraterrestrial life and the origin of life are questions intertwined.” Recent study on these issues related to four topics: (1) the origin of life on earth; (2) the physical environment of the moon and planets; (3) the present evidence of life beyond the earth; and (4) prospects for future exploration. He discussed the chemical reactions which must have existed in the primitive terrestrial environment and produced organic matter. The critical event was the origin of a molecular system capable of synthesizing itself, and “this event—which occurred some 4,200 million years ago—can be identified with the origin of life on Earth.” From then on the long evolutionary sequence from molecule to Man was under way. Dr. Sagen asserted that “through the interaction of organic molecules life must arise on countless other worlds, in our solar system, and other solar systems . . . [but] the forms of living organisms on other planets must be intriguingly diverse.” Dr. Sagen reviewed the improbability of life on Venus, the possibility of life on the moon, and the “favorable” environmental features for life on Mars. It is not, he said, a closed question with regard to life on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The presence of extraterrestrial organic matter in meteorites “greatly substantiates the belief that organic matter is an abundant constituent of the solar system.” Detailed characterization of extraterrestrial organisms likely to be found in exploration of the moon and the planets “will open up a new era, not only in biology but in all fields of human endeavor.”
aec announced University of California Lawrence Radiation Laboratory and Texas a&m Activation Analysis Laboratory would conduct nasa- and AEC-funded research in methods of determining chemical composition of lunar surface. First week in November: Armour Research Foundation reported to nasa that surface of the moon may not be covered with layers of dust. Initial Armour studies indicated dust particles become harder and denser in higher-vacuum environment such as that of moon, but studies had not proved that particles eventually become bonded together in rock-like substance as vacuum increased.
Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, predicted U.S. would land a man on the moon in 1969.
Reported by Irene Fischer of the Army Map Service that three experimental methods measured the mean distance from earth to the moon as 238,866 miles, a figure accurate within about a mile. A fourth method gives a figure accurate within about 8% miles. The 238,866-mile distance is 9 miles more than previously accepted figure used for decades and based on direct observation of the parallax of the moon at its mean distance from the earth.
Unnamed Soviet scientist, called “chief designer of Soviet spaceships,” reported by Tass as saying that U.S.S.R. planned to establish an “industrial undertaking” on the moon.
nasa selected Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. as prime contractor to manage and integrate spacesuit program for Project Apollo as well as to design and produce its life-support pack. Spacesuit development and fabrication would be done by International Latex Corp. under subcontract.
In speech at the Seattle World’s Fair, Secretary of State Dean Rusk urged that activities in space be subjected to international law and supervision before it is too late. Without international regulation, he said, “the frontiers of space might be pierced by huge nuclear-propelled dreadnaughts, armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy. Weather control might become a military weapon. . . .”
Rep. Edgar Hiestand asked citizens of the 21st Congressional District of California'—“Do you consider scientific information resulting from a U.S. moon flight worth its $40 billion cost?” Results of the poll were: 44% replied “no”; 35% replied “yes”; and 21% replied “undecided.”
In reviewing technical considerations leading to nasa’s selection of the lunar orbital rendezvous mode (lor) for Project Apollo, D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of Manned Space Flight, told ars lunar conference in Cleveland: “The mission I have described has been widely reported in the newspapers and technical journals, with a liberal use of superlatives in assessing its magnitude and complexity. In this case, resort to superlatives is well-advised—this is truly a staggering undertaking. Entirely new concepts of component and system reliability must be developed and proven. Extensive tests must be carefully planned and conducted, and results must be exhaustively studied. Crew capabllities must be developed and meshed with proven automatic systems so that the two work together with Swiss-watch precision. “It is a challenging task, studded throughout with difficult decisions which must be soundly based and properly made. . . . “With the decision as to the method by which we wlli go to the moon we think we have taken a giant step forward. Essentially, we have now ‘lilted off’ and are on our way. ...”
Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of the U.S. delegation to cospar meeting in Washington, reported that the moon emits x-rays as a result of solar and cosmic ray bombardment. Rockets shot of October 24, 1961, detected x-radiation from the lunar surface. By future studies of these energies it is hoped to determine the composition of the surface of the moon.
nasa announced that nine companies had submitted proposals to develop lunar excursion module (lem), one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft. After evaluating proposals, nasa would award contract “within six to eight weeks,” according to the Wall Street Journal.
British astronomer Zdenek Kopal of the University of Manchester said the gravitational pull of the earth might have heated the interior of thejmoon to nearly 2,000° C. He ascribed the moon’s growing diameter and its rising temperature to constant push-and-pull action of the earth’s gravitational force, causing tidal friction within the lunar interior. The friction generates heat faster than the heat can escape from the moon, thus contributing to the addition of tens of thousands of sq. mi. to the moon’s surface and 1,832° of temperature over the last 4.5 billion years. Kopal was speaking before the Conference on Lunar Exploration, Blacksburg, Va.
Speaking before the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Nobel physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey said that modern space science indicated the moon and the earth originated independently. It appeared likely that the moon was drawn into earth orbit early in the history of the solar system, some time after both bodies had been essentially formed in their present sizes and masses. He said that science now tended to disprove two widely accepted theories on the moon’s origin: (1) that the moon had been broken from the earth by tidal action, and (2) that the moon and earth had originated together in one gaseous cloud.
Soviet Academician Nikolai N. Semenov, Nobel Prize-winning chemist, was quoted as suggesting the moon be made into a major power source for earth. If the moon were covered with semiconductors and photo-elements of high efficiency solar energy falling on the moon could be converted to electrical power far exceeding that produced on earth. He also proposed the moon be made the site for all atomic and thermonuclear power stations, to avoid overheating and irradiating the earth. Research may find a way, he continued, to transmit the power to earth— perhaps by lasers or masers.
Radarastronomy observations of the moon taken by Millstone radar, mit Lincoln Laboratory, revealed unusually strong echo from region of crater Tycho. G. H. Pettengill and J. C. Henry, who reported on experiments in Journal of Geophysical Research, concluded the enhanced radar reflectivity may be explained by unusually rough crater floor and by crater walls consisting of material characteristic of lunar subsurface.
nasa announced it would negotiate with three companies to conduct three-month studies of a lunar logistics system. Negotiations with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., related to $150,000 study of types of spacecraft which could carry supplies to manned Apollo landing site on the moon; negotiations with Northrop Space Laboratories and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. related to $75,000 studies and operational analyses of possible cargoes for the lunar logistics spacecraft. Various nasa centers simultaneously would study lunar logistics system trajectories, launch vehicle adaptation, scheduling, alternate spacecraft propulsion concepts, lunar landing touchdown dynamics, and use of roving vehicles on the lunar surface.
Walter C. Williams, Associate Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said “I can’t guarantee we’re going to be first [to land a man on the moon], but if we don’t try, we’re going to be last. Either we have to spend more money on space ... or change our goals.” Williams was speaking at dinner commemorating 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ flight, in Beverly Hills, Calif.
George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, predicted in Voice of America interview that final decision on manned lunar flight technique would be made soon. Of the lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) method, he said: “We in nasa have already reached the firm conclusion that this is the best, cheapest, most reliable and quickest way to reach the moon. . . . The final decision has not been made, but in the meantime, we are proceeding with the lunar orbit rendezvous approach.”
U.S. and Australian scientists reported in Science that phases of the moon affect rainfall on earth. Their studies in both northern and southern hemispheres disclosed that heavy rains fall most frequently in the first and third weeks of the synodical month— the period from one new moon to the next.
nasa announced plans to launch Ranger (5) toward the moon during mid-October. The 775-lb. lunar probe would represent third U.S. attempt to take close-up photographs of the moon, gather information on lunar surface composition, and land instrumented capsule on lunar surface.
World’s first regularly scheduled Hovercraft transportation service ended. Operating since July with 8 round trips daily from Rhyl, Wales, to Wallasey, England, the experiment proved Vickers Armstrong 24-passenger Hovercraft could successfully negotiate soft sand and shallows as well as deeper water. Hovercraft rides 8 in. above surface (land or sea) on cushion of air.
usaf announced it wollid extend space survelliance to the moon through a system developed by the Space Track Research & Development Facility at Laurence G. Hanscom Field, Mass. There will be surveillance of orbiting man-made or natural objects beyond the earth’s nominal, low-altitude orbital areas out toward the moon.
Optical and radar observations of Project Highwater experiment, 23,000	gallons of water bursted from upper stages of Saturn test launch at 65-mile altitude on April 25, showed that the burst took 2-3 seconds to expand to about 10 times the size of the moon in a roughly circular pattern, and lasted about 10 seconds. A second fainter trail, about one lunar diameter, followed along the trajectory from the burst and lasted a few minutes, presumably caused by venting out of the incompletely destroyed second stage. Project Highwater was an msfc responsibility, a bonus experiment to the Saturn test conceived by Dr. Charles Lundquist.
X-15 No. 3 flown to speed of 2,830 mph (mach 4.06) and to altitude of 179,000 ft. in a test of new adaptive control system to be used in Dyna-Soar and Apollo vehicles, nasa's Neil A. Armstrong was pilot. Whereas the previous control system was automatic only while the X-15 was within the atmosphere and the pilot had to control flight with reaction jets while in space, the new system would be automatic in both regimes.
