nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of formal contract to General Dynamics/Convair for four Little Joe II vehicles, two launchers, and launch support for testing boilerplate models of Apollo spacecraft in unmanned, suborbital flight from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (msc Release 63-31)
Soviet news agency Tass reported astronomer Pyoter Shcheglov had discovered a “flat cloud of hydrogen shaped like a pancake” circling the earth at an altitude of 6,200 mi. Similar to a ring around planet Saturn, the cloud would be visible to spacemen on the moon with special viewing instruments, (upi, Atlanta Journal and, Constitution, 3/31/63)
Article in Soviet newspaper Pravda, reported in Missiles and Rockets, said the moon appears to be undergoing changes: During recent years, crater Linne has decreased to half its former size; crater Alhazen has disappeared; small craters have formed at bottom of Plato; and, at sunrise, greenish-gray spots periodically appear at bottom of some craters. Pravda said spots in bottom of crater Eratosthenes appear to some observers tobe moving. {M&R, 1/14/63, 23)
Scientist Dr. Charles R. Warren of U.S. Geological Survey’s Military Geology Branch said in Science magazine that the moon is probably covered with a layer of fuzz, about an inch deep. The “skeletal fuzz consists mostly of empty space” and could be a mesh or miniature tinker-toy structure or it might resemble a loose aggregate of snowflakes or reindeer moss. Dr. Warren had made study of lunar terrain for Army Corps of Engineers. (NYT, 4/12/63,29; upi, Wash. Post 4/12/63)
Development of the Apollo spacesuit and backpack was entering the manned test phase of the prototypes. Under a 3-phase program, Hamilton-Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. were now well into the second phase. The first phase had been design; the second called for development of prototypes of three suit designs, each building on test data from its predecessors. Prototypes of first suit were finished in August; prototypes of the second suit were nearing completion. The third phase, to be concurrent with the second phase, would include environmental and physiological tests. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 49)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysics Laboratory and editor of Science, criticized costs of landing men on the moon in this decade: “What we are witnessing is the expansion of a new, sophisticated form of the prewar Public Works Administration. Science is being used as a ‘front’ for technological leaf-raking. . . .” Dr. Abelson was speaking at Univ. of Maryland. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/63, Al)
nasa was reported by Space Business Daily to be negotiating contract with Standard Oil Co. of Ohio for “a research investigation of a technique for abstracting information from non-cooperating objects in Earth-orbit.” (Space Bus. Daily, 3/6/63, 280) “The major problem remaining in the F-l engine program is the existence of the phenomenon known as combustion instability, which is characterized by pressure oscillations in the combustion gas inside the engine. Although combustion instability has developed in only seven of the 250 F-l firings in the last two years, even this small incidence cannot be tolerated. Consequently, we are placing major emphasis on solving this problem. The source of instability in liquid propellant engines has been the subject of considerable research, since most engines exhibit instability in the early stages of their development. . . . “We are confident that we will solve the instability problem on the F-l engine, just as it has been solved for all other liquid propellant engines in use, and we are confident that we can achieve the flight rating and delivery schedules. We are, however, giving this matter our closest attention and bringing to bear the knowledge and judgment of the most qualified experts in the United States. . . . In response to questions by Congressmen Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) and James G. Fulton (R.-Pa.), Mr. Holmes said that both Projects Gemini and Apollo slipped about five months because of the Administration’s refusal to request FY 1963 supplemental appropriations last fall. (Testimony; M&R, 3/18/63,10)
lunik iv passed within 8,500 km. (5,281 mi.) of the moon at 4:26 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. “The experiments and measurements which were conducted by means of the spacecraft are completed. Radio communication with the spacecraft will continue for a few more days. “Broad experimental data, which are of great value for the solution of a number of technological problems related to the conquest of the moon, were obtained. Measurement data are now being processed and studied in scientific centers of our country which are responsible for the investigation of cosmic space.” Tass still did not reveal nature of probe’s mission. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station in England, was quoted as saying he believed the Soviets had failed in an attempt to land instruments on the moon. “It is hardly conceivable, after a lapse of three years, with all the improvements in techniques, that the Russians would merely set out to do again what they did with lunik iii.” (Pravda, 4/7/63, eos Trans.; AP, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
msc officials said the Apollo Pad Abort Test No. 1, conducted at wsmr on Nov. 7,1963, appeared from data to have been successful in all respects and showed the aerodynamics of the Apollo escape system “to be just what we expected.” Liftoff and subsequent flight sequencing were within one second of program, (msc O\7________ ^ D ___7__ 11 /1 «»/£*»	1\ ir	x*.wivtujutof/? 11/ io/	A j
First public showing of guidance and navigation system for Apollo
U.S.S.R. reported lunik iv had covered 216,000 km. (134,150 mi.), more than half the distance to the moon, during its first 24 hours of flight. Tass announcement said several measurements had been made to establish spacecraft’s trajectory but did not indicate whether the “automatic station” was on course. Telemetry data indicated onboard instruments were operating normally, and internal pressure and temperature were within prescribed limits. There still was no description of the probe’s mission. Article in Izvestia by Soviet geologist Aleksandr Khabakov said that “a soft landing on the moon of a container with instruments and auxiliary apparatus seems to be technically feasible.” (NTT, 4/4/63,18; Izvestia,4/4/63, eos Trans.)
In article on lasers in Pravda, V. Vyenikov wrote that “an auxiliary optical system can focus the laser beam in such a way that the diameter of its cross-section reaches values of 1 micron. This is approximately 60 times smaller than the thickness of a human hair. A similar beam, directed toward the Moon, illuminated on its surface a region less than 4 kilometers. This experiment proves that theoretically it is possible to transmit energy from Earth to future participants of lunar expeditions.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/63, afss-t Trans.)
After a technical lecture on the chemical structure of matter, Dr. Linus Pauling, 1963 Nobel Peace Prize winner, attacked the U.S. lunar program before the National Academy of Sciences meeting in the Department of'State auditorium: “I believe that it [the lunar program] is a pitiful demonstration. Something is wrong with our system of values when we plan to spend billions of dollars for national prestige.” Pauling claimed that for the same investment it would be possible “to answer 1000 interesting and important questions about the human body for every one question answered about the moon.” (Simons. Wash. Post, 10/23/63, 1)
Disputing New York Times editorial (June 28) which approved House Science and Astronautics Committee’s rejecting nasa lunar orbiter for special survey of the moon, Assistant Director of Univ. of Calif. Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics Gordon J. F. MacDonald wrote that “no other program funded or contemplated will provide critical data on the moon’s gravity field and on the radioactivity of the lunar surface. . . . “[nas Space Science Board] . . . noted that the surveillance of the moon on a planetary scale is of first importance both to the manned landing and to the long-range scientific investigation of the moon .... “The full value of [Ranger and Surveyor] limited observations can ’	’’	’	1 ''	''	1 ia less detailed but orbiter .... “The long-range manned and unmanned exploration of the moon will be delayed by failure to fund during the current fiscal year the orbiter program. This failure is another expression of the inability of the scientific community adequately to present their case to Congress.” (Letter, 7/1/63, NYT, 7/16/63, E8)
Rep. Ben F. Jensen (R.-Iowa) inserted in Congressional Record a Washington Post article which said that majority opinion expressed by 25 U.S. Nobel Prize Winners criticized “waste” and “inefficiency” in America’s “crash program” to land man on moon by 1970. (Eisele, Wash. Post, in CR. 5/7/63,7424)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, held press conference after returning from three-week tour of Soviet space tracking observatories. Lovell said that “there is a great deal of discussion in the Soviet Academy as to whether it will ever be worthwhile getting a man on the moon . . . .” “I think at the moment, the Americans are racing themselves . . .’ [for manned lunar landing], adding that he favored manned lunar exploration. He announced agreement on tracking deep space probes reached between tracking station in Crimea and Jodrell Bank facility, and agreement on three astronomical programs in which Soviet and Jodrell Bank telescopes would be synchronized. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 7/17/63)
It would be two or three years before the U.S.S.R. tried to land a man on the moon, according to Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid Sedov in an interview with the Brussels newspaper Le Soir. He said the Russians do not yet have a definite system for landing a man on the moon but did have the technical ability to do it. (upi, Wash. Post, 10/8/63)
Dr. Barry Commoner, Prof, of Plant Physiology at Washington Univ., St, Louis, said in speech before convention of National Science Teachers Association in Philadelphia that U.S. scientific research was becoming too “mission oriented.” “In 1962 about one-third of the total federal obligation for basic research—and federal funds are now the major source of support for basic science—came from a single agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. In a total federal budget of about $900 million for basic research, nasa was obligated to provide $350 million, while the National Science Foundation provided under $90 million .... “We are engaged in a spectacular balancing act. Education is supported by science, science by space, and space by the man on the moon . . . [The] policy of supporting education through science and science through space is dangerously unsound .... We should recognize this policy for what it is—a short-sighted, pinch-penny effort to buy a few selected fruits of the tree of knowledge, without accepting the honest responsibility of nourishing the whole living, growing organism.” (NYT. 4/7/63: St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/7/63) During April: William A. Hyman, internationally known trial lawyer and author of “The Magna Carta of Space—The Legal Lodestar,” speaking at the Inter-American Bar Association in Panama, said: “The Space Committee of the United Nations has failed to give due consideration and take appropriate action on the important question of sovereignty and security as they become involved in the use of space.” (CR. 6/27/63, A4133-34)
In space studies symposium at Argonne, 111., Bernard I. Spinrad, Argonne National Laboratory scientist, predicted: “On the basis of techniques winch in general we now know, I believe that the larger scale exploration of the solar system will in fact be undertaken from a base on the moon.” (AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 5/4/63)
Writing on possible effects of subgravity on human beings, Dr. Tau-Yi Toong, consultant, usaf oar, said: “Two major difficulties present themselves in a study of such effects in earth-bound laboratories; first it is difficult to simulate subgravity on earth for long durations and, secondly, it is impossible to scale human beings up or down. . . . “It was pointed out to the author by Dr. Harold J. von Beckh that part of the effort of a human heart is spent to overcome gravity. It would seem that a lighter load is imposed on the heart of a man on the moon and thus his heart beat slows down. . . . The human heart might possibly degenerate to such an extent that its beat slows down further to something corresponding to the ‘normal heart beat of an abnormal giant’ on the earth. The situation might become even worse should he again return to the earth’s gravitational field with his weakened heart. . . .” (oar Research Review, 2/11/63, 3)
nasa selected Marion Power Shovel Co. to design and build crawlertransport vehicle for lifting and transporting three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle mated to Apollo lunar spacecraft and associated launch equipment. Vehicle would be required to haul the 400-ft.-high, 12-million-lb. assembly a distance of a little more than two miles—keeping it within 1/10 of a degree of true level—and deposit it on Merritt Island (Fla.) launch pad. Crawler would weigh 5.5 million lbs. and would measure 130-ft. long, 115-ft. wide, and 20-ft. high. Plans called for Saturn V-Apollo to be assembled in Vertical Assembly Building at nasa Launch Operations Center’s Complex 39, then transported via the crawler to launch pad. nasa planned to buy two crawlers at cost of $4-$5 million each, (nasa Release 63-27; msc Release 63-24)
A. M. Nowitsky, Director of Spacecraft Sterilization, Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., said in speech before Aerospace Medical Association meeting in Los Angeles that sterilization of lunar spacecraft was essential to prevent contamination of moon and to detect any organisms on the moon: “For millions of years the moon has been a vulnerable target in the path of extraterrestrial debris, possibly organic, bacterial and living—possibly disease-causing and preserved in a state highly acclimated to unfavorable environmental extremes. “If such forms do exist and are in any way dangerous or destructive, their early detection'would prove vital to man’s future planetary exploration and the protection of earth from mutual contamination.” (Miles, L.A. Times, 5/2/63)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of aaas magazine Science, criticized in editorial the four justifications cited for manned lunar landing program: propaganda value of program had been “vastly overestimated”; possibility of military applications seemed “remote”; “technological fallout” would recover “not more than a small fraction of the cost of the moon program”; and scientific questions about the moon could be satisfied with unmanned, instrumented probes. If a scientist is not among the crewmen, “the alternative of exploration by electronic gear becomes exceedingly attractive. The cost of unmanned lunar vehicles is on the order of 1 percent of the cost of the manned variety; unmanned vehicles can be smaller and need not be returned. Most of the interesting questions concerning the moon can be studied by electronic devices .... Unmanned exploration could provide the basis for realistic design of manned landing craft, thus decreasing the total costs and increasing the chances of success. A reexamination of priorities is in order.” (Science, 4/19/63, in CR, 6/11/63)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said in U.S. News and World Report interview that U.S.S.R. did not have a priority program for landing a man on the moon. The president of the Academy of Sciences [Mstislav Keldysh] said that the Soviet Academy saw certain insuperable difficulties. “First, they did not at the moment see how it was possible to protect any lunar voyages from the lethal effects of solar radiation. “Secondly—and mixed up with this—is that they did not think it was economically feasible with present techniques to land sufficient material on the moon to give the necessary protection against solar radiation and, at the same time, to enable a scientific program to be carried out and also to give the chap a reasonable chance of getting back to earth. “Most important of all, it seemed to me, is this: They have decided that with a soft landing of instruments on the moon they can extract nearly all the scientific information they want long before there would be a chance of getting a man there to do it .... “I told the president of the Academy quite frankly that I didn’t agree with this sentiment, because I’m a very firm believer in the importance of getting a man on the moon not only for scientific reasons but also because it is a great challenge facing the human race . . . .” Sir Bernard said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on two objectives in space exploration: (1) “soft landing of instruments on the moon . . . and, subsequently, other planets” and (2) “assembly of a platform in space .... The cosmonaut program is related ... to this effort to erect a big platform in space and put a telescope on it . . . .” (Interview, U.S. News, 8/12/63)
msc announced the award of a formal contract to Raytheon Company’s Space and Information Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for industrial support to mit, which is developing the guidance and navigation systems for Apollo, in the design and development of the onboard digital computer for the command module, (msc Fact Sheet #96)
The Space Vehicle Panel of the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee met at msc for briefings and presentations on the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.	(Space Newft Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
Urging passage of $5.5 billion nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, Sen. Stuart Symington said: “It should be made clear that the United States is not committed to an all-out race, a crash program, so as to be first to the moon. “The moon is no finish line in a race. It is but a proving ground, where we will test and demonstrate that competence in space technology which our security should insure .... “[There is] a proper division of effort between military and civilian space programs, between space science and space technology, between current programs and advanced research in support of future programs, between the space program and other possibilities for substantial Federal contributions to research and development.” (AP, NYT, 8/9/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract extension with General Electric Co. for plant- and test-support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Extension was expected to exceed $25 million, nasa had selected GE in February 1962 to support Project Apollo including systems integration, checkout, and reliability—including plant and test support at mtf. (nasa Release 63-283)
At breakfast meeting of Republican Congressmen in Washington, Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said that anyone who would be willing to spend $40 billion to get to the moon was “nuts.” (Finney, AFT’, 6/13/63)
nasa announced it would negotiate a contract with mit, AC Spark Plug Div. of GM, Raytheon Co., Kollsman Instrument Co., and Sperry Gyroscope Co., for the development, fabrication, and testing of the guidance and navigation system for the Lu,nar Excursion Module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. These same companies already are developing the guidance and navigation system for the Apollo command and service modules; the lem system would be as compatible as possible and have as many interchangeable parts as possible with the other systems, (nasa Release 63-234)
Missiles and Rockets reported nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was studying Mariner B and Voyager projects to determine if the Early January: Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa msfc, visiting West Berlin’s Technical University to receive honorary doctorate, said: “I am convinced personally that the Russians will not succeed in making a manned space flight to the moon and back before the Americans. The Russians now could send a man to the moon but that would be a one-way trip.” (Newport News Times-Herald, 1/12/63)
Soviet scientists reported that radio soundings had indicated that the surface of the moon was “hard and extremely porous,” in contrast to other theories that the moon was covered with a thick layer of dust, (upi, Wash. Dally News, 11/14/63; Izvestia, 11/15/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
msc successfully conducted the first off-the-pad abort test of the Apollo launch escape system at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. A boilerplate version of the Apollo command ~y.~ J —1- / T"» _ " 1 1_a._ XT_ O \_i:A.-J	il__"IKK AAA 1I1UUUU5 ^A>UUt5rpia.W5 J^U. uj Wits lllltJAt UU 11U5 pitU. Uy L11C Ib.-thrust launch escape motor mounted on a launch escape tower attached to the Apollo module. Thrust continued to a height of 4,100 ft. (T + 8 sec.), escape tower jettisoned at 4,900 ft. (T+15.5 sec.), and parachutes deployed for the recovery. Primary purpose of the test was to determine the stability and operational characteristics of the escape configuration during a pad abort. (msc Release 63-247; NYT, 11/8/63,16)
According to Soviet lunar-exploration timetable published in HunSrian magazine Lobogo, U.S.S.R. planned first manned circum-lar flight for 1964r-65, first manned lunar landings for 1966-68, and first “temporary laboratory” on moon for 1968-70. Article said manned Vostok flights had “virtually accomplished 80 per cent of a space rendezvous maneuver, lacking only the coupling of the two spaceships.” Next step after orbital rendezvous should be trip to moon. Abstract of article, which appeared in June 26 issue of Lobogo, was published in translation by Joint Publications Research Service of Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/4/63)
Discussing President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said in Army-Navy-Air Force Joumal and Register article: “The big question ... is how far along are the Soviets in a moon program and which mode of approach did they select? “. . . if the Soviets have adopted one of the approaches we have discarded, any cooperative arrangement would require program reorientation on the part of both nations of such magnitude that the only imaginable result is complete chaos, compounded of the basic difference in approach, the language barrier, differing technological philosophies and engineering standards. “Even if the U.S.S.R. is already proceeding on the same lines as the U.S., i.e. the lunar orbit rendezvous mode, there are different methods of attaining the same end and it is extremely unlikely that their systems development parallels our own in every detail. “It is possible of course that the cooperative program consist of joint funding, a single lunar launch base and a common pool of astronauts, with the technical differences being resolved through the use of one spacecraft/launch vehicle combination without altering current developmental lines. But which one ? Who gets the program management? One can see a political and technical argument over the ‘Apollostok’ (or should it be ‘Vostapollo?’) which would leave the moon safe from assault for at least a couple of decades.” (A-N-AF Journal <& Reg., 9/28/63, 14)
gsfc held bidders’ briefing with 350 representatives of 55 aerospace firms hearing outlined the “Unified S-Band” method of providing tracking and communications for Apollo lunar missions. Conferees were notified of firm design and production requirements for two complete systems and three partial systems. Contract would be awarded after April 1, 1964. (gsfc Release G-30-63)
Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) speaking for Republican Party’s Advisory Committee for Space and Aeronautics, charged Kennedy Administration had failed to build a strong military space program and recommended usaf be given authority to undertake an immediate military "space program with priority over nasa’s manned lunar landing program: “Very little of the hardware developed by nasa can be used militarily. But the Kennedy Administration tends to lead the public to believe that the opposite is true .... [nasa projects such as Mercury and Apollo] could no more be converted to competitive military space systems than could a Liberty ship into an aircraft carrier or a truck into a tank . . . .” (AP, Boston Herald, 1/4/63)
I believe that man will not merelv endure; he will prevail. He is immortal . . . because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance. “In exploring the moon and planets, I am convinced with Faulkner that man will prevail.” (Text, CR, 5/21/63, A3220)
Unnamed nasa official said nasa had reviewed Pratt and Whitney’s prototype of fuel cell for Apollo spacecraft and had accepted the fuel cell. Recent criticism had previously been reported that the fuel cells fell short of nasa’s requirements. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/27/63)
afcrl research project to find if tliere were any correlation between phases of the moon and rainfall on earth involved checking 1,000 dates over 92 years of observations, checking each date against the lunar phase. Result of research, reported afcel’s Dr. Fred Ward, indicated there was no correlation between rainfall and the lunar cycle. (OAR Research Review, 12/16/63,2)
In convocation address at the University of Maine, President Kennedy outlined U.S. foreign policy. Referring to the Cuban crisis of October 1962, the President said: “A year ago it would have been easy to assume that ail-out war was inevitable—that any agreement with the Soviets was impossible—and that an unlimited arms race was unavoidable. Today it is equally easy for some to assume that the cold war is over— that all outstanding issues between the Soviets and ourselves can be quickly and satisfactorily settled—and that we now have, in the words of the psalmist, an ‘abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth’ .... “The fact of the matter is, of course, that neither view is correct. We have, it is true, made slight progress on a long journey .... We have concluded with the Soviets a few limited enforceable agreements or arrangements of mutual benefit to both sides and the world .... “In times such as these, therefore, there is nothing inconsistent about signing an atmospheric nuclear test ban, on the one hand, and testing underground on the other; about being willing to sell to the Soviets our sumlus wheat while refusing to sell strategic items; about probing their interest in a joint lunar landing while making a major effort, to master this new environment; or about exploring the possibilities of disarmament while maintaining our stockpile of armaments. For all of these moves, and all other 741-623 o—64--26 elements of American and Allied policy toward the Soviet Union, are directed at a single, comprehensive goal—namely, convincing the Soviet leaders that it is dangerous for them to engage in direct or indirect aggression, futile for them to attempt to impose their will and their system on other unwilling peoples, and beneficial to them, as well as all the world, to join in the achievement of a genuine and enforceable peace .... “It is in our national self-interest to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere so that all our citizens can breathe easier. It is in our national self-interest to keep weapons of mass destruction out of outer space—to maintain an emergency communications link with Moscow—and to substitute joint and peaceful exploration for cold war exploitation in the Antarctic and in outer space .... “. . . For without our making such an effort, we could not maintain the leadership and respect of the free world . . . .” (Text, AP, Wash. Post, 10/20/63, A7)
nasa announced it would negotiate with General Electric Co. for an extension of GE’s Project Apollo support effort to provide plant and test support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Estimated cost of initial one-year contract was $1.5 million, (nasa Release 63-75)
Installation of new tracking system, Mistram (Missile Trajectory Measurement), on Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, was announced. Mistram would provide more precise missile guidance and nose-cone impact data than presently possible on rockets fired from Cape Canaveral; it would provide accuracy required for controlling space rendezvous maneuvers in Project Gemini and for tracking return of Apollo lunar spacecraft. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
Prof. Eugen Saenger, Prof, of Space Research at Technical Univ. in Berlin, predicted in interview that if manned observation stations were established on the moon “no large-scale happening of any consequence anywhere in the world could go unseen.” Noting that it costs several thousand dollars to orbit a pound of payload, he predicted that by 1975 cost would be only $25 per pound. Dr. Saenger’s interview was published in Good Friday issue of German weekly publication Christ und Welt, (cdns, Wash. Post, 4/15/63)
First anniversary of mariner ix fly-by of planet Venus, providing data that clouds surrounding Venus are cold and dense and that Venus has surface temperature of 800° F. After passing the planet, mariner n continued in perpetual solar orbit. Since launch Aug. 27, 1962, mariner n has traveled 754 million mi. in 474 days. It is currently ahead of earth at straight line distance of 76,172,000 mi. Analysis of mariner n tracking data provided new determinations of the Astronomical Unit, the mass of Venus and the moon, and locations of points on earth. Communications records included sending commands to the spacecraft flying by Venus (36 million mi.), and reception of signal from the spacecraft at distance of nearly 54 million mi. (nasa Release 63-275)
In letter to Speaker of the House, President Kennedy described his proposed program of U.S. supersonic transport development. “A successful supersonic transport can be an efficient, productive commercial vehicle which provides swift travel for the passenger and shows promise of developing a market which will prove profitable to the manufacturer and operator. “It will advance the frontiers of technical knowledge—not as a byproduct of military procurement, but in the pursuit of commercial objectives. “It will maintain the historic U.S. leadership in aircraft development. “It will enable this country to demonstrate the technological accomplishments which can be achieved under a democratic, free enterprise system. “Its manufacture and operation will expand our international trade. “It will strengthen the U.S. aircraft manufacturing industry— a valuable national asset—and provide employment to thousands of Americans . . . .” (Letter, CR, 6/17/63 10304) Jwne 14: nasa announced signing contract with AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors to fabricate, assemble, and test navigation and guidance system for Apollo command module, (nasa Release 63136)
Speaking on floor of Senate, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) advocated deployment of Nike-Zeus and development of more advanced antimissile missiles: “Imagine a world, treaty or no treaty, in which the Soviets had achieved a substantial lead in development of an anti-iCBM. Where then would be the sword and shield of peace ? What then would be the position of the Soviets to back their aggressions, and what would be our ability to stop them? “President Kennedy is fully confident that we can put a man on the moon—no mean feat—and is willing to spend $5 billion a year to do it ... . “I have talked enough to competent scientists and engineers who believe that a good anti-iCBM, capable of protecting the American people, would be no tougher task. But of course it would require an equal enthusiasm, money, and effort as our moon program does to accomplish. Hmv can we fail to apply anything less than our best efforts to produce it ? . . .” {CR, 8/13/63, 14043)
Analysis of radar observations of planet Venus indicated Venutian surface is smoother than that of earth or the moon, it was reported. Observations were made Nov. 29-Dec. 7, 1962, by National Bureau of Standards’ radartelescope at Jicamarca, Peru. (Wash. Post, 1/11/63, A5)
On the eve of its fifth anniversary, nasa had run into a patch of “attack by partisan politicians, budget-cutters, those who want the military to have a stronger role in space, mismanagement sleuths, and persons confused by President Kennedy’s bid for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. moon venture,” Howard Simons claimed in the Washington Post. He cited nasa’s budget troubles, with the $5.7 billion request already cut to a $5.3 billion authorization, another $200 million already cut by a House Appropriations Subcommittee, and even further cuts threatened in the full Committee. nasa Administrator Webb, Simons said, had blamed budget problems on House Republicans, charging that they “ ‘are following a political line trying to make the President’s program look foolish—‘Nuts,’ as Eisenhower called it. They have moved to the position that military activities in space are the only ones worthwhile.’ ” Under mismanagement charges, Simons listed the gao report on the Centaur program and the nasa charges of substandard workmanship by industry in the Mercury program, which in itself implied, according to Simons, a nasa admission that it had not supervised industry effectively. (WasA Post, 10/5/63, 4)	*
Historian Arnold Toynbee, in Washington to address World Food Congress, said in news interview that U.S. and U.S.S.R. together controlled 80 per cent of world’s technical power but both nations were neglecting humanitarian applications. He cited the “moon race” as example of both nations’ “escapism” from basic problems of mankind. (Richmond News Leader, 6/12/63 )
U.S. Geological Survey’s lunar mapping project, mapping 8.5 million sq. mi. of moon’s surface, was described in Washington Evening Star. Undertaken for nasa, project would provide basic geological information needed for placing instruments and men on the moon. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63)
nasa announced signing of $387,900,000 contract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for development of lunar excursion module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. Contract provided that Grumman, on cost-plus-fixed-fee basis, would design, fabricate, and deliver nine lem ground test vehicles and 11 lem flight models, and also would provide certain operational support. Selection of Grumman for lem contract negotiations was announced Nov. 7, 1962. (nasa Release 63-51; msc Release 63^9)
Senate Republican Policy Committee made public its report questioning priority of U.S. manned lunar program. “The question is not . . . whether man will ultimately reach the moon and beyond. The question is, rather, how shall it be done, and whether other aspects of human needs should be bypassed or overlooked in one spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing at once .... “A decision must be made as to whether Project Apollo is vital to our national security or merely an excursion, however interesting, into space research. “If our vital security is not at stake, a less ambitious program may be logical and desirable.” (CR, 5/14/63, 7916; Toth, NTT, 5/11/63,1,6)
Washington Post editorial said of U.S. manned lunar program: “We may not get to the moon first, or we may not get to it at all— but that will not mean all has been in vain. In trying to reach such a spectacular goal, we are developing the rockets that will place us in the forefront of the space age, and in developing the scientific and engineering skills required to achieve this purpose we are enormously expanding the country’s capacity to achieve scientific goals as yet unspecified. The skills and talents nurtured at nasa will be making their contribution to the knowledge, the comfort, the convenience and the survival of the United States long after moon landings have been accepted as a commonplace or abandoned as an impossibility. The world was altered by the voyages of Columbus, even though they failed of their planned objectives. And the world is being altered before our very eyes 741-623 0—64---13 by a new struggle to master man’s environment. Enterprises such as this are not to be judged by the ordinary criteria of scientists, economists or sociologists. They are not to be weighed on the balance against some other more practical and more appropriate or more feasible endeavor. Such heroic enterprises move by their own laws, abide by their own rules and set their own precedents and when they are over, leave humanity with its knowledge multiplied, its future expanded, its horizons widened, its outlook sharpened and its hopes uplifted by a new sense of man’s unending and unlimited possibilities.” {Wash. Post, 5/7/63; CR, 5/8/63,7491)
nasa selected Boeing Co. for negotiation of incentive-type contract to build Lunar Orbiter spacecraft, contract expected to exceed $60 million. One of the five bidding firms, Boeing would provide probes that are three-axis stabilized, use Eastman Kodak-developed camera system, and rca power and communication subsystems. Five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft would be launched to take close-range photographs of lunar surface, as well as to measure such conditions as radiation and micrometeoroid density. Lunar Orbiter complements Ranger and Surveyor lunar probe projects, providing scientific data about the moon in preparation for Project Apollo manned lunar landing, (nasa Release 63-280)
Robe	ix, president of Continental Airlines, speaking to an aviation group of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, proposed that the U.S. join with France and Great Britain to develop a mach 2.2 commerpial airliner and that at a later date those countries join the U.S. in developing a stainless-steel—titanium mach 3 airliner: “If our country can propose a joint effort with the Russians to reach the moon, we certainly should be able to entertain the idea of joint development of a supersonic transport with two of our best friends.” (Wall St. Journal, 10/2/63)
James Reston, writing of President Johnson’s attack on poverty, said the President was faced with having “to choose not necessarily between the moon and the slums, but between the problems of today and the problems of tomorrow. “. . . some of the President’s scientific advisers have recommended that . . . [the FY 1965 budget request for Project Rover] be cut again to $100 million, which is less than half the Rover project budget for the current [fiscal] year. “There is, of course, no assurance that money saved on this project would be approved by the Congress for an attack on poverty and illiteracy in the slums, but President Johnson’s decision on this will give some indication of the set of priorities he proposes to establish for his Administration . . . .” (Reston, NYT, 12/20/63, 28)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced beginning of nasa Apollo environmental control system tests in Garrett-AiRe-search Los Angeles, ecs would provide life supporting atmosphere in command module of Apollo spacecraft. Tests would include simulating prelaunch, ascent, orbital, and re-entry pressure conditions on the system, (msc Release 63-61)
nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., speaking before the Chamber of Commerce, Albuquerque, N.M., said: “All of you saw the headlines saying, ‘Khrushchev Announces Withdrawal from Moon Race’ or words to that effect; but I wonder how many read the subsequent stories in which Khrushchev said his remarks had been misinterpreted, and that the Soviet Union intended to explore the moon as soon as this could be done with confidence of success.
First drop test of Project Apollo earth landing system successfully accomplished by Northrop Corp. for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft command module was released from modified C-133 cargo plane and safely landed by cluster of three Northrop Ventura ringsail parachutes, (msc Release 63- 85)
A technical services contract was awarded by the Manned Spacecraft Center to Lockheed Electronics Company to provide r&d support for Apollo. The contract involves vehicle instrumentation and communication systems to be used in the early flight phases of the program. ( msc Fact Sheet # 96)
Cancellation of five follow-on flights of the Ranger lunar impact spacecraft announced by nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. Decision to cancel the follow-on series represented $90 million saving in the Ranger project. Dr. Newell said: “By this move, we are placing greater reliance on the remaining four Rangers, the Surveyor landers and the Lunar Orbiters for unmanned lunar exploration prior to manned landings on the Moon. At the same time, this move will contribute to necessary economies in the overall nasa program.” (nasa Release 63-276)
Premier Nikita Khrushchev told a group of visiting U.S. businessmen that U.S.S.R. was continuing its manned lunar landing program. Clarifying his remarks of Oct. 26, he said that “when we have the technical possibilities of doing this, and when we have complete confidence that whoever is sent to the moon can safely be sent back, then it is quite feasible, quite possible.” He said that polet i had made space rendezvous possible but that “no definite date” had been set for such an experiment. On the supersonic transport aircraft, he said: “I can say that we are designing and building a supersonic plane. I can’t give you the details because I don’t remember the technical data on that plane.” {NYT, 11/7/63,1; AP, Wash, Post, 11/7/63)
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, in an interview with Communist newsmen published in Izvestia, said: “At the present time we do not plan flights of cosmonauts to the moon. “I have read a report that the Americans wish to land a man on the moon by 1970. Well, let’s wish them success. “And we will see how they will fly there, and how they will land there or to be more correct ‘moon’ there. “And most important—how they will get up and come back. “We will take their experience into account. “We do not wish to compete in sending people to the moon without thorough preparation. “It is obvious there would be no benefit from such competition. “On the contrary it would do harm since it would lead to the destruction of people. “It is a joke in our country to say ‘Who is impatient on earth, let him go to the moon.’ “For us it is good enough on earth. But if we are to talk seriously we will have to work a lot and prepare well in order to complete a successful flight of man to the moon.” (upi, NTT, 10/27/63,1)	_
Army Corps of Engineers awarded nasa contract to Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory for estimate of power needs of a manned lunar base and design of nuclear generator that could be sent to the moon for such a base. Data would be used by nasa in evaluating feasibility of lunar base, (dod Release 1255-63)
The International Academy of Astronautics, at regular meeting, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper to succeed Dr. Frank J. Malina as President of the Academy. Dr. Draper is one of the world’s leading space engineers, engaged in the solution of problems of guidance and control of space vehicles. His latest and largest undertaking is the design of the guidance-navigation system to be used aboard the Apollo spacecraft, which is to carry man to a Moon landing and a safe return. He is Head of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as Director of the mit Instrumentation Laboratory, in which capacity he leads a team of 1,800 scientists, engineers and technicians, (iaf Release 17, 10/1/63)
Two major contracts for the Apollo project were awarded recently for (1) a lunar charting sendee by the usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis, Missouri; and (2) an exploratory study of guidance system techniques in emergency abort operation of the Apollo uf.m during lunar landing, awarded to Chance Vought Astronautics Division of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., Dallas, Texas, (msc Fact Sheet *96)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor for development of Apollo lunar excursion module (lem), had awarded $8,370,000 contract to Hamilton Standard Div. for design, development, and production of environmental control system for lem. (msc Release 63257)
President Kennedy’s news conference. Asked about developments on his proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar landing, the President replied: “We have had no indication that the Soviet Union is disposed to enter into the kind of relationship which would make a joint exploration of space or to the moon possible. But I think it is important that the United States continue to emphasize its peaceful interest and its preparation to go quite far in attempting to end the barrier which has existed between the Communist world and the West and to attempt to bring as much as we can the Communist world into the free world of diversity which we seek . . . .” Asked whether the question of verification had come up in U.S.-U.S.S.R. talks on an agreement to ban the orbiting of nuclear weapons, President Kennedy said: “... there is not an agreement. The United States has stated it would not put weapons in outer space. We have no military use for doing so, and we would not do so. The Soviet Union has stated that it does not intend to. We are glad of that. There is no way we can verify that, but we are glad to hear the intention .... “This is a matter, it seems to me, that can best be handled not through any bilateral agreement but as a General Assembly matter, because other countries may have the same capability, and I think every country should declare that they are not going to put atomic weapons in the atmosphere, which could threaten not only the security of a potential adversary but our own security, if for some reason the weapons should miscalculate and descend upon us . . . .” (Wash. Post, 10/10/63, 14)
U.S.S.R. announced successful launching of lunik iv probe on a Si/, -day flight toward the moon. Mission of 3,135-lb. instrumented spacecraft, said to have been placed in parking orbit around the earth and then fired toward the moon, was not disclosed. Tass announcement said all onboard equipment was functioning normally, scientific stations in U.S.S.R. were tracking the probe and receiving scientific information from it. “According to data which was already processed the flight of the automatic station continues along a trajectory which is close to the calculated trajectory.” At 4:00 p.m. Moscow time, lunik iv was reported 50,486 km. (31,350 mi.) from earth, (nyt, 4/3/63,1,14; Pravda, 4/3/63, eos Trans.)
A roundup of Congressional opinion on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that the Soviets did not plan to land a man on the moon and its possible effect on the U.S. manned lunar landing program indicated that most Congressmen thought it would result in some reduction in funds for the U.S. program. (Wash. Post, 10/28/63)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference whether reports that U.S.S.R. was not striving for manned lunar landing would affect Project Apollo, said: “Well, in the first place, we don’t know whether the Russians are—what their plans may be. What we are interested in is what their capabilities are. While I have seen the statement of Mr. Lovell [July 16] about what he thinks the Russians are doing, his information is not final. Their capacity is substantial; there is every evidence that they are carrying on a major campaign and diverting greatly needed resources to their space effort. With that in mind, I think that we should continue. It may be that our assumption or the prediction . . . that they are not going to the moon might be wrong a year from now, and are we going to divert ourselves from our effort in an area where the Soviet Union has a lead, is making every effort to maintain that lead, in an area which could affect our National security as well as great peaceful development ? I think we ought to go right ahead with our own program and go to the moon before the end of this decade. “The point of the matter always has been not only of our excitement or interest in being on the moon, but the capacity to dominate space, which would be demonstrated by a moon flight. [This] I believe, is essential to the United States as a leading free world power. That is why I am interested in it and that is why I think we should continue, and I would be not diverted by a newspaper story.” Asked about the possibility of cooperating with U.S.S.R. in a joint lunar mission, he replied: “We have said before to the Soviet Union that we would be very interested in cooperation. As a matter of fact, finally, after a good many weeks of discussion, an agreement was worked out on an exchange of information with regard to weather, but we have never been able to go into more detail. The kind of cooperative effort which would be required for the Soviet Union and the United States together to go to the moon would require a breaking down of a good many barriers of suspicion and distrust and hostility which exist between the communist world and ourselves. “There is no evidence as yet that those barriers will come down, though quite obviously we would like to see them come down. Obviously, if the Soviet Union were an open society as we are that kind of cooperation could exist, and I would welcome it. I don’t see it as yet, unfortunately.” (Text. Wash. Post, 7/18/63)
U.S.S.R. would use earth-orbit rendezvous for an early circumlunar manned flight with present-generation hardware, according to article in Pravda by “chief designer” of Vostok spacecraft. Author indicated that the tandem flight of L/Col. Valery Bykovsky and Jun. Lh Valentina Tereshkova was successful preliminary to such flight, which he said would last 8 to 12 days. Re-entry, he indicated, was the most difficult part of the moon flight. (M&R, 7/1/63,29)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Aircraft Co. to negotiate contract for four-month study of lunar base concept. Study would be first phase of broad lunar base study program to determine feasibility of such a project following Project Apollo. (nasa Release 63-145)
Ground-breaking ceremonies for eight-story nasa structure to be used for pre-flight testing of Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were held near Cape Canaveral. $7.69-million building would be first of 40 buildings in industrial complex located in the 87,000-acre Merritt Island area nasa had acquired for its space • projects. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
Political Committee of the U.N. General Assembly opened debate on report by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. 741-623 o—64Addressing the 111-nation Committee, U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said President Johnson instructed him to reaffirm the proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in exploration of the moon that President Kennedy had offered last September. But, Stevenson continued, “If giant steps cannot be taken at once, we hope that shorter ones can. We believe there are areas of work, short of integrating the two national prorgams, from which all could benefit. We should explore the opportunities for practical cooperation, beginning with small steps and hopefully leading to larger ones.” Stressing that U.S. manned lunar program was only one part of the space program and that no more than 10 percent of the total U.S. space expenditure went directly for the lunar flight, he added: “Let me make clear that exploration of the moon is not a stunt, distinct from the outer-space program as a whole; nor is it the exclusive concern of only two nations. “Our policy of engaging in mutually beneficial and mutually supporting cooperation in outer space—with the Soviet Union as with all nations—does not begin or end with a manned moon landing. There is plenty of work yet to come before that—and there will be even more afterward.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/3/63, 1,14; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 12/3/63,1)
Tass announced lunik iv was 314,000 km. (194,494 mi.) from earth at 8:00 p.m. Moscow time and would pass close to the moon’s surface, indicating for the first time that the probe would not orbit or land.. Speculation was tbat lunik iv might havs bca-n planned to soft-land an instrument package on the moon. Tass said radio communication with the spacecraft was good and that onboard instruments were functioning normally. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/63; Pravda, 4/5/63, eos Trans.)
Report that moon has porous surface consisting basically of silicon and aluminum oxides and that its core is very hot was made by team of Soviet radioastronomers at All Union Symposium of Radioastronomers in Gorki, U.S.S.R. (Komsomotskya Pravda, 3/8/63, eos Trans.)
Team of four usaf and Lockheed experts, headed by Laurence Stoddard of Lockheed-Califomia Co., Lunar and Planetary Sciences Laboratory, announced they would attempt to photograph moon during 37-sec. solar eclipse near Cape Town, South Africa, Jan. 25. “Knowledge of the exact shape of the moon will give us additional information on the effects of moon gravity. This information is of great importance in planning lunar landings and computing the lifetime of manmade vehicles orbiting the moon,” Stoddard said. Stoddard photographed similar eclipse last July in Senegal, West Africa. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/21/63, A3)
Sending Man to the Moon Jointly: Not sure_________________________________11%
Boilerplate Apollo capsule underwent eighth drop test of the 3-parachute landing system. At El Centro, Calif., U.S. Naval-Air Force Parachute Facility dropped the capsule from a C-133 transport aircraft from 13,000 ft. in a test of the parachute combination under low-altitude abort conditions, (msc Release 63-i78)	...
Commenting on President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration negotiations, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans said in Houston press conference that the proposal did not mean Soviet cosmonauts would fly in Apollo spacecraft. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, compared a cooperative moon program to cooperative exploration of Antarctica—U.S. and Soviet scientists explore the continent together but, he said, “they get there in different ships.” (Burnett, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/22/63)
