Soviet news agency Tass said Soviet scientists had concluded the moon’s surface was a “loose porous substance” and the interior was solid rock. Conclusion was said to be based on study of radio waves from the moon. (AP, Wash Post, 3/12/64)	,
NASA’s ranger vii spacecraft was launched from Cape Kennedy on its flight to the moon. After an almost perfect countdown, Atlas-Agena launch vehicle boosted the 806-lb. spacecraft into a parking orbit around the earth, and then the Agena engines refired to place ranger vii on its trajectory to the moon. The spacecraft carried six television cameras designed to take and relay to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. Flight to moon would take about 68 hours, with the pictures to be taken during the last 15 min. before craft impacted on the moon. The launching was so accurate that, even without the standard midcourse correction maneuver, ranger vii would hit the moon. However, scientists wanted pictures of the “Sea of Clouds” region and planned to execute midcourse correction to ensure impact and pictures in this area. (NYT, 7/29/64; nasa Release 64-176)
Rep. Peter W. Rodino (D.—N.J.) said on House floor: “. . . Hardly any problem seems beyond solution by our scientists and engineers. We marvel at our achievement of landing a vehicle on the moon, transmitting pictures of its progress to the very instant of impact. Yet, we are doing practically nothing to solve a major air safety problem, or, worse yet, to discover its cause. I refer to the increasingly serious jet age problem of clear air turbulence—CAT—a danger to every passenger flying commercial or military transport aircraft. . . . “Our scientific and industrial communities must be given adequate funds promptly to initiate work on the problem; and that can best be done through a coordinated research effort jointly undertaken by Government and private industry. . . . “Our failure to implement without delay a national effort to develop an effective cat detection and avoidance system may—in fact, probably will—cost the lives of many future air passengers. With every gain in air traffic, with every increase in aircraft speed, with every additional mile flown by every additional plane, the problem becomes more serious. . . .” He introduced into the Record an article on CAT by James A. Fusca in Space Aeronautics, August 1964. (CR, 8/19/64,19715-20)
Mockup of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) was shown to the press at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. after three days of design inspection by officials of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Objective of review was to establish design freeze on most areas of lem design. Under NASA contract, Grumman would build 9 lems for ground testing and 11 for flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/27/64, 7; M&R, 4/6/64, 26)
NASA announced that it had organized a moonwatch network to assist with development and operation of the “Moon Blink,” an instrument designed to verify and locate color on the lunar surface. When alerted by one of the stations, watchers at scattered distant points would train their telescopes on the moon to verify a sighting. Professional and amateur astronomers at some 35 stations linked by long-distance telephone were working with NASA to give volunteer assistance to the Moon Blink program. The instrument was being developed by NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology under contract with Trident Engineering Associates, Annapolis, Md., and consisted essentially of rotating color disks which would blink when red color showed on the moon. Although the instrument was being developed for detection of unusual coloration on all types of bodies orbiting in space, the moon’s surface was considered of particular interest since the red color could signify a source of gases and possibly of energy. Any source of energy would be significant to the NASA lunar landing program, (nasa Release 64-316)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft was mated to Saturn I SA—6 at Cape Kennedy in preparation for flight later this spring. (Marshall Star, 4/8/64, 1)
NASA Director of Manned Lunar Mission Studies Thomas C. Evans discussed at aas meeting the systems that might be used for post-Apollo exploration of the moon. The concepts, making maximum use of the investment in Saturn and Apollo, included: Apollo itself, with separate missions to each point of interest; Apollo supplemented with Stay Time Extension Module (stem) , with increased payload capacity developed in Apollo system to transport “saddle bags” of supplies or surface equipment attached to outside of lem; Apollo supplemented with Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) , with two flights—one to transport two astronauts, the other to deliver support equipment and supplies probably including lunar surface vehicle; and, Apollo supplemented with Lunar Exploration System for Apollo (lesa), with 2-3 flights and payload to include shelter-laboratory and roving vehicle. (Text)
New York Times editorialized that delay of the 1969 target date for Project Apollo “may increase the chance that the project of landing a man on the moon will become an international effort, mobilizing all the resources of world technology. That certainly would be most appropriate for man’s first landing in the cosmos beyond this tiny planet.” (NYT, 1/17/64, 42)
In speech accepting Republican nomination for President, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater said: “I can see, and I suggest all thoughtful men must contemplate, the flowering of an Atlantic civilization, the whole world of Europe reunified and free, trading openly across its borders, communicating openly across the world. “This is a goal far, far more meaningful than a moon shot. . . (Text, NYT, 7/17/64, A10)
Article in U.S. News & World Report assessing impact of Project Apollo on U.S. industry quoted unnamed U.S. space official: “ ‘Project Apollo is the biggest single job in history. In terms of manpower used, it dwarfs the building of the pyramids 'by three times. It is five times greater in cost than the wartime crash program to build the first atomic bomb.’ “Over-all price tag on moon exploration in this decade is 20 billion dollars. Ten billion of that has been spent—or will be spent—on preliminary programs such as Projects Mercury and Gemini and for new facilities, Government payrolls, tracking stations, communications. . . . “At a time when Pentagon spending on missiles and rockets is going down, higher spending by . . . [nasa] comes as a shot in the arm to thousands of firms. . . . “Apollo is now entering a critical phase, one entrusted almost solely to U.S. industry. At the peak of the industrial pyramid are four major aerospace firms, supported by 66 other major companies holding NASA contracts of more than half a million dollars each. . . . “What is bound to impress anyone is how the big companies have been pulled together on this vast project. ... To people in industry, working together in peacetime on a ‘national goal’ is new and satisfying. Explains one official: ‘The amazing thing is that industry is finding that space is not only good business—but it is a real adventure for us, too.’ ” (U.S. News, 10/5/64)
Successful test of Apollo escape system was conducted at White Sands Missile Range by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft (command and service modules) was mounted on Little Joe II. At altitude of 17,000 ft. the Little Joe II was exploded. Instantly the rockets in the escape tower ignited and propelled the Apollo command module away from the exploding booster—to maximum altitude of 24,000 ft.; then the escape tower was jettisoned automatically. Drogue parachute opened from nose to stabilize the spacecraft as it descended. Then at about 7,500 ft. three large parachutes were deployed from the nose. First chute broke loose from the spacecraft, but the spacecraft landed safely with two chutes at speed of about 30 fps. The 7l/>-min. test was termed successful, with all objectives achieved, (nasa Release 64-108; Freelander, Houston Post, 5/14/64; Witkin, NYT, 5/14/64,18)
RANGER VII successfully completed its historic mission of taking and relaying to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. The spacecraft sent back 4,316 high-quality photographs of the moon before it crashed on the surface of the moon in an area northwest of the Sea of Clouds. All six cameras aboard the spacecraft worked properly, sending back photographs of the moon that improved the resolution of lunar detail as seen from the earth by a factor of 1,000. The closest pictures were snapped 2.3 sec. before impact, at 10.7° south latitude and 20.7° longitude, 68 hrs. and 36 min. after takeoff. At news conference on preliminary results from RANGER vii, held at JPL, principal experimenter Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory described sampling of the lunar photographs as they were shown to the public. In reply to a question, he said: “.. . the thing that struck me most was that the Moon, the region of the Moon, the dimensions which we have been able to observe ... this range, tremendous range of new knowledge has not resulted in any totally unforeseen problems_____ “The Moon has shown—the records show a continuity of features from the large craters observable with telescopes down to smaller sizes. “Think that the rounded features of the large numbers of secondary craters is new. Also their large number is new. . . . “It is also clear that primary craters exist, little pits which have very much the same shape. . . . They are smaller, but the shape, the form, is the same as the bigger craters. . . . “There are some ridges shown. These ridges in the maria are rather of the same nature, of the same shape, sort or form, as the larger ridges. “So I would say, in summing up, that the new region of knowledge is in a true sense an extension of the earlier knowledge. I think it shows that the craters continue to occur down to sizes of about three feet in diameter, about one foot depth. “This clearly implies that we are not dealing here with enormous layers of dust, of very, loose dust, that is, very loose material, where one would not expect any small features to be visible at all. It is not like sand, in other words.. , . “This is a great day for science, and this is a great day for the United States. . . . the amount of information that has been gained about the lunar surface is truly remarkable.” (nasa Transcripts)
NASA announced selection of RCA Missile and Surface Radar Div. for negotiations to procure C-band radars for support of Project Apollo. These radars would be part of instrumentation on the tracking ships being designed and built as joint dod-nasa effort, (nasa Release 64-107)
Army Map Service announced completion of its topographic study of the moon. Prepared under agreement with NASA, the lunar map was the most complete ever made, the first to show variations in heights over all the visible surface of the moon. Map covered area of about 8,000,000 sq. mi., and more than 5,000 surface features were identified by name. The topographers established that the moon’s highest peaks reach about 35,000 ft. above its lowest points—making the lunar mountains about 6,000 ft. higher than Mt. Everest, (nyht, Wash. Post, 6/24/64; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/24/64)
Australian scientist Victor Albert Bailey speculated that moon may possess far-reaching electrostatic field, which could have been responsible for ranger VI camera failure by interfering with switches for the cameras. {SBD, 2/7/64,207)
Boeing study of post-Apollo manned lunar bases for NASA was basis for lesa concept (lunar exploration system for Apollo), lesa provided that a 25,000-lb. module would be soft-landed on the moon by a Saturn V launch vehicle. Three crewmen would follow by means of Saturn V/Apollo. The module would have 3,000 cu. ft. volume and could support three men for 90 days on the moon. Boeing’s lunar base was expandable simply by adding more of the basic shelter modules, and longer visits by larger crews could be made with larger lunar bases. (M&R, 3/16/64, 26-27)
Scientists at AF Cambridge Research Laboratories discovered definite relationship between phases of moon and cloudiness around the earth, oar announced. Statistics covering 21,184 days from 1905 to 1962 indicated sunshine was slightly below seasonal averages for a few days following each new moon and slightly above average between last quarter and the new moon. (S.F. Chronicle, 8/17/64; SBD, 8/18/64, 241)
George Low, recently appointed Deputy Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said in Houston that failure of ranger vi lunar TV probe was “a grave disappointment.” Despite Ranger failure, target date for manned lunar landing was still 1969, he said, but “we certainly can’t guarantee there won’t be technical difficulties that won’t let us do it. . . . If we have to use the Apollo as an unmanned reconnaissance craft our small margin [of time] will be eaten up.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64)
Federal investigators and an attorney from the NLRB were dispatched to Cape Kennedy to seek a solution to labor troubles which halted work on America’s programs for landing on the moon and for orbiting a manned space laboratory. An estimated 80% of workers on the Vertical Assembly Building for Project Apollo and the launch complex for the usaf’s Titan III refused to cross picket lines thrown up by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees in protest to use of a Government-owned railroad spur which had been operated since Jan. 23, 1963, by nonunion personnel. Cost of the projects affected by the work halt was estimated at $215 million. (Chic. Trib., 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) called for 10% cut in NASA’s Apollo FY 1965 budget, in statement submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee. He stated 1970 Apollo goal had already been missed, so that cut in funds would have no serious effect, and that NASA’s past estimates of costs and time were not reliable, so that little confidence could be placed in NASA’s meeting its 1970 deadline. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Developmental spacecraft landing rockets were tested using a Gemini boilerplate. Spacecraft was dropped from a C-119 aircraft at 7,000ft. altitude. Two 12,000-lb .-thrust rockets were fired simultaneously when the spacecraft was ten ft. above the water with burn time one and one half sec. Landing speed of the craft was slowed from 27 fps to about nine to 10 fps; normal g-force of seven to eight g’s was reduced to approximately two and one half g’s on impact. A controllable parachute steered by radio commands from a NASA ship lowered the spacecraft into the waters of Trinity Bay, Tex. The landing rockets were not a definite part of either the Gemini or Apollo programs, (msc Roundup,12/23/64,7)
Temperature on planet Jupiter was reported to be higher than previously thought. Geology-astronomy team at Cal Tech that studied the planet with heat-sensitive detector fitted to 200-in. telescope on Mt. Palomar found sunlit atmosphere of Jupiter averaged 230 degrees below zero F. But in shadow cast by one of its moons—Ganymede—temperature jumped to minus 117 degrees. Dr. Bruce C. Murray, associate professor of planetary sciences, and Dr. Robert L. Wildey, research fellow in astronomy and geology, gave two possible explanations for the unexpected rise in temperature: “Perhaps in sunlight the atmosphere is photochemically stable, and the shadow removes the stability. Then the atmosphere may start to break down into more transparent material, permitting the heat detector to observe much deeper into the atmosphere where temperatures are higher. Another possibility is that a breakdown of the shaded atmosphere may result in an upwelling from deeper, warmer zones of the atmosphere.” Study also showed that another of Jupiter’s moons—Callisto—radiated twice as much heat as a normal moon would be expected to do. (Dighton, AP, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commander of National Range Div., presented to Aviation/Space Writers Association meeting at Patrick AFB, Fla., a “status report” on newly organized nrd: “The activation of the NRD and the renaming of its organizations has already been well publicized.- Basically we have brought the old Atlantic Missile Range and the icbm and satellite test range portion of the Navy’s Pacific Missile Range under single management. Additionally, my job as the DOD representative in support of nasa’s Projects Gemini and Apollo has moved with me to the- new organization. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-61)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft with attached burned-out Saturn S-IV stage, launched into intentionally low orbit Sept. 18 by Saturn I SA-7, re-entered earth’s atmosphere over the Indian Ocean. The orbiting package was in its 59th orbit and had been in flight for three days, 19 hrs., 37 min. (nasa Release 64-250)
Highlights of Recent Space Research,” by Robert Jastrow and A.G.W. Cameron of Goddard Institute for Space Studies, NASA, appeared in Science. The article presented highlights of recent space research in the physical sciences: geodesy, meteorology, the upper atmosphere, magnetosphere, magnetopause, atmosphere of Venus, exploration of the moon, solar physics, x-rays and gamma rays.	(Science, 9/11/64, gsfc Reprint)
Head designer of Soviet spacecraft, name not identified, was interviewed in Izvestia. His predictions for the next five years: “. . . permanently operating orbital stations consisting of sputniks having various purposes such as providing service in investigating the Earth, the Sun, forecasting weather, monitoring the radiation conditions in space, etc.; . . . an all-purpose radio and TV system for transmitting through space, with the aid of the so-called ‘hanging’ (‘stationary’) satellites; . . . ways of using space . . . for mail-freight deliveries, requiring high speed, and finally passenger service; . . . permanent orbiting stations [where] regular shifts of scientific workers of the most diversified specialties will live and work. ... In general, during this period flights into near space and return to Earth will become very commonplace. I think that in the next five years, many comrades will sojourn in space.” Regarding “direct investigations in the region of the Moon and on its surface,” the designer said: “In all likelihood, in the imminent years such studies can be accomplished only with the aid of small automatic devices transmitting the data to Earth by radio.” (Izvestia, 1/1/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
Fuel cells producing power to operate all electronic equipment in Apollo spacecraft would also produce enough drinking water as a by-product to supply the three-man crew during 14-day journey to the moon and back, MSC announced, (msc Release 64-32)
Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co. has submitted study to NASA which concluded that six-man space research station, capable of orbiting for one year, could be orbiting earth within five years. Crew, serving on staggered schedule, would travel to and from station on modified Gemini or Apollo spacecraft. Station itself would provide small, degree of artificial gravity by rotating slowly and would include centrifuge to simulate re-entry forces. (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/14/64)	_	_
Midcourse maneuver for ranger vi lunar spacecraft was executed from NASA—jpl Tracking Station, Goldstone, Calif., 16 hrs. after the spacecraft was launched from AMR. The radio signal activated an onboard motor which fired for 69 sec., aiming the spacecraft on collision course with the moon. Target for the lunar spacecraft: Sea of Tranquility. (Witkin, NYT, 2/2/64, 1; Houston Chron., 1/31/64)
DOD announced $5,550,012 contract for integrated navigation systems for three Project Apollo tracking ships had been awarded by Naval Bureau of Ships to Sperry Rand Corp. (dod Release 633-64)
NASA Nike-Apache vehicle launched at 12:13 a.m. edt from Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in experiment to measure light intensity and charged particle flux as functions of altitude. Payload and spent second stage, which were not separated during flight, impacted 98 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fifth in series to measure and study the nature and causes of aurorae and airglow in the night sky during the dark of the moon, project of Rice Univ. under NASA grant. (Wallops Release 64-53)
nasa announced 84.6-million contract had been awarded by MSC to Space Technology Laboratories for mission analyses and trajectory simulation work in Projects Apollo and Gemini. Contract would be a continuation of Gemini spacecraft analysis project begun in September 1963 and an extension of similar activities in Apollo, (nasa Release 64-206)
msc operations at Cape Kennedy, renamed Msc-Florida Operations, was reorganized as “part of a broad NASA organizational realignment aimed at strengthening Gemini and Apollo management structures at Washington, Houston, and Florida.” The organization was headed by G. Merritt Preston, responsible for msc operations at the Cape since 1961. (ksc Release 43—64; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
NASA signed $80-million incentive contract with Boeing Co. to build five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. Beginning in 1966, Atlas-Agena boosters would launch Lunar Orbiters from Cape Kennedy on missions to take close-range photographs of moon’s surface for scientific study and to help select landing sites for Project Apollo, (nasa Release 64-109)
NASA announced Collins Radio Co. and Philco Corp. had been selected for final competition for prime contract to provide Apollo Network S-Band Systems. Estimated $5-million contract called for basic purchase of two complete tracking and data acquisition systems with 30-ft.-diameter antennas and three electronic subsystems. The hand would handle such functions as tracking, telemetry, and TV and voice communication. (nasa Release 64-116)
In his State of the Union message to Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . our ultimate goal is a world without war, a world made safe for diversity, in which all men, goods and ideas can freely move across every border and boundary. “We must advance toward this goal in 1964 in at least ten different ways, not as partisans but as patriots. . . . “Fourth, we must assure our pre-eminence in the peaceful exploration of outer space, focusing on an expedition to the moon in this decade—in cooperation with other powers if possible, alone if necessary.” (Text, NYT, 1/9/64, 16)
Tass reported that a Gorky Univ. team, headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the leading Soviet authority on radio emanations of the moon, had found evidence they believed showed that the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguishing it both chemically and in mineral content from deep layers. Results were obtained during the complete lunar eclipse of last Dec. 30 observed from Ussurisk, in far eastern Siberia. Troitsky’s group made use of the fact that the lunar surface cooled during eclipses and that the cooling caused a drop in the intensity of radio emanations. The Russians worked out the relationship between the decrease of radio emanations from the obscured part of the moon and the physical properties of the surface. Investigating the properties of the uppermost porous layer of the moon’s surface to a depth of about four inches, the Russians established that its electrical conductivity was 50% to 100% greater than that of the underlying rocks and concluded that the two layers differed in chemical composition and mineral content. The conductivity of the top layer was found to correspond to that of meteorites, confirming the hypothesis that bombardment by meteorites and the settling of meteoritic dust played an important part in shaping the uppermost layer of the moon. {NYT, 12/21/64)
Radar and Doppler velocity sensor system destined to assist the Surveyor spacecraft in its soft landing on the moon was in advanced test phases at Ryan Electronics, Missiles and Rockets reported. Flight tests of the system using helicopters at Holloman afb and at the Hughes Aircraft Co. airport had been successfully completed and had run from 6,000 to 20 ft. above the ground. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
The hydrogen-fueled J-2 engine that would power the upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle successfully demonstrated its ability to stop and restart in a ground test carried out at the Santa Susana Field Laboratory of Rocketdyne Div. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine would operate in a cluster of five to provide one million lbs. of thrust for the S—II second stage of the Apollo moon launch vehicle, as well as operating singly in the S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB. The test engine was operated initially for 165 sec. and shut down. Following a 75-min. “coast” period, the engine was restarted. After seven seconds, it was shut down for six minutes, then restarted and operated for the full duration of 310 seconds. Among specific objectives demonstrated by the test were automatic repressurizing of the start tank during engine operation, sustained tank pressure during the orbital coast period, and reliable operation of the electrical and pneumatic systems used for restart. (Marshall Star, 12/16/64, 1, 12; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/12/64)
Third anniversary of President Kennedy’s address to Congress on urgent national needs in which he said: “. . . I believe this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.”
Washington Daily News editorialized that the success of ranger vii’s mission represented “a significant milestone on a historic road to manned exploration of the moon.” The lunar flight was termed “a demonstration of man’s ceaseless, boundless quest for knowledge—and one which, in the end, is likely to pay off as well as similar past voyages into the unknown.” {Wash. Daily News, 8/1/64; CR, 8/4/64. A4114)
Edward Z. Gray, nasa Director of Advanced Manned Missions, described manned lunar bases under study for post-Apollo missions, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. “The earliest system we can see for extending the capability of Apollo would be the Apollo logistic support system (alss) . “It consists of the launching on the Saturn V of an Apollo spacecraft with an unmanned LEM, wherein we have replaced the ascent stage of the lem with a cargo compartment. The Apollo spacecraft and unmanned lem, or lem truck are launched to the Moon. The lem truck is disengaged from the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit and lands in an unmanned mode on the surface of the Moon. “The payload capability with the present Apollo launch vehicles and spacecraft would be approximately 7,000 pounds. There would be a payload volume of about 2,000 cubic feet. This would provide a shelter with occupancy capability for two men for about 14 days on the lunar surface. An alternate payload that could be carried by the lem truck would be a two-man roving vehicle . . ., which would have a capability to cover about 200 to 300 miles on the lunar surface in the 14 days. . .. “Then looking beyond to the time when much greater staytime on the lunar surface would be desired, we show a lunar exploration system for Apollo (lesa) which weighs about 25,000 pounds on the surface of the Moon. These are Earth pounds. “It would be launched with a Saturn V without an Apollo spacecraft and would be delivered in an unmanned mode directly onto the surface of the Moon. It has a volume of over 3,000 cubic feet, and could provide satisfactory shelter and life support for 3 men to stay 90 days on the surface of the Moon. “The mode of operation would be to launch this unmanned vehicle to the surface of the Moon, and follow it up with an Apollo launch so that the lem would land in the near vicinity of the lesa payload, probably using a homing radar. ...” He described the LESA concept as expandable through addition of modules; for instance, three modules could form a base for 18 men, 24 months occupancy time. {1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 2, 59799)
Bendix Products Aerospace Div. was awarded $99,973 NASA study contract for shock absorbing device to permit soft landing on moon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Bendix would test various sizes and shapes of crushable aluminum honeycomb structures to determine performance characteristics under lunar environmental conditions, (msc Release 64-9)
ranger vii spacecraft successfully completed its midcourse correction maneuvers to put the spacecraft on its final collision course to the moon. RANGER vii carried out series of orders involving switching from the directional to the omnidirectional antenna, folding the directional antenna out of the way of the midcourse motor, pitch and roll maneuvers to properly orient the spacecraft, firing the midcourse motor, and reorientation by earth and sun acquisition after the midcourse motor had been fired. Telemetry indicated that everything aboard the spacecraft was normal after the midcourse correction activities had been completed. (NASA Release 64-187)
Senate passed (78-3) H.R. 10456 authorizing funds for NASA for FY 1965. Senate adopted the committee amendments en bloc. Amendment introduced by Sen. Fulbright to reduce R&D funds for Project Apollo by $267,750,000 was rejected by vote of 42—38. Bill would be sent to House-Senate conference committee. (NASA lar III/127; CR, 6/24/64, 14367-84)
Amateur astronomers in Riverdale, the Bronx, saw a red spot on the moon between the craters Aristarchus and Herodotus at 4:20 a.m. It vanished at 5:10 a.m. before the moon had come into view of the western observatories which had observed spots near Aristarchus last Oct. and Nov. (NYT, 6/18/64)
Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry M. Goldwater issued report on science prepared by his Task Force on Space, Science, and the Atom, in which he had this to say of Project Apollo: “Man should indeed explore the moon, but I see no good reason why we must incur the large unnecessary expense of a crash program. The first man on the moon will probably not gain for us any vital military advantage.” He proposed instruments be sent to the lunar surface, emphasis be concentrated on efforts to assure the “security of nearspace.” (Wash. Post, 10/25/64, A9)
Alvin H. Parker soared his Sisu 1A sailplane from Odessa, Tex., to Kimball, Neb. (644 mi.) to claim new world soaring distance record over the previous 544.331-mi. distance record. (SSA Release) During July: Two 10-story buildings had heen completed in ksc Merritt Island Launch Area and were turned over to NASA. They were the $7.8 million operations and checkout building for the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft, and the $1.3 million spacecraft pyrotechnic installation building. (AP, Orlando Sentinel, 7/22/64)
NASA announced it had selected Collins Radio Co. for procurement of a major portion of the S-band tracking, data acquisition, and communications system to be used in Project Apollo. Nine systems with 30-ft.-diameter parabolic antennas were to be provided, at a cost of approximately $20 million, (nasa Release 64-146)
President Johnson signed NASA Authorization Act (H.R. 10456) authorizing $5,227,506,000 for NASA FT 1965. Largest part of authorization was for Project Apollo, $2,677,500,000. The bill was $76,494,000 less than the Johnson Administration had requested. (AP, NYT, 7/15/64, 15)
In paper on manned lunar scientific operations, prepared for aas meeting in New York, NASA’s Dr. Paul Lowman (Office of Space Science and Applications) and Donald A. Beattie (Office of Manned Space Flight) said that . . it is apparent that the moon is a virtual Rosetta stone that, if properly read, may permit us to learn how the solar system, the earth, and the continents on which we live were formed. . . . “Since the scientific investigations of highest priority are in the fields of geology and geophysics, it appears that there is definite value in extending manned lunar exploration by the use of modified Apollo equipment. Experience has shown that geophysical and geological mapping investigations of large areas are Continuing tasks; like the painting of the Golden Gate Bridge, they are never really finished, because new concepts, questions, and methods evolve during the program. The occasionally-expressed view that the major questions about the moon could be settled by a few landings and the return of a few samples ignore the experience of several centuries of terrestrial geology and geophysics. . . (Text)
Results of five public opinion surveys conducted in 12 cities over 14 months for Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. were announced. Findings indicated that most Americans supported the national goal of landing men on the moon by 1970 but they felt no sense of urgency about achieving it. One third of those interviewed thought spending should be reduced. (NYT, 11/15/64, 66)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) introduced a concurrent resolution to change the goal of the manned lunar landing to before 1975 instead of before 1970 (H. Con. Res. 257). “The change of policy ... is to allow our scientists greater flexibility in meeting the challenging technological problems of the Apollo project. Especially, I have in mind the desirability of eliminating the pressures of meeting time schedules, of minimizing perils such as solar radiation, and frankly I would stretch out the fantastic cost of the manned space exploration program over a longer period of time. . . . “My new resolution is to invite the opinions of qualified experts and knowledgeable persons on this subject. . . . Congress should provide for an overall reappraisal of such a costly manned flight activity which accounts for two-thirds of the $5 billion space budget. Certainly, I cannot believe there is any valid reason why the Space Administration and those engaged in the manned space research venture should not be given more latitude in the scheduling of the program. Any slippage in time schedules due to reasons of safety and increasing assurance of success should not require any apology or excuse. Nor should the program be speeded for prestige at the cost of added risk. Congress by adopting my resolution would be setting a policy of proceeding at an orderly and normal speed and of avoiding undue risks in establishing any deadline. Finally this greater latitude should allow for tighter budgeting and contribute to reductions in the level of annual appropriations.” (CR, 1/23/64, 932)
Baltimore Sun editorialized on ranger vii: “. . . we hear much talk of what this means in international prestige, and to what extent we have given the Russians (as well as the moon) one in the eye. Yet surely the thing itself is the thing itself, and is wonderful in the full sense of that word. To see actual photographs close-up of the surface of the moon, whose mystery throughout the history of mankind has but been enhanced by its proximity and by the fact that something could always be seen there, is a matter of awe and wonder; and that is the main thing about this moonshot.” (Balt. Sun, 8/1/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at aiaa Luncheon in Washington: “. . . the concept of the lunar landing was not new when NASA was founded in 1958. Research was continuing on the various technical aspects of such a mission. In 1959, inhouse work began on mission definition. In the fall of 1960, three six-month feasibility design study contracts were awarded. In January 1961 NASA received these interim findings. There were two basic vehicle approaches to be considered—direct ascent and rendezvous. In May of 1961, the study contract results were available, and supported our interim findings, and the recommendation was made to the Congress that the nation proceed with the mission. . . . “There will be missions after Project Apollo. We are already examining their feasibility, cost, and potential return. We are carefully establishing a variety of future space missions, both manned and up-manned, that exploit the near earth, lunar, and planetary environments. No decisions have been made and we are not ready to recommend them yet. As the information becomes available and as the results are analyzed, we will be able to present the country with a solid spectrum of achievable, well-conceived mission alternatives and options. The selection will be a national, not an agency, decision.” (Text)
George H. Arthur, Deputy Director of the International Telephone and Telegraph Aerospace Laboratory at Nutley, N.J., predicted that the Russians would go to the moon before 1970 and make a manned circum-lunar mission in two and one half years. He said the United States would also be able to get to the moon by 1970 if it had as much success with its developmental program in the Saturn IB and Saturn V as it had with Saturn I. (Balt. Sun, 11/5/64)
“. . . I think we can safely say that our structural problems have been overcome and nuclear rockets can be developed for the performance of future missions beyond Apollo.” (Text)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, campaigning in New Hampshire Republican primary for presidential nomination, said there was a “very serious question” whether U.S. should abandon Project Apollo manned lunar project and rely instead on instrumented spacecraft. About 95% of information obtainable by men on the moon “for a half an hour” could be gathered by instruments, he said. He said the decision for Apollo came after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion, when the Administration decided the U.S. needed something “dramatic.” Rockefeller proposed reconsidering the space plan advocated by President Eisenhower, calling for a slower, less expensive, “scientific” program, (nyt, 2/14/64, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, reported in New Scientist that technical difficulties, and not a deliberate slackening of effort, were hampering Soviet activities in getting men to the moon. He noted that the Russians apparently had not made a probe work in space successfully for more than a few weeks and concluded that the Soviets were failing where “once they shone—in basic rocketry techniques.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
Educator Robert M. Hutchins, writing in the Omaha World-Herald, said of U.S. project to land a man on the moon: “I think it will not be argued that the primary object of this venture is to advance knowledge. It seems rather to be designed as a huge public relations stunt. The ‘knowledge industry’ will restore the prestige we lost when the Russians outdistanced us in space. . . . “If we were dedicated to advancing knowledge, we would have had some serious debate about the best way to do it. Is it to improve our colleges and universities or to put on scientific spectaculars?” (Omaha Sun. World-Herald, 3/29/64)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of msc, was one of featured speakers at opening of Houston Museum of Natural Science and Burke Baker Planetarium in Houston. Dr. Gilruth said msc was negotiating with museum officials for part time use of planetarium for Apollo project, (msc Roundup, 7/22/64, 1)
Ryan Aeronautical Corp. was awarded contract from RCA to design landing radar for the Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. RCA, responsible for major lem subsystems, would integrate landing radar with lem’s overall sensor system. (M&R, 1/13/64,10-11)
Prof. A. A. Blagonravov, chief delegate of the U.S.S.R. to the U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, told a news conference in Geneva that the Soviet Union had no set plan for landing a man on the moon “within the present decade.” (AP, Houston Post, 6/6/64)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy, where it would be orbited by Saturn I SA-6 in April. Three separate usaf aircraft transported the boilerplate launch escape system, command module, service module,.related ground service equipment, and adapter. Within a few hours, S-l stage and instrument unit for SA-6 arrived by barge after 13-day trip from Huntsville, Ala. (msc Release 64-33; MSC Roundup,2/19/64,1)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, visiting NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said extended manned exploration of the moon “does make considerable sense” as follow-on program to Project Apollo. He said such a program was one of several which NASA would present as possible post-Apollo goals to the President “in approximately a month’s time.” Other possibilities would include such programs as landing unmanned spacecraft on other planets. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/28/64)
Discussing U.S. space costs in terms of the gross national product, Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said the GNP was nearly $2 billion a day, “and I guess we can afford a couple of days of that to get to the moon.” (AP, Louisville, Ky., Courier-Journal, 8/7/64)
In honor of ranger VII, the International Astronomical Union meeting in Hamburg, Germany, designated the region where the lunar probe impacted on the moon as “Mare Cognitum.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/2/64,14)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright, Chairman of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said at Copenhagen celebration of 50th anniversary of Denmark-America Foundation: “The most urgent need of this troubled world is new thoughts and attitudes toward the old problem of human relations, as distinct from excessive preoccupation with traveling to the moon.” (AP, Kansas City Times, 5/12/64)
Full-scale metal mockup of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) for Project Apollo was review by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center officials at Grum-man’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Mockup’s appearance was highlight of week-long analysis of the mockup design with a critique aimed at defin-itizing the lem design, (msc Roundup, 10/14/64, 1)
France’s preparations for hydrogen bomb development in the South Pacific were reaching unexpectedly large proportions, New York Times reported. Gaston Palewski, French Minister for Scientific Research, had recently said in Papeete that “France has engaged herself in Polynesia for a very big task.” Test site and military installations were being constructed at Mururoa in the Tuamotu Islands, 720 mi. southeast of Tahiti. French sources indicated France would become a thermonuclear power by late 1967 or early 1968. (NYT, 1/16/64, 4) Mid-January: Work on test site for Project Apollo at White Sands Missile Range was halted by strike of operating engineers, (sbd, 1/15/64, 72)
Use of lasers to measure craters on the moon was reported by J. S. Courtney-Pratt, of Bell Telephone Laboratories, to Society of Photographic Scientists and Engineers in New York. Based on computations made with laser beams sent to crater lips and then to crater bottoms, lunar craters were found to be as deep as 20,000 ft. (Devlin, NYT, 4/29/64, 15)
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, displayed in Tel Aviv a clock designed for lunar explorers. The clock, designed by Dr. Levitt, accounted for the fact that a lunar day and night would be more than 28 times as long as the earth’s 24-hour cycle. His clock showed Greenwich time on earth as well as local time for any point on the moon. (NYT, 6/7/64, 78)
nasa presented ranger VII press briefing, essentially the same presentation as that planned for the iau three days later, in which refined flight data were announced. RANGER VII impacted on the moon within 19 sec. and 6 mi. of the planned time and target. It landed in one of the rays from the crator Tycho; Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper expressed opinion that the crater rays were lava flows. Dr. Kuiper stated the impact area was not typical of the lunar surface. Of the RANGER VII lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper revealed that the photographs resolved objects down to 10—15 inches, and the resolution was considered 1,000	times better than the very best earth-based observation and 5,000 times better than routine earth-based observation. 200 more of the lunar photographs were released. On the question of the nature of the lunar surface, no firm conclusion was drawn. Dr. Kuiper, who estimated erosion on the moon to be about 5 ft., said it was “purely a guess” that there was “fairly solid stuff there.” He added that it was not possible to obtain such data as surface bearing strength from the ranger vii photographs. Dr. Harold Urey, whose paper was read in his absence, also expressed his belief that the photographs did not answer the question of surface strength; however, he said that a “spongy,” “fairy castle structure” could be prevalent many feet down. Dr. Shoemaker, who expressed view that moon loses more material than it gains, suggested erosion could be on the order of 50 ft. He said U.S. Geological Survey was converting the photographic data into topographic profiles, and the results were showing that moon’s surface was “smoother than I had dared hope.” He said average slope in the area being studied did not exceed 10° and pointed out that this was reassuring for Project Apollo, whose Lem spacecraft had been designed to land safely on slope of 15°. (NASA Press Conf.; Finney, NYT, 8/29/64; Toth, Wash. Post, 8/29/64; Watson, Balt. Sun, 8/29/64)
Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Northwestern Univ. said that he and his colleagues would submit a proposal to NASA for a 24-in. telescope to be landed on the moon by the mid-70’s. Such a telescope might double the size of the optically observable universe from its present radius of about 5 billion light years to perhaps 10 billion. It would also “see” radiations from deep space that are totally excluded by earth’s atmosphere. (Schmeck, NYT, 11/20/64)
Soviet aircraft designer Artem I. Mikoyan, brother of Soviet President Anastas I. Mikoyan, remarked in Moscow: “Whatever secrets surround the earth’s nearest neighbor, they will be solved by man. And one would like to believe that the first man on the moon will be our Soviet cosmonaut. We are confident of this. Confirmation of this may be seen in the flight of the spaceship ‘Sunrise’ [voskhod] .”	(AP, Wash. Post, 10/26/64)
Three USAF test pilots entered Apollo command module at Martin Co., Baltimore, for simulated 7-day lunar landing mission. (AP, NYT, 1/13/64, 9)
The first Apollo spacecraft adapter was delivered by Army CH-47A helicopter from Tulsa, Okla., to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center-Florida Operations at Merritt Island. The 4,000-lb., 22-ft.-dia., 28-ft. long, cone-shaped unit structurally simulated the adapter section that would house the Apollo lunar excursion module (lem) on its trip to the moon. It would undergo tests to determine whether the mechanical fit was adequate, if sufficient access was provided to perform service and checkout of the LEM, and to determine its compatibility with test facilities and ground handling. Helicopter was chosen over other forms of transportation because of the awkwardly large diameter of the section. (ksc Release 227-64)
