U.S.-Mexican agreement for operation of NASA tracking station at Guaymas, Mexico, had been extended to 1970, NASA announced. The station would be used to track Project Gemini and Project Apollo. The two Governments also agreed to cooperate on meteorological sounding programs, (nasa Release 65-76)
Prof. Hannes Alfven of the division of plasma physics at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden, revived a theory that the moon was once an independent planet. In an article written for Science, he said that “many if not all of the craters of the moon were produced” by an “intense bombardment of fragments of itself” when the moon swept too close to the earth and partly disintegrated under the tremendous tidal forces that were generated. “It is also possible,” the theory suggested, “that so much of the lunar matter fell down [on this planet] that the upper layer of the earth—the crust—originally derives from the moon.” Prof. Alfven wrote that this theory was first stated by H. Gerstenkorn of Hanover, Germany, and published in 1954 in Zeitschrift fur Astrophysik under the title “Uber die Gezeitenreibung beim Zweikorperproblem” (“About Tidal Friction in a Two-Body Problem”). (Osmundsen, NYT, 4/24/65, 31: Myler, Wash. Post, 4/24/65)
Commenting on how swiftly man had moved into the space age, an article in the Baltimore Sun said: “Travel in space . . . remains and will remain dangerous—a work for none but the brave, the skilled and the dedicated. There will be moments of breathless drama, many of them, as when the first man arrives on the moon, and of tragedy. But short of those moments, travel in space near the earth is beginning to be routine.” (Balt. Sun, 9/17/65)
NASA announced plans to negotiate with Lockheed Missile and Space Co. to modify five Agena D second-stage launch vehicles for use in Lunar Orbiter missions. Modifications under the incentive contract would include vehicle engineering support; systems testing; overall system integration functions; shroud, adapter and interface coordination; and design fabrication of ground equipment. The Lunar Orbiter program would secure topography data of the moon’s surface to extend scientific knowledge and to help select and confirm landing sites for the Apollo manned moon landings. (NASA Release 65-6)
Editorializing, the Hartford Courant said: “. . . Lunik V’s purpose was openly said to be a soft landing on the moon, an experiment that might have sent back the first pictures of the moon from the actual lunar surface, and information about the physical nature of that surface. Possibly the Russians were sure they had the problems of a soft landing solved. But just possibly they decided this time to be frank and out in the open about the whole business. After all, why be scared? Look at all the failures the United States has admitted. And right now the Russians have something to console themselves with. It’s called honesty, and its just as good to be distinguished for this as it is for technology.” (Hartford Courant, 5/16/65)
The task of effecting a soft landing on the moon had been placed on the agenda of space projects in the U.S.S.R., Academician Leonid Sedov, leader of the Soviet delegation to the 16th iaf Congress, said at a press conference. He added: “Such a landing has already been worked out on the ground.” (Tass, 9/17/65)
Robert Hotz, editorializing in Aviation Week and Space Technology, said that it could be a “dangerous mistake” to defer development of earth-orbital operational capabilities until financial and technical peak loads of Apollo had been passed:	“The Soviets obviously have chosen the earth-orbital approach to their lunar landing mission. Therefore, they necessarily must develop rather fully their hardware and operational techniques in this area as a vital prelude to their lunar landing attempts and not as a postlude, in the manner of current U.S. planning. They also have made little attempt to conceal their primary military interest in the development of manned spacecraft operations in the earth-orbital area. “Thus, it is entirely possible that unless U.S. policy is drastically changed soon, the Soviets may have an opportunity to achieve the technical surprise in space that they so narrowly missed in the race to an intercontinental ballistic missile.” (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 21)
NASA was negotiating with General Electric Co. to provide 50-w. isotopic power generator for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Packages (Al-sep) program. The thermoelectric nuclear power unit, designated Snap—27, would use plutonium-238 as the heat source. The packages would transmit selected measurements back to earth. AEC would manage detailed design and development of the unit based on studies of prototypes by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (aec-nasa Release H-226)
NASA awarded mit separate cost reimbursement contract, with no fee, to cover further work on guidance and navigation of Apollo command and lunar excursion modules. The new contract, running from March 1 through November 4, 1965, totaled §15,529,000, including $1.4 million to support research activities in the guidance and navigation field. (NASA Release 65-116)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said at the annual meeting of the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia: “Beyond military and political advantages of getting to the moon are possibilities we cannot conceive.” The moon, he said could prove to be “the Rosetta stone of the universe. Its lifeless surface could give us the clue to the process of life.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/21/65)
NASA had decided to replace Lem’s fuel-cell power subsystem with a more conventional battery system, Missiles and Rockets reported. Motivation was concern for reliability. Decision would not affect use of fuel cell in the Apollo command module. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
Apollo Extension Systems (Aes) schedule was summarized by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in the Journal of the Armed Forces: “nasa has worked up a tentative Aes schedule. It calls, first, for perhaps three or four 14-day earth-orbital missions, using a basic Apollo spacecraft only slightly modified, starting in 1968. This phase would be followed by extended earth-orbital (45-day) missions at the rate of five or six a year in 1970-71 and 14-day lunar exploration missions at the rate of one or two a year in 1970-71.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 9/25/65, 23)
NASA selected four companies to perform four-month design studies on an experiments pallet to fly aboard Project Apollo missions: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Martin Co.; and Northrop Space Labs. The firms, under separate and concurrent fixed-price contracts valued at approximately $375,000, would design, develop detailed specifications, and produce mock-ups of a pallet to house scientific, technological, and engineering experiments to be carried on Apollo missions of up to two-weeks duration beginning in 1968. After review and evaluation of the design studies, NASA planned to select one of the firms to develop the experiments pallet flight hardware under a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, (nasa Release 65-361)
NASA was acquiring eight kc-135 jet transports and three ships to help maintain communications during Apollo moon flights. In addition, two ships of the existing DOD instrumentation fleet were being remodeled for support of the Apollo lunar mission’s reentry phase. The KC-135’s would be used during reentry to combat the effects of the plasma sheath blackout which had drowned out communications on previous manned launchings. In addition, three primary ground stations were being prepared at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra; and Madrid. (nasa Apollo Proj. Off.; ap, CSM, 7/19/65)
Soviet cosmonaut Col. Vladimir Komarov, who commanded the threeman spacecraft VOSKHOD I on its orbital flight, told a Havana newspaper: “I believe I will take part in a similar trip—if not to the moon, then to another place.” Komarov was a member of the Soviet delegation in Havana for celebration of the sixth anniversary of Fidel Castro’s revolution. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 1/3/65; ap, Hartford Courant, 1/3/65)
ranger VIII lunar photography probe struck its target on the moon at 4:57:36.8 EST, after radioing to earth about 7,000 close-up pictures of the lunar surface during the last 23 min. of flight. The point of impact was 2.59° north latitude, 24.77° east longitude, in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area slightly east-northeast of the center of a full moon. The spacecraft impacted at slightly less than 6,000 mph. Total distance of travel along its trajectory from lift-off had been calculated as 248,766 mi. Accuracy of the shot was reflected in the fact that impact had been planned for 4:57:30, and at 3° north latitude and 24° east longitude. ranger viii had been programed to execute a “terminal sequence” just before impact to point the six tv cameras more in the direction of flight; this sequence was omitted to allow the cameras to cover a larger area than planned and to provide greater continuity with the pictures transmitted by ranger vii last July 31. A second change in the flight was to turn on cameras 23 min. before impact instead of 13 min. and 40 sec. as planned. The new time had been chosen so that initial pictures would be about equal to earth-based resolution and then continue into impact. Two small anomalies: one part of the spacecraft had registered a higher temperature than had been anticipated and more telemetry data had been lost during midcourse maneuver than had been expected. ranger viii had been launched Feb. 17 from Cape Kennedy. (NASA Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65, 1, 65)
Ikeya-Seki comet reached perihelion (closest approach to the sun) with the comet only about 300,000 mi. from the visible solar disk and within a solaf radius of the sun’s surface. Traveling along an elliptical path that would carry it around the sun and deep into the solar corona, Ikeya-Seki had a visual magnitude of —10, nearly as bright as the moon. It was the brightest comet since the one in 1882 which reached an intensity of —7. (NASA Release 65-332; Osmundsen, NYT, 10/20/65, 39; Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/65, C23)
nasa had contracted with Collins Radio Co., Dallas (Tex.) Div., to procure Unified S-Band Telemetry Systems for three 85-ft. -diameter antennas in support of Project Apollo. Under the fixed-price type contract worth $2,740,000, Collins would install the three systems at antennas to be built at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra, Australia; and Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 65-63)
Boeing Co. unveiled to the public a mockup of its Molab (Mobile Laboratory), a six-wheeled vehicle being studied by NASA for use in manned exploration of the moon, (ap, Tulsa Daily World, 5/6/65) May 6: mariner iv, after 159 days in space, was 72 million mi. from earth, had travelled 243 million mi. The spacecraft continued to return scientific and engineering data to ground stations daily and to set new records for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-148)
The first NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., assembled over 400 university representatives interested in learning how their institutions could qualify for NASA grants for space-related research or expand present programs. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of the NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, reported that 200 universities were participating in the program, that some of the grants were for specific projects, some in university sustaining programs, and others for the support of predoctoral candidates. He said that while NASA was “mission oriented,” its job was not limited to putting a man on the moon: “Its objective is the expansion of human knowledge of phenomena in the atmosphere and space. One problem is how the academic community can communicate with nasa.” (McCoy, Kansas City Star, 3/1/65) In a luncheon address, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, urged educators not to strangle “the holy curiosity of inquiry.” He said the success of the U.S. space program depended largely on “formation of ideas by individuals working as individuals in universities.” (Text) Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) told the Conference that the U.S. must “widen the scope of man’s imagination, trample rough-shod over intellectually inhibiting barriers and stimulate to their fullest potential the mental powers of young and reasonably young Americans if the United States were to achieve and maintain preeminence in space.” Symington emphasized the need for communication of new knowledge. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65) Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of Univ. of California’s Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, reviewed activities supported by NASA multidisciplinary grant: “In the three years UCLA has administered [the . . . NASA grant, we have aided in bringing thirty-seven visiting scientists to this campus for short periods of time. This grant has supported fourteen visiting researchers for periods of up to one year. Through the use of these funds and program enrichment funds from the NASA Predoctoral Traineeship grant, we have aided in bringing seven new faculty members to this campus to augment the existing faculty in space-related fields. . . . Finally, we have made over fifty sub-grants to faculty for new starts on space-related research in various areas—Biology and Medicine, Physical Sciences, Engineering, and Business Administration.” (Text)
Surveyor mission to softland a television camera on the moon had been postponed until May 1966, JPL announced. Unspecified technical problems in the spacecraft and testing gear were blamed, (ap, NYT, 11/23/65, 11)
ComSatCorp announced agreement on a $4,512,772 contract with Page Communications Engineers, Inc., for three transportable earth stations to be used as links in providing communication services for Project Apollo. Contract was filed with the Federal Communications Commission in conformity with FCC rules requiring 10 days notice for such awards. ComSatCorp also had filed with the Commission a related application seeking authority to construct the stations and asking FCC approval of their technical characteristics. (ComSatCorp Release)
Soviet scientist Dr. V. S. Troitsky, of the Scientific Research Radiophysics Institute in Gorky, said that radio emissions from the moon indicated that its interior was so hot that it must be four times as radioactive as the inside of the earth. He also said that radio observations indicated a surface layer of light material about 20-ft. thick, overlying denser rock. Dr. Troitsky made these statements at an international conference on the solar system, being held at Cal Tech. (NYT, 9/15/65)
nasa had awarded a new $47,655,103 cost-plus-incentive/award fee contract to trw Inc., for work on the Gemini/Apollo mission trajectory control program and the Apollo spacecraft systems analysis program, (nasa Release 65-378)
Gen. Omar N. Bradley (usa, Ret.), Chairman of the Board of the Bulova Watch Co., disclosed at the annual stockholders meeting that Accutron-type electronic clocks were being designed for use on the control panel of nasa’s Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. Star-tracking devices incorporating Accutron would be in the moon vehicle’s navigation system. A special “moon van” containing components and examples of hardware for use in Project Apollo was on display at the meeting. (NYT, 7/28/65,43C)
half of the lunar disc was in shadow. The first frames show a considerable part of the moon visible from the earth. Later frames show the surface of the moon when there was considerable solar side illumination, when the relief formations cast distinct shadows. The images from Zond 3 are sent with a clarity of 1,100 lines. When photographing from a distance of the order of 10,000 km., images of a lunar surface area of about 5 million square km. are possible. The quality of the photographs obtained make it possible to see numerous details of the lunar relief, which are of considerable interest. The photo obtained from Zond 3 will be published in leading newspapers and scientific journals. To analyze the result obtained and to name the craters, ranges, and other formations on the newly photographed sections of the moon, the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. has set up a special commission. Scientific investigations are continuing on Zond 3. For further testing of the radio line the transmission of photographs of the far side of the moon from the station will continue during subsequent communications sessions, right up to the greatest distance from the earth. Thirty-eight communications sessions have been conducted from Zond 3. All on-board systems are functioning normally.” (Izvestia, 8/15/65, 1)
Soviet spacecraft luna viii impacted on the moon. Indications were that it was destroyed instead of making a soft landing. Tass reported that “the systems of the station were functioning normally at all stages of the landing except the final touchdown.” Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank radiotelescope tracking station, said: “The recordings of the final stages of Luna 8 made at Jodrell Bank indicate that a minor fault probably developed approximately four minutes before touchdown. The retrorockets did not have full effect and the probe probably made a hard rather than a crash landing, but nevertheless sufficient to put the instruments out of action. It seems clear the Russians narrowly missed complete success. . . . They have probably obtained a great deal of new information which will enable them to correct the remaining minor faults. . . .” (Tass, 12/7/65; Balt. Sun, 12/8/65)
Man might be able to change the orbit of asteroid Icarus and make it an orbiting earth station, suggested Soviet scientist K. Stan-yukovich in an interview published by Economichesky Gazetta. Icarus has almost a one-mile diameter and weighs over six billion tons; every 19 yrs. it passes within 4 million mi. of earth. “There is a great demand for a natural moon of Icarus’ size,” Stanyukovich said, where man could build scientific observatories and warehouses to store fuel for spaceships departing on interplanetary trips. He doubted that it could be captured on its next approach in 1968, but foresaw a possibility for 1987. (Burke, L. A. Times, 11/6/65)
Writing in Pravda, I. Akulinichev, Dr. of Medical Sciences, said: “. . . Of course, the question of lunar laboratories is now only at the level of scientific planning. ... To bring this possibility closer to our times, it is necessary to accomplish manned flights to the region of the Moon. Further, we need to solve reliably the question of methods to use for a successful lunar landing of a spacecraft and the return of the cosmonauts to Earth. In my view, the first lunar laboratories will initially study the possibilities of the prolonged sojourn of man on the Moon. Scientists will investigate ways of using the lunar conditions for assisting the normal life activity of people. . . . Finally, the scientists will study the conditions of orientation on the Moon and the possibilities of the navigation of interplanetary spacecraft.” In the same issue of Pravda, Soviet Academician B. Konstantinov wrote: “In this New Year’s article, I wish to dwell on the possibility of international cooperation in the use of solar energy. . . . What appears most attractive is the conversion of solar energy into electricity. In the foreseeable future, man may solve this problem; along with this, it is conceivable that the problems of controlling the weather and climate will also be solved.” (Pravda, 1/3/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, announced at a news conference the crew selected for the Gemini VIII spaceflight: Neil A. Armstrong, a civilian, would be command pilot; David R. Scott (Maj., usaf) would be copilot. Backup crewmen named were Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (Lcdr., usn). Gemini vm was scheduled to include practice on rendezvous and docking maneuvers and a space walk that could last as long as one orbit of the earth—about 95 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/21/65, 6)
U.S.S.R.’s photographic moon probe, ZOND III, was 33.4 million miles (52.8 million km.) from earth. Transmission of photos of the moon’s hidden side had been resumed according to the flight program. Pictures were of good quality. (Tass, 10/28/65)
NASA announced that Launch Complex 16 at Cape Kennedy would be modified to convert the former Titan missile facility into static test stands for the Apollo' manned lunar spacecraft. Construction bids were expected to be opened by Army Corps of Engineers, late this month. The modified test facility would replace an Apollo static test stand originally planned for the NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island facility. Officials estimated that the modification of Complex 16 would represent a cost reduction of about 72 per cent under the original $7 million construction estimate for test stands on Merritt Island, (ksc Release 7-65)
ranger VIII lunar probe successfully executed a midcourse maneuver that corrected the path established at launch and aimed it for impact on the moon in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area centered 2.6° north of the lunar equator and 24.8° west of the moon’s north-south line. Signal for the maneuver was radioed from earth to activate commands previously stored in the spacecraft’s computer. At that time, the 808-lb. photo probe was 99,281 mi. from earth, traveling toward the moon at 4,100 mph. First command ordered the spacecraft to roll 11.6°; the second ordered the pitch maneuver of 151.7°; the third commanded the motor to burn for 59 sec. Then, after the spacecraft was ordered to break its attitude stabilization locks on the sun and earth, a “go” command was transmitted and ranger vm executed the maneuver in about 27 min. The correction completed, the spacecraft reacquired its stabilization locks and continued on its course. One measure of the accuracy of the maneuver was the current expected impact time on the moon:	Feb. 20 at 4:57:30 a.m. plus or minus 60 sec. The original planned time was 4:57:30 a.m. The photo probe’s initial course would have missed the trailing edge of the moon by 1.136 mi. (NASA Transcript; L.A. Times. Miles, Wash. Post, 2/19/65; Appel, NYT, 2/19/65; UPi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/18/65; ap, Chic. Trib., 2/19/65; Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 34)
Soviet scientists, writing in the bulletin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, asserted that a flight to the moon can now be regarded as fully reliable from the medical and biological viewpoint. This conclusion was reached in summing up the results of the medical-biological research carried on in the two Voskhod spaceflights. Careful training and selection of visual reference points in advance helped to offset the anticipated disorientation of spaceflight. (Tass, 9/3/65)
At Vatican City, Pope Paul vi saw a movie made up of photos taken by ranger vii as it neared the moon. NASA Associate Administrator Robert Seamans, Jr., in Europe on. other business, and NASA European representative, Gilbert W. Ousley, were received by the Pope, showed him the movie, and answered his questions. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 1/11/65; ap, Balt. Sun., 1/11/65)
Comparing luna in [lunik iii] and zond ill, H. Pfaffe said in an article in East Germany’s Berliner Zeitung: “Owing to its trajectory, Zond 3 was able to photograph the moon under favorable illumination conditions for one hour and eight minutes. Luna 3 was able to photograph only 40 minutes. Zond 3’s trajectory was so chosen that the probe assumed a planetary orbit around the sun. Luna 3, on the other hand, assumed an elliptical orbit with the earth as one focal point. While Luna 3 transmitted its photos of the moon from distances of 400,000 km. and 40,000 km., Zond 3 began to transmit from a distance of 2,200,000 km. This and the fact that the new photos were on a 1,100-line basis indicated the advances made in the Soviet radio and photographic systems.” (Pfaffe, Berliner Zeitung, 8/15/65, 3)
An analysis of worldwide press reactions to the successful GEMINI IV flight indicated that most newspapers took the occasion to call for U.S.-Soviet cooperation in space ventures. “That this [cooperation] is unlikely shows how far our politics lag behind our technology,” Britain’s Manchester Guardian said. Dutch newspapers joined in asking for cooperation in space and Trouw said the duplication of effort by the Soviet Union and the United States “is a waste of money and know-how.” The West Berlin press highly praised the U.S. policy of reporting the Gemini flight as it was taking place. Swedish newspapers refrained from any comment amid a wave of anti-American sentiment over Viet Nam and the Dominican Republic. The Hindustani Times commented: “It is a pity that the two nations [U.S. and Soviet Union] are going about the job with such secrecy. The time has come for both nations to pool their resources and make the projected attempt on the moon a truly human adventure.” ( Wash. Post, 6/9/65, A3)
The problem of the moon’s origin should be solved when Surveyor spacecraft had sent samples of the lunar surface to earth, predicted Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, at a news conference during the meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Seattle. Absence of terrestrial matter in lunar soil would indicate that the moon originated elsewhere in the solar system, Urey said, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/65)
Chairman of the ucla Astronomy Dept. Dr. L. H. Aller believed the moon might be as solid as metal below the top few inches of surface, reported George Getze in the Los Angeles Times. According to Getze, Aller said chances were good that the chemical composition of the moon was more like the sun’s than the earth’s and that elements in the sun as gases would be found in the moon as solids. “The first few inches of the moon’s surface may have been changed a good deal by meteor hits and solar radiation, but if we go down a few feet we will probably find that the composition is like the sun’s,” he said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 5/6/65)
luna v “hit the moon in the area of the Sea of Clouds” at 10:10 p.m. Moscow time [3:10 p.tn. edt], Tass announced. The release continued: “During the flight and the approach of the station to the moon a great deal of information was obtained which is necessary for the further elaboration of a system for soft landing on the moon’s surface.” The announcement revealed no further details of the landing. Western experts saw evidence that the Soviets had attempted a soft landing and failed. (Tass, 5/12/65; Shabad, NYT, 5/13/65, 1, 24)
Editorial by Henry Eyring, Univ. of Utah, in Science: “. . . The crash program on the atomic bomb grew out of groundless fears that our antagonists would get the atomic bomb first. The vast sums being spent at present on a crash program for an early landing on the moon have their own somewhat obscure, psychological basis. If the moon program is really the most effective means of staving off all-out war, expensive as it is, it is still a bargain. On the other hand, the attempts which are sometimes made to sell the moon program on its scientific merits alone, in competition with other scientific uses of the money, are less convincing. The charitable conclusion is that in public affairs it is deemed necessary to oversimplify actual objectives so that the general public will best serve its own interests for the wrong reasons. This oversolicitude is probably neither necessary nor desirable. . . .” {Science, 10/22/65, 439)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans said during FY 1966 budget briefing: “. . . it is conceivable . . . that the lunar landing would occur in early 1970 ... we feel actually greatly encouraged at the progress that has been made freezing the design, and we feel very reassured at the test results we are achieving on our propulsion systems and with our stages. So that we really feel that there is more chance that we can get off the flight on an earlier mission than I would have said a year ago.” Dr. Seamans said Apollo gave the nation a capability for a wide variety of scientific and technological flights in earth orbit, in orbit around the moon, and also for an extended lunar stay time. He commented that the objectives of the current extended Apollo (Apollo-X) design and feasibility studies were to extend the time of the lunar mission out to the order of two weeks. He also said that Apollo-X circumlunar flights, in polar orbit about the moon and taking photographs of the entire lunar surface, on missions that could involve staytimes on the moon of up to one or two weeks, all would have great possibility and would offer great interest scientifically. In commenting on an earlier agreement (1963) with the Pentagon for developing of a manned orbiting laboratory, Dr. Seamans said: “At the time of that agreement, we were really thinking of something that we now realize is further out in time, namely, a more permanent space station that could stay in orbit for a year’s time and could be resupplied, and would permit the crew to be ferried into orbit and bring them back. The study really related to that kind of possibility which we now realize is much further out in time ... we may end up with what is called the MOL, and we may also find that there are important uses for the Apollo system beyond the present manned lunar landing program.” He said NASA studies of improving both the Saturn IB and the Saturn V launch vehicles indicated that “these two launch vehicles can take care of our needs for an extended period of time.” (NASA Budget Briefing FY 1966)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center reported it had saved $12 million toward a $35 million cost reduction goal for FY 1965. Major portion of this saving was made possible by a suggestion from Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, that instead of spending the budgeted $7,873,000 for a static test stand for the Apollo spacecraft at Cape Kennedy, the reserve Titan Launch Complex 16 be modified for static test use. Cost of modifying the Titan launch complex would be $3,982,900, with a net saving of $3,890,100. (msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said at a press conference at the International Transport Exhibition in Munich that the Soviet Union planned to land a man on the moon in 1970. Komarov, in charge of the first spacecraft with a three-men crew, was awarded the Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card—a top international aviation decoration. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/16/65)
luna vi, Soviet probe, would miss the moon by 160,000 km. (99,379 mi.) because of an unsuccessful midcourse maneuver, Tass announced. Engine used to adjust the spacecraft’s trajectory could not be switched off, causing a deviation from the planned course. (Tass, 6/10/65)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, Editor Robert Hotz said: “This is a year in which we will hear much about the growing pains of Apollo. It would be most amazing if we didn’t. For Apollo is now in the midst of that difficult period when the problems of creating this incredibly intricate and complex technical system are being hammered the hardest toward solutions. It is also the period when the effectiveness of the management structure in welding all of the complex subsystems into a successfully functioning overall system within the time and money boundaries already established becomes most vital.”	(Av. Wk., 1/18/65, 17)
According to USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories study, a continuous barrage of meteoroids was causing moon to lose up to 6,000 tons a day and earth to gain 10,000 lbs. a day. Because of its strong gravity, earth absorbed about four times as many impacts as moon, (oar Release 3-65-3; Chic. Trib., 3/11/65)
New York Times continued its editorial opposition to the national objective for Project Apollo of landing a man on the moon in this decade. On Feb. 19, an editorial drew from the two successful major launchings of the week (ranger viii and SATURN i sa—9) the lesson that the kinds of experiments on these flights (lunar photography of ranger viii and pegasus I micrometeoroid detection satellite on Saturn I) proved there wrere many unmeasured perils in space and that “In the face of these uncertainties, the American space program ought to retain maximum flexibility of timing, rather than try at all costs to achieve the artificial goal of a manned lunar landing by 1970.” On Feb. 22, following the successful conclusion of the RANGER viii lunar photography mission, another editorial praised the accomplishment, then noted that the Ranger series was not providing all of the answers to lunar questions critical to the Apollo program, and concluded:	“The two successful Ranger shots, however, make clear that much valuable information can be gathered about the earth’s natural satellite by relatively cheap instrument-carrying rockets that do not risk human lives. This demonstration, and the continuing uncertainties about matters essential for a safe manned round trip to the moon, strengthen still more the case for making progress slowly, without any arbitrary deadline, on Project Apollo.” {NYT, 2/19/65, 34; 2/22/65, 20)
The New York Times commented on the success of the U.S.S.R. zond jii mission: “Like the Ranger and Mariner feats before it, Zond 3 has again shown what enormous gains in man’s knowledge can be obtained by using instruments alone, a technique much cheaper and less hazardous than sending men to the moon or the planets. There is every reason to suppose that a United States satellite could have gotten similar photographs of the other side of the moon even earlier than Zond 3 had a sustained effort to this end been made. “The restraining element has been the limitations imposed on this country’s exploration of space with instrument-carrying rockets by the overriding priority given to the enormously expensive Apollo project for landing a man on the moon by 1970. The Soviet propaganda and prestige gains that will result from the current accomplishment represent one of the costs of the decision to put so much emphasis upon a manned voyage to the moon.” (NYT, 8/17/65, 30)
NASA’s decision to divert funds from its basic science research program to Project Apollo as a budgetary expediency was criticized by the New York Times: “[nasa] is sacrificing scientifically important projects whose sole defect is that they lack the spectacular publicity value of Project Apollo, which already consumes most of nasa’s huge appropriation. “We believe this is an irrational set of priorities, the result of the public-relations approach. There is no compelling scientific reason why a man should be landed on the moon by 1969 rather than in 1971 or 1973. . . .” (NYT, 12/17/65, 38)	_
Telemetry data from ranger ix indicated that the probe was on such an accurate course toward the moon that jpl engineers decided to delay for one day a planned mid-course correction, ranger ix began its 245,500-mi. trip to the moon Mar. 21, and was 144,488 mi. from earth at 9 p.m. est. (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/22/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/65; ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 3/22/65)
Course of Soviet spacecraft luna viii was successfully corrected and it was now on a trajectory toward the moon close to the calculated one, Tass announced. (Tass, 12/6/65)
A suggestion made at the White House Conference on International Cooperation that the U.S. seek international agreement on a legal code for human activity on the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “An important precedent for a code of lunar law exists in the Antarctic Treaty of Dec. 1, 1959. That pact, to which both the United States and the Soviet Union adhere, provides that Antarctica shall be used only for peaceful purposes and shall contain no military bases. It suspends all territorial claims to the Antarctic and establishes the principle that all settlements and activities in the area are open to inspection by observers designated by the nations ratifying the treaty. “The contracting nations agree to make available to each other all scientific information gathered there, and to exchange personnel among their expeditions and stations. “Adoption of an analogous code for the moon would be a major triumph of international cooperation . .	(NYT, 11/30/65, 40)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the radiotelescope facility at Jodrell Bank, England, said that the telescope would try to track Soviet lunar probe LUNA v on May 10. “We have been expecting the Russians to make an attempt to achieve a soft landing of an instrumented package on the moon for some time now,” he said. “This may possibly be the attempt.” {NYT, 5/10/65)
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, head of the astrogeological branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, said in an interview with the Houston Post while at Rice Univ. as a speaker in the President’s Lecture Series that the Ranger program had cost a total of about $200 million. He estimated that each Ranger shot had cost just under $30 million and said that although four of the seven Ranger missions had failed, it would have been foolish to settle for one success: “Just imagine that the Martians sent a Ranger-like camera to take pictures of the earth. With just one shot, they’d end up with pictures of a space no bigger than the size of an urban lot, or of the peak of the Alps, or of the sand dunes in Arabia. Could they tell anything about the earth from pictures of just one of these?” The Ranger program, just concluded with the success of ranger ix, gave U.S. scientists good pictures of three different areas of the moon, Shoemaker said. “A Ranger picture is worth a million computer words.” (Perez. Houston Post, 4/8/65)
luna vin would land on the moon Dec. 6 at about 4:50 p.m. est, Tass reported. Telemetry data indicated the spacecraft was on a correct trajectory and functioning normally. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65,43)
B. F. Goodrich Corp. had been selected by Hamilton Standard to replace International Latex Corp. as subcontractor for garment portion of the Apollo spacesuit. Change followed problems with certain portions of garment. iM&R. 3 15 65, 7)
Soviet engineer T. Borisov suggested that cause of LUNA v’s apparent failure to soft land on the moon might have been failure of the braking rockets to fire “precisely when needed,” the New York Times reported. Borisov pointed out that earth stations could not help the automatic equipment during this phase because it takes 2% sec. for radio signals to make round-trip between earth and moon. (NYT, 5/14/65, 3)
U.S.S.R. launched luna viii unmanned spacecraft toward the moon. Objectives were testing of soft lunar landing system and scientific research. Weighing 1,552 kg. (3,422 lbs.), the spacecraft was following a trajectory close to the calculated one. Equipment was functioning normally. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/4/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
NASA announced it had asked astronomers and scientists in 38 countries to help analyze and interpret the closeup photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii in July 1964. The scientists would first receive a set of 199 high-quality pictures taken by ranger vii’s “A” camera; photographs taken by other cameras would be sent later. NASA had also sent ranger vii photographs to the European Space Research Organization, the European Launcher Development Organization, the International Committee on Space Research, and the United Nations, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/15/65)
A panel of scientists analyzed slides of the ranger ix lunar pictures at a post-impact press conference and noted that crater rims— some with level areas—and ridges inside the walls seemed harder than the plains but that floors of the craters appeared to be solidified volcanic froth that would not support a landing vehicle. Volcanic activity was inferred from indications that the moon had at least three types of craters not caused by meteorite impact. Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona said parts of the highlands around the crater Alphonsus and ridges within it seemed harder and smoother than the dusty lunar plains. Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the same laboratory said of the crater: “It might well be better to make landings there.” Most significant finding of ranger ix’s photographs, according to Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey, was the smoothness of the crater walls and of the long ridges on the floor of the crater. Dr. Harold Urey of the Univ. of California referred to black patches in the pictures which he said might be composed of graphite: “. . . these dark halo craters are due to some sort of plutonic activity beneath the surface of the moon. They do not look to me like terrestrial volcanoes. . . . They look like a unique lunar type of object.” Dr. Urey said a Soviet scientist had reported a red flare near a peak in Alphonsus and that analysis had indicated presence of a molecule with two carbon atoms. He said this was “a very curious situation because this molecule . . . does not escape from any known volcano” on earth, (nasa Transcript)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona, heading the panel for scientific evaluation of ranger viii photographs, said at a press conference that one of the most important results of this flight had been the discovery that the Sea of Clouds and the Sea of Tranquillity were similar in structure. He noted several “odd depressed regions” and said that they could be areas where collapse had occurred, which might suggest the presence of lava fields. He believed the lunar surface was composed of very light, frothy material such as would be formed when rock was melted and allowed to resolidify within a high vacuum, like that on the moon. The material envisioned by Dr. Kuiper might be considered similar to certain volcanic rocks found on earth: while it would probably be lighter than water, it could still have substantial strength. This theory was based on laboratory attempts several years ago to simulate conditions existing when the moon was formed. Ewen A. Whitaker of the Univ. of Arizona said he felt the lunar material, which he thought had a consistency of crunchy snow, would support a manned spacecraft. He said color lines and sharp boundaries tended to show that the surface was some sort of frothy, lava-like material and definitely not dust. Another member of the Panel, Dr. Harold C. Urey, of the Univ. of California, noted dimples on the moon’s surface and said their curved walls indicated material must have been thrown out of their centers when comparatively soft terrain was gouged by heavy masses of rock. He thought he saw spots in the center of some dimples into which soft material might be draining and estimated the depth of some dimples at 50 to 60 ft. Dr. Urey also suggested the surface material might have the consistency of crunchy snow, (nasa Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65; Miles, L. A. Times, 2/21/65; ap, Indianapolis Star, 2/22/65) February 20: No evidence of lunar origin had been found in rock samples from western Iowa tested at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said Donald E. Perry, gsfc Information Officer: “We had not . . . found anything in Iowa which could be identified as meteoritic or of the nature of a tektite.” NASA had requested a six-county area of western Iowa to submit rocks for analysis since gsfc astronomer, Dr. Walter O’Keefe, had had the theory that tektites came from the moon. Western Iowa had been chosen as a likely spot for the search for tektite fragments because of its heavy deposits of loose soil and near absence of natural rock formations. (Barton, Omaha Sunday Worid Herald, 2/21/65)
Two Soviet scientists retained their full capacity to work after spending 30 days in a closed test chamber—said to be the period necessary on a spaceflight to circle the moon. Psychologists did not favor a two-man crew for long space flights, however, since the experiment showed that “even trifles psychologically are blown out of all proportion.” Results and data of the experiments were published in Problems of Space Biology. (Tass, 9/6/65)
At a press conference during the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Univ. of California chemist Harold C. Urey said that he hoped the moon was “interesting enough to make the $20 billion exploration program ‘worthwhile.’ ” He added, “If it turns out that the moon escaped from the earth, it will be just another incident and I will be disappointed. If, however, it was captured by the earth it will be an outstanding link in history.” Urey backed the U.S. program designed to land men on the moon by 1970 and said he did not consider the cost excessive. (Denver Post, 2/10/65)
Speculation that the earth might briefly have had another moon, one of pure iron which disintegrated and fell to earth in a series of fireball showers, was reported in Science. Discovery of a 47-mi.-long string of craters and meteorites extending northeast to southwest in northcentral Argentina led scientists to propose that the rare meteorites, consisting of almost pure iron, might be remnants of a single object which had orbited inside the Roche Limit, been torn apart by the gravity of the earth, and fallen from orbit. Perigee of the hypothetical orbit would have been over the latitude of Argentina and inclination would have been about 40° to account for the alignment of the nine craters. {Science, 9/3/65, 1055-1064)
Geologist G. J. H. McCall of Univ. of Western Australia said he believed the lunar surface to resemble plastic, and he recommended another Ranger spacecraft be sent to the moon to test his theory. McCall was in Bend, Ore., attending the International Lunar Geological Conference. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 8/27/65)
NASA had selected Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. for contracts to study feasibility of including optical-technology experiments— particularly lasers and large telescopes—in future extended Apollo flights. NASA was also interested in optical communication in deep space, the effects of space environment on optical systems, and related secondary experiments. The program would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 65-223)
Deploring the “belated decision” to finance the space defense of the U.S., syndicated columnist David Lawrence wrote: “It is interesting to note that on October 7, 1963, Louis C. Wyman, Republican, who was then a member of Congress and formerly was attorney general of New Hampshire, submitted alone a minority report to the House appropriations committee, in which he criticized at length the administration’s indifference to the military significance of space developments. He said: ‘As a first priority, rather than racing to the moon, the United States should establish and maintain an integrated weapons system in inner space within manned space capsules that have a capability to observe, intercept and, if necessary, destroy other objects in space.’ “Mr. Wyman’s extensive report will go down in history as a remarkable prophecy as well as an interesting example of how often minority reports become majority opinion.” (Lawrence, Kansas City Times, 9/16/65)
In an article in The Huntsville Times, Richard Lewis said: “If Project Apollo continues at its present pace, the United States will be able to attempt the landing of astronauts on the moon in 1968. . . . “This impression of the status of Apollo . . . was gained by this reporter in tours of both industrial and test centers for the mammoth project. . . . “The story at these centers is this: no new breakthroughs in electronics, mechanics, metallurgy, propulsion or guidance and navigation are required for the program. All major problems are settled. They have been solved or ‘worked around.’ . . . “So well does Apollo appear to be running that there is a strong probability it will overtake the later flights of Project Gemini, the two-man spacecraft program.” (Lewis, Chicago Sun-Times, Huntsville Times, 1/20/65)
NASA awarded a $8,879,832 fixed-price contract to the Univac Division of Sperry Rand Corp., for digital data processors to be used in Project Apollo. The contract also called for computer programing assistance in modifying present computer programs or developing new ones for Project Apollo requirements, (nasa Release 65-50)
NASA announced management assignments in the Apollo Applications area: msc would be responsible for development and procurement of all standard and modified spacecraft (Command, Service, and Lunar Excursion Modules), astronaut activities, flight operations, and integration of experiments in the command and service modules; MSFC would be responsible for development and procurement of launch vehicles, integration of experiments into the Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn instrument units, and s-ivb stages (top stages of both Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles); KSC would assemble, check out, and launch Apollo Applications space vehicles and their associated payloads. Proposals for possible Apollo Applications experiments were expected to be submitted by the world scientific community, industry, other Government agencies, and the entire NASA organization. (NASA Release 65-381)
NASA’s ranger ix, equipped with six television cameras, was successfully launched toward the moon from Cape Kennedy by an Atlas-Agena B. After the Agena had carried the 800-lb. ranger ix into 115-mi.-altitude parking orbit with 17,500 mph orbital speed, the Agena engines were cut off. Second burn of the Agena lasted about 90 sec., increasing the velocity to about 24,525 mph and freeing ranger ix from the major pull of the earth’s gravity, ranger ix then continued on its 2*/2-day, 245,000-mi. trip to the moon. About 70 min. after launch, NASA announced the spacecraft had been commanded to deploy its solar panels that would convert solar energy to electrical power for its equipment. Projected target was the crater Alphonsus, about 12° south of the moon’s equator, where gaseous emissions had been reported. On the day of impact, Alphonsus would be illuminated by slanting sunlight, producing long shadows and bringing out subtle surface features. The terminator—dividing line between the dark and sunlit portions of the moon—would be only 11° from Alphonsus. Five hours after lift-off, NASA announced that ranger ix’s course was so accurate it would hit the moon only 400 mi. north of the crater target; an inflight maneuver would be executed later to correct this small course error, (nasa Release 65-25; Wash. Post, 3/22/65; Sehl-stedt, Balt. Sun, 3/22/65; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65; WSJ, 3/22/65)
Tass had reported that Soviet astronomers believed the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguished chemically and in mineral content from deeper layers. “Highly accurate and reliable” observation had been made by a Gorky University team headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the Soviet Union’s leading authority on radio emanations of the moon. (Sha-bad, Louisville Courier-]ournal, 1/31/65)
NASA would negotiate with International Latex Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for development and production of Project Apollo flight suits and a portable life support system for extravehicular activities during earth-orbital flights and on the lunar surface. International Latex would receive about $10 million to produce the flight suits, consisting of a liquid-cooled undergarment, constant-wear garment, pressure garment assembly, and thermal-micrometeoroid protective over-garment. Hamilton Standard, under separate contract, would receive about $20 million to produce the life-support system: a backpack weighing about 65 lbs. containing an oxygen system, thermal control system, and communications equipment. Present plans called for the pressure suit to be worn during the latter phase of the Apollo/Saturn IB earth orbital mission series and during Apollo/Saturn V missions. Gemini pressure suits would be used on initial Saturn ib missions, (nasa Release 65-346)
Ten areas on the moon had been selected by NASA for planning photography by the Lunar Orbiter spacecraft next year. Areas included examples of all major types of moon surface to permit assessment of their suitability for spacecraft landings. Nine of the sites were within the area proposed for Apollo manned landings; eight were potential sites for Surveyor softlanding spacecraft. The 10 areas were located along the moon’s equator beginning at about 43° east longitude and stretching to 65° west longitude, (nasa Release 65-335)
Louis Walter, gsfc geochemist, told ap reporter his research with tektites indicated lunar surface may be sand-like. The key to this conclusion lay in Walter’s discovery of the presence of coesite in tektites, believed to be particles of the moon sent into space when meteorites impact the lunar surface. Coesite, also found around the world at known meteorite craters and sites believed to have sustained meteoritic impacts, is a form of silicon dioxide—a major constituent of sand—produced under high pressure. “If we accept the lunar origin of tektites, this would prove or indicate that the parent material on the moon is something like the welded tuft that we find in Yellowstone Park, Iceland, New Zealand, and elsewhere,” according to Walter. Welded tuft was said to have some of the qualities of beach sand, (ap, Chic. Trib., 3/1/65)
