Little Joe II launch vehicle boosted a five-ton unmanned Apollo spacecraft to 15-mi. altitude from wsmr in test of ability of Launch Escape System (Les) to rescue the spacecraft from an abort at medium altitude. Planned pitch-up maneuver was executed and satisfactory launch escape vehicle performance demonstrated; successful canard operation caused command module to stabilize in proper attitude. After jettison of the Les, the hard part of the boost protective cover, and the forward heat shield, command module made safe descent on its three main parachutes. Test, conducted at maximum-Q conditions, was slightly marred by telemetry failure, (nasa Release 65-348; upi, NYT, 1/21/66,10; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/21/66)
Johnson Administration could not increase NASA’s FY 1968 budget because of Vietnam war, but it could make a pobcy decision on a post-Apollo program, wrote Robert Hotz, in Aviation Week. "What it will take to get this effort going is some political courage to restate the necessity of proceeding beyond Apollo, a decision to chart a specific course from the available alternatives and some modest Fiscal 1968 funding to retain the technical resources that will be required for the future—particularly engineering and scientific manpower. This combination of activity has already been deferred one year beyond its critical moment by the Johnson Administration. Delay for another fiscal year could impose a braking effect from which eventual acceleration would be much more costly and much less effective.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 10/10/66, 21)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft, which entered lunar orbit Aug. 27, stopped transmitting at 2:30 gmt Oct. 1 when its batteries were exhausted, Tass reported. Spacecraft had completed 277 orbits around moon and had sent 137 transmissions of scientific information and trajectory data to monitoring stations on earth. Results would be published later. (Tass, 10/4/66; Tass, Pravda, 10/5/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) ascent engine test completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
nasa selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $17-million costplusincentive-fee contract to manufacture four Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep). The 170-lb. packages containing scientific instruments to measure lunar surface characteristics and atmosphere would be carried to moon in Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) on initial Apollo landing missions and would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year after crew’s departure from lunar surface. Contract would be managed by msc. (nasa Release 66-63)
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Univ. of Chicago astrophysicist, was one of 11 scientists named by President Johnson to receive 1966 National Medal of Science. (Pres. Doc., 1/2/67, 1832-3) Landing sequence began when spacecraft was oriented vertically to the moon. At 43-mi. (69-km.) altitude, radar system aimed at lunar surface and turned on retrorocket, and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to 18 mph, instrument capsule was ejected and softlanded. Four minutes later, its petal-like covering opened, its antenna opened, and radio transmissions began. 18 hrs. after touchdown, luna xiii began photographing a panorama of the moon’s surface. Pictures showed barren, heavily pitted landscape littered with stones ranging upward in size from one inch, which Soviet scientists concluded had resulted from either volcanic eruptions or impacting meteoroids. There was no evidence of a thick layer of dust. In addition to photographic equipment, spacecraft also carried two mechanical manipulators to test firmness and density of lunar soil: (1) a rod which was driven into surface with specific force; and (2) a meter which measured soil’s resistance to radiation. Analysis of data indicated that lunar surface could bear manned spacecraft and that soil from 8- to 12-in. depth was similar to medium-density terrestrial soil. Also onboard were a dynograph which tested firmness of lunar surface by recording duration and force of impact impulse, and a radiation meter which revealed that moon’s surface reflected about 25 per cent of electrically-charged particles which struck it. Tass commented on LUNA xm’s successful mission: "There is no doubt now that it is these cosmic stations that can supply the information permitting a new approach to solve such important problems of science as the origin of the solar system, the origin and development of life on other planets, and the internal structure of celestial bodies.” (NYT, 12/25/66, 1, 40; 12/26/66, 19; 12/31/66, 6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/66, A3; 12/27/66, A4; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, Al; 12/31/66, 1,	7)	.	.	.	.	. .	.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have reached basic agreement on text of treaty for free and peaceful exploration of moon and outer space. Text would be presented within next two or three weeks for approval of U.N. General Assembly. U.S. was said to have agreed that all countries —not just U.N. members—should be allowed to sign treaty. Communist China, East Germany, North Vietnam, and North Korea would then be free to adhere to it if they chose. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 78)
Urgency of NASA decision on post-Apollo program was discussed by Karl Abraham in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. He noted Saturn V’s potential for solar system exploration and many scientists’ fear of overcommitment to investigation of the moon. Among other factors involved, Abraham said, NASA "must consider how particular programs will affect its farflung field centers and their specialized work . .. some are so highly specialized that a sharp change of direction in rocketry or spacecraft and satellite objectives would tear them apart unless sufficient advance time were allowed for gradual changeovers to the new missions.” (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/17/66; CR, 2/10/66, A704)
T-38 aircraft of M/G Irving H. Branch (usaf), Commander of Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, crashed over Puget Sound when attempting an instrumented approach to Boeing Field, Seattle, during rainy weather. Branch was enroute from Edwards afb; his body was later recovered from Puget Sound by divers. (Seattle Times, 1/6/66, 31) During week of January 3: Representatives of U.S. Dept, of Agriculture’s Plant Quarantine Div. met with NASA’s Planetary Quarantine Committee to discuss handling and disposal of soil and rock samples brought to earth from the moon or other planets. A Dept, of Agriculture spokesman warned that without precautions, insects and microorganisms from outer space could conceivably be brought to earth on returning spacecraft and multiply unchecked in an environment that would not control them. (NYT, 1/9/66, 58)
NASA was considering landing unmanned Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) equipped with an Apollo-type lunar television camera on the moon before the first manned mission, Aviation Week reported. Photographs from the camera, which would be mounted externally and coupled with a scanning device to permit broad coverage, would provide mission planners with information on lunar surface characteristics. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 36)
NASA selected Dynatronics, Inc., to provide 18 additional pulse code modulated (Pcm) telemetry decommutator systems for Project Apollo communications under $2.3-million fixed-price contract. Systems would receive, identify, sort, and prepare "real time” and "onboard stored” data. (NASA Release 66-114)
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne)—the Spanish national telephone company under nasa contract—awarded ITT contract to establish a ground station terminal complex on Grand Canary Island to support communications for U.S. Apollo mission. Stations, equipped with 42-ft. parabolic antenna reflectors, super-cooled low-noise amplifiers, and 10-kw transmitters, would furnish multichannel telephone and telegraph service, (itt Release)
Analysis of NASA lunah orbiteh i’s orbit led to assumption that moon is homogeneous, not layered, Dr. C. L. Goudas of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories said in an interview with Walter Sullivan of the New York Times. He said its shape—-flattened at the poles with several bulges at the equator and slightly pear-like—was not "dominated by a 'frozen tide.’ ” Gamma ray recordings by U.S.S.R.’s luna x spacecraft indicated similar conclusion; lunar surface lacked emissions typical of granites, which are associated with layering. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/27/66, E7)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. introduced their draft space law treaties at opening session of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’s Legal Subcommittee, meeting in Geneva to discuss peaceful cooperation in exploring the moon and other celestial bodies. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told Subcommittee that although drafts were different in scope, they could be reconciled if there were good will and common purpose to reach agreement. Soviet representative Platon Morozov charged U.S. should not speak of peace in outer space while continuing its "shameful aggressive war on the peaceful people of Vietnam.” (Reuters, NYT, 7/12/66; Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A23)
NASA announced schedule changes in manned Apollo flights because of launch vehicle and spacecraft development problems: second manned flight of an Apollo spacecraft (AS-205), scheduled for spring 1967, was postponed and no new date set; AS-205 prime crew Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham became backup crew for AS-204 mission—first manned Apollo flight—scheduled for first quarter of 1967. (nasa Release 66-295)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $4.2-million, fixed-price contract to provide six computer complexes to support Apollo command-module and lunar-module simulators at msc and ksc by March 1967. (nasa Release 66-254)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) descent engine, Phase II, test began at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
arc’s new Hypervelocity Free Flight Facility would be fully operational by the end of July, nasa announced. "Light-gas guns” would fire free-flying spacecraft models into three wind tunnels. Muzzle velocities up to 20,000 mph against an air stream flowing up to 10,000 mph in the opposite direction would enable models to achieve test speed of 30,000 ,mph, simulating atmosphere reentry flight from moon or planets. (nasa Release 66-189; arc Release 66-10)
General Dynamics Corp. received eight-month, $275,000 msfc contract to investigate concepts of large space structures having possible post-Apollo use. Three structures which could fly as Apollo Applications (Aa) payloads on Saturn launch vehicles would be selected, evaluated, and validated for immediate useful application in space, (msfc Release 66-245)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x completed its 284th orbit around moon and transmitted Communist anthem, "Internationale,” on command from Soviet center of deep space communications. Instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 5/10/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
28-member Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began article-by-article examination of drafts by U.S. and U.S.S.R. for proposed treaty governing exploration of space. U.S. Ambassador to U.N. Arthur J. Goldberg announced that U.S. had agreed to extend negotiations beyond proposal for treaty to ban military use of moon and other celestial bodies to cover "space itself along the lines proposed by the Soviet Union.” Agreed text would be presented to U.N. General Assembly in New York in September. (NYT, 7/22/66, 11)
Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology, received patent for an astronomical clock to keep track of the movements of the sun, moon, stars, and tides; provide a perpetual calendar; and show local and world time. Dr. Spilhaus said his clock could aid astronomers and navigators. (Jones, NYT, 5/7/66, 35)
NASA Lunar Orbiter, scheduled to orbit moon in spring 1966, might photograph luna ix to gain perspective dimensions of lunar surface and determine spacecraft’s size and extent of damage caused by landing, the New York Times speculated, luna ix’s landing area, the Ocean of Storms, was not included in original flight plan of 10 regions to be photographed. (NYT, 2/7/66, 4)
Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Alexander Lebedinsky, professor; and Alexander Vinogradov, geochemist, held 216-hr. televised press conference in Moscow on the luna ix mission. Keldysh said U.S.S.R. had mastered the soft-landing technique and was planning more soft-landing missions in 1966 to obtain information on physical conditions on the moon, composition of lunar rock, and variations in lunar temperature. He said the next major challenge would be designing a spacecraft capable of returning men to earth from the moon and called for U.S. "cooperation not competition” in a program for manned lunar landing, luna ix’s mission was "only to photograph the surface of the moon and measure cosmic radiation,” Keldysh said. The full panorama of the lunar surface included 6,000 lines and was transmitted to earth in 100 min. Spacecraft contained no solar batteries. Lebedinsky revealed that luna ix had "shifted between the second and third transmissions of the panorama, and as a result, the inclination of the phototelevision camera changed several degrees, while the camera itself shifted its position several centimeters.” Keldysh added: "It may be that the station landed on an unstable small stone, or perhaps the ground settled slightly. Such a very small deformation could occur because of temperature changes on the moon or a certain mechanical impact by the station itself.” He expressed confidence that the lunar surface could support manned spacecraft. Lebedinsky said luna ix had measured rate of radiation in outer space at 30 millirads a day and that the spacecraft had detected additional radiation on lunar surface—apparently produced by nuclear reactions from cosmic rays hitting moon’s upper layers—but he did not disclose amount. Vinogradov reported that lunar surface was hard, porous, volcanic cracked rock, Dut acknowledged that other areas might be different. Keldysh announced that venus ii and venus hi spacecraft, launched Nov. 12 and Nov. 16, 1965, respectively, were scheduled to approach Venus March 1. (Wash. Post, 2/11/66; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66; Sullivan, NYT, 2/11/66, 17)
surveyor i bounced two to three inches upward on first impact with lurain June 2, jpl announced. According to data returned by 620-lb. spacecraft, signals generated by strain gauges indicated the three shock-absorber legs had all landed simultaneously on a horizontal surface. Eight-inch-diameter circular footpads rebounded clear of surface before settling on moon. Spacecraft exerted pressure of about 0.5 psi on lurain after it came to rest. Pressure of footpads at impact was about 8 psi. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/25/66, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/56, A12; AP, NYT, 7/25/66, C3; Tech. Wk, 8/1/66, 9)
"The answer to the housing problem lies on the way to the moon,” technologist and Southern Illinois Univ. research professor Buckminster Fuller told Wolf Von Eckardt of the Washington Post. Much of the complex apparatus used in development of closed ecological systems for long manned space flights could be used in terrestrial housing, Fuller said. He envisioned enclosing the necessary machinery in a "little black box. . . . We are investing $7 billion in it. It weighs 500 pounds. We can probably mass-produce it for $2 a pound. "That means we can give all the things they need foremost in a house —water, heat, cooling and waste regeneration—for $1000. And we can give it to them without tying them down to real estate with its wastefully expensive water pipes and sewers . . . with high-pressure sprays and chemical regeneration, a man can quench his thirst and clean himself for a long time with just a glass of water. "[It] . . . also solved the pollution problem. . . .” (Von Eckardt, Wash. Post, 10/2/66, Gil)
Edgar M. Cortright, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications in support of NASA’s FY 1967 authorization, discussed the merits of the Apollo and Surveyor programs: "The scientific advantages of having Surveyors in the program along with Apollo is the ability to sample more sites and to determine what areas of the moon are worth visiting by man, for example, in addition to going to sites that man is not likely to for the next decade or more—up near the poles and certain of the mountain regions. "We would like to help develop this total strategy of exploration of the Moon in a sensible way. We think automated equipment continues to have a role to play. . . . "I think there is nothing we can fly on Surveyor that would improve or even come close to equalling what can be done by the Apollo once it gets there. In other words, bringing a sample back is so much better than doing analyses on the lunar surface.” (Transcript)
Success of U.S.S.R.’s luna ix and luna x missions supported two important conclusions, suggested the New York Times in an editorial: "The Soviet Union is now well ahead of the United States in scientific exploration of the moon; Moscow’s scientists are straining to beat this country in achieving man’s first round-trip to the moon. . . . "But no matter which nation will be first to conquer the moon, it is important to clarify the legal issues arising from this development. There should be general international agreement that the moon is the property of all mankind and not of any one nation . . . [and] is open for research by scientists of all nations. . . .” (NYT, 4/5/66, 36M)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii was probably less than 100 mi. from moon, reported director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Sir Bernard Lovell. He said: "Last night the signals from tbe probe Were steady and indicated that, contrary to luna x and xi, it was ejected into orbit without rotation. That means that potentially it was a more successful exercise.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/66)
Defense Electronics, Inc., received a $2,380,000 contract from usaf for telemetry equipment for Apollo airborne tracking aircraft. Firm would supply C-135 trackers with prediction playback monitors and other equipment to provide communications link to Apollo spacecraft prior to insertion into lunar trajectory. (Wash. Post, 4/5/66, C7)
$3,000 block of magnesium used as vibration test fixture for Lunar Excursion Module’s propellant-gaging system brought $28.14 in Los Angeles junk yard. Two trash collectors had diverted block from Apollo project into their disposal truck while emptying trash cans at Giannini Corp., Duarte, Calif. They were booked on suspicion of grand larceny, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A6)
Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Tass as saying that he was in favor of strict international law governing cooperation in space. Through agreement, all stations, equipment, and spacecraft sent to moon or the planets could be available for use by representatives of other states, he noted. "However, all this would be justified only if the moon and the other celestial bodies are used by all treaty participants for peaceful purposes.” (Tass, 10/26/66)
nasa selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and Martin Co. for negotiations of parallel one-year $l-million fixed-price study contracts on integration of experiments and experiments support equipment in space vehicles and spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. Companies would define experiment integration work (payload integration in Apollo lunar module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument unit, and S-1VB stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles.) Contracts would be managed by msfc. (nasa Release 66-137)
Launch from etr of first unmanned Apollo spacecraft, scheduled for Feb. 23, was postponed because of cloudy, uncertain weather that would hamper visual and long-range photographic coverage of liftoff. {NYT, 2/23/66, 20; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, Al; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, A6)
luna ix was launched by U.S.S.R. on a trajectory toward the moon, Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally. Launch was apparent attempt to softland on the lurain. (Pravda, 2/3/66, USS-T Trans.)
luna x completed its 150th orbit of the moon and marked Lenin’s birthday by beaming back to earth the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” (upi, NYT, 4/23/66, 5)
Plans for manned solar astronomical mission to orbit earth in Apollo spacecraft during period of maximum solar activity beginning in 1968 were announced by NASA. Mission objectives would be to acquire high-resolution measurements and observations of structure and behavior of sun above earth’s atmosphere and to test man’s capabilities for conducting astronomical observations in space, msfc would have project and experiment development responsibility, (nasa Release 66-232)
General Precision Equipment Corp. received $8.6-million nasa contract to provide three sets of equipment to modify Apollo simulators at ksc. {WSJ, 11/2/66, 3)
President Johnson sent FY 1967 budget request to Congress including total space budget of $6.8 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5,012 billion (nasa had originally requested $5.58 billion); dod, $1.65 billion; aec, $173.7 million; Environmental Science Services Administration, $27 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.8 million. NASA R&D program was a major area of reduced expenditure with reduction of approximately $186 million (comparedwith FY1966 appropriation) mostly absorbed by the sharp drop in requirements for Project Gemini. With only three flights remaining to be made in FY 1967, the total budget dropped from $226.6 million in FY 1966 to $40.6 million requested for FY 1967. Sum included $19.1 million for the spacecraft and $8.5 million for mission support. There was also a reduction of some $54 million in lunar and planetary exploration and $12 million in physics and astronomy. Funding for Project Apollo increased slightly—from $2,967 billion in FY 1966 to $2,974 billion, including $1.2 billion for spacecraft (as compared with FY 1966’s $1.17-billion level). $100 million requested for Apollo Applications (Aa) program—once considered the single program with any potential for new major funding—was not approved. Major portions of the dod space budget would be spent on development of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)—which would be slowed down with no increase in funds over the $150 million allowed in FY 1966; development and launch operations costs of the Titan III launch vehicle; continuation of the reconnaissance and Vela nuclear detection satellite programs; navigational satellite launches; and initial launch of a satellite by the Defense Communications Satellite System, dod budget also provided for initiation of procurement of the FB-111B aircraft and development of a new short-range air-to-surface missile (Sram). aec’s budget allotment for space programs included $78 million for Project Rover; $39.5 million for testing of the Nerva engine system; and $8.2 million for testing of the Snap-8 nuclear reactor. essa’s Tiros weather satellite program would involve expenditures in FY 1967 of $17 million for spacecraft and launchings and approximately $10 million for data acquisition, processing, and archiving. faa’s FY 1967 budget request for $758 million contained $80 million for six more months of supersonic transport research. (Text; Wash. Post, 1/25/66, A10; Schmeck, NYT, 1/25/66, 1; Av. Wk., 1/31/66, 23, 29, 30; M&R, 1/31/66, 25)
Scheduled test of Apollo Launch Escape System (Les) at WSMR was postponed indefinitely due to heavy cloud cover. Countdown for the Little Joe II had proceeded to minus 30 min. [See Jan. 20.] (upi, NYT, 1/19/66, 38)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg discussed space role of nuclear energy in keynote address at Western Electronic Show and Convention in Los Angeles. In addition to advantages of nuclear propulsion, Dr. Seaborg said Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) systems offered: (1) independence of sunlight, permitting use in shadow of a planet or moon and at great distances from the sun; (2) reduced atmospheric drag and propellant weight for maintaining low orbits of manned orbiting stations; and (3) larger quantities of electric power. He suggested nuclear power systems assembled on the moon could not only provide heating, cooling, and electric power, but could extract water and minerals and help produce synthetic food. (Text)
Television system on U.S.S.R.’s luna ix, which transmitted first pictures from moon Feb. 3-6, weighed less than 1.5 kgs. (3.3 lbs.), disclosed the Soviet designers of this equipment in an Izvestia interview. Since the TV camera had to "distinguish minute details of the surface and transmit to earth simultaneously the landscape around the spot where it landed,” a miniature Vega photocamera with lens that could "photograph at distances from two meters to infinity without focusing” had been used. First "radio communication session with the moon” began within 4 min. 10 sec. after the soft-landing and first television reportage began within seven hours. Complete panoramic scanning took 100 min. Future probes of moon’s surface would use camera coupled with microscope for minute study of the lurain. (Izvestia, 2/19/66, 1)
After trip from Seal Beach, Calif., aboard usns Pt. Barrow, S-II-F facilities stage—nonflight version of Saturn V/Apollo launch vehicle’s 2nd stage—arrived at ksc for use in testing launch facilities. Stage would be mated with two other facilities stages and an Apollo spacecraft mockup to form the 365-ft.-tall Saturn V launch vehicle. This would mark first time all major components would have been joined in the Saturn V configuration, (msfc Release 66-47)
Hughes Aircraft Co. engineer’s smuggling of a small U.S. flag on nasa’s surveyor I spacecraft which softlanded on the moon June 2 was a breach of discipline and a violation of international space policy, wrote Joshua Lederberg in the Washington Post. ". . . NASA policy requires 'minimum contamination’ so that the moon can remain a useful preserve for the detection of any life that might be transported by, say, meteorites. This calls for 'clean room’ standards during the assembly of spacecraft components. "A bootlegged flag which could not have been subjected to such control for decontamination is a clear violation of a policy to which this country’s honor has been attached and calls for strenuous disciplinary measures to insure the integrity and credibility of purpose of our future exploratory missions.” (Lederberg, Wash. Post, 8/7/66)
nasa might have attempted to send Surveyor spacecraft to the moon in tion Week contended. NASA had wanted to rush Surveyor into launch that would have landed during lunar night rather than preferred daylight opportunity, to ensure that U.S. achieved first soft-landing before U.S.S.R. (Av. Wk., 7/4/66, 15)
New York Times reported hint by Leonid I. Dubrovin, chief of 11th U.S.S.R. Antarctic expedition, broadcast by radio from Mirny Antarctic station, "that the Soviet Union planned to use the Antarctic as a testing ground for manned landings on the moon.” Dubrovin had said fierce Antarctic conditions would test man’s adaptability and scientists could learn much there "that would help man to survive in the desolate conditions of the moon.” (NYT, 5/1/66, 15)
Cosmonaut-pilots would head crews of all spacecraft landing on the moon in the future because landing "cannot be fully trusted to machines,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev predicted in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Belyayev, who manually landed voskhod ii March 19, 1965, said that two methods of braking were possible: jet engines and use of aerodynamic forces. (Tass, 11/4/66)
All primary mission objectives of first unmanned Apollo Saturn IB mission Feb. 26 were achieved and flight was very satisfactory according to initial evaluation of test results, nasa announced. Guidance and control systems performed well; both S-IB and S-IVB trajectories and velocities were normal and no structural problems were found in either stage or instrument unit. Quality of data received at ground stations was excellent and few losses occurred in expected 1,300 measurements telemetered. All spacecraft systems and subsystems performed as planned with two exceptions: (1) one of the main parachute harness legs failed to sever after landing, thus retaining chute attached to module; and (2) Service Module (Sm) propulsion system exhibited below nominal performance during both firing periods resulting in reentry speed about 500 mph less than 18,500 mph expected, but sufficient to evaluate performance of heatshield for orbital missions. Earth landing system functioned properly to safely recover Cm, and unsevered parachute was recovered for post-mission examination. Spacecraft would be flown to Downey, Calif., for detailed inspection by nasa and naa Apollo officials and tests for improvements, (nasa Proj. Off.; msfc Release 66-51)
More than 1,500 building tradesmen staged one-day strike at ksc to protest nasa’s method of awarding construction contracts. Work on three key Apollo projects was delayed by walkout, which had been called by Brevard (County) Building and Construction Trades Council, but preparations for July 18 Gemini X mission continued uninterrupted, (upi, NYT, 7/14/66, 21)
Soviet proposal for keeping moon free of weapons was presented to U.N. Secretary General U Thant by Ambassador Nikolay T. Fedorenko, head of the Soviet delegation to the U.N. Four principles were suggested as basis for international agreement: "1—The moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration and use by all states without any discrimination. All states enjoy freedom of the scientific exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies on an equal basis and in accordance with the basic principles of international law. "2—The moon and other celestial bodies should be used for peaceful purposes only. No military bases and installations including installations of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction should be stationed on the moon and other celestial bodies. "3—The exploration and use of the moon and other celestial bodies should be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all mankind. They are not subject to appropriation or any territorial claim. "4—In the course of the exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies, the states proceed from the principles of cooperation and mutual assistance and carry on their activities with due account of the respected interests of other states for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.” Proposal paralleled treaty suggested by President Johnson May 7. (Marder, Wash. Post, 6/1/66, Al)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the press that luna x spacecraft had gone into orbit around the moon, but that "all may not be well” with it. He suggested that luna x was tumbling uncontrollably in orbit around moon at distance of 300 or 400 mi.; this theory evolved after Jodrell Bank detected a series of maneuvers beginning at 12:50 p.m. est—15 min. after Jodrell Bank had first picked up luna x’s signals. Frequency of the signals had begun to decrease, indicating the probe was under the moon’s gravitational pull at a distance of about 2,000 mi.; signals then faded out entirely, suggesting that the retrorockets had been fired and the probe had landed. At that point Lovell said: "We think Luna 10 landed at 1:44 P.M. [est].” Minutes later, however, signals again picked up and the situation became "extremely obscure.” He concluded: "At last hearing our signals could be interpreted as coming from a tumbling spacecraft. We find it difficult to believe that it is meant to be tumbling.” U.S.S.R. had announced luna x’s lunar-orbit mission after March 31 launch. Sir Bernard’s theory came a day before Soviet announcement of mission results [see April 4]. (NYT, 4/4/66, 9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/4/66; Wash. Post, 4/4/66, Al)
nasa invited aerospace industries to propose definition studies of integrating experiment equipment to be used in spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications missions. Studies would define experiments integration work in the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument units, and top stages of Saturn IB and V vehicles; they would include consideration of mission analysis, experiment equipment, installation and integration of equipment, specialized crew requirements, launch facility requirements, tracking, and other support requirements. Two or more firms would be selected for negotiation of parallel nine-month study contracts, (nasa Release 66-14)
U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported that U.S.S.R.’s luna xii spacecraft had apparently entered orbit around moon and was transmitting telemetry but no photographic signals. U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Oct. 22 launch, (upi, NYT, 10/26/66, 10; Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A16)
U.S. gave U.N. proposed treaty on exploration of moon and other celestial bodies and asked that U.N. Outer Space Legal Subcommittee meet July 12 to discuss it. Draft—based on May 7 statement by President Johnson urging treaty to reserve celestial bodies for peaceful purposes— declared such bodies open equally to all countries, subject to claim by none, and off limits to nuclear weapons, weapon testing, military maneuvers, and fortifications. Soviet source said U.S.S.R. had submitted similar treaty earlier in day; text of proposal was not made public [see June 17]. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4)
Two photographs of the moon produced at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station by feeding radio transmissions from luna ix into newspaper telephoto machine were shown on British television. Each picture took eight minutes to receive and was recorded at 100 lines to one inch for finished 10- by 11-in. photo. Sir Bernard Lovell, station director, said in a television interview that photos "seem to destroy the theory that the moon’s surface is covered with dust several feet thick. There may be a few inches of dust, but the pictures tend to confirm the view of the moon’s surface as hard, spongelike pumice stone substance. "It would be perfectly satisfactory for landing not only heavy vehicles but also men.” Lovell pointed out rock-like pinnacles estimated to be 10- to 20-ft. tall; small stones, some less than one inch in diameter; the curved horizon of the moon; and sharp shadows which indicated the sun was casting the shadow. He emphasized, however, necessity of knowing the proper scale before photos could be meaningfully interpreted. Lovell said luna ix had landed in a location which would receive sunlight for 14 days, thereby permitting solar power to replenish its batteries. (Wash. Post, 2/5/66, Al, A6; Sullivan, NYT, 2/5/66, 1, 10)
George C. White, Jr., chief of nasa Hq. Apollo Spacecraft and Vehicle Test Performance Office, was appointed Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
National Science Foundation and National Foundation for the Advancement of Arts and Humanities urged in comments filed jointly with fcc that satellite system be devised that would "permit the distribution of high-quality programs in the arts, humanities, and sciences to remote areas in the Nation where educational and cultural opportunities are often minimal.” Comments were filed in response to fcc request for suggestions on establishment of comsat facilities by organizations other than Government and communications companies. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A18) During November: Two tests important to launch of nasa’s first manned Apollo mission had been successfully completed at msc. First was six-day manned Apollo systems test of spacecraft 008 which was conducted in Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory chamber. Second was entry-egress training in Gulf of Mexico for AS-204 prime and backup crews, (msc Roundup, 11/11/66, 8; naa s&id Skywriter, 11/11/66, 1, 2)
NASA awarded Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. nine-month, $250,000 contract extensions to continue evaluating optical experiments for possible future extended Apollo space flights, (nasa Release 66-300)
luna x completed 218th orbit of moon after a total of 120 radio communications periods, Tass announced. Equipment was functioning normally, and radio link was said to be stable. (Tass, 4/30/66)
"Whole towns” on the moon, complete with dome-like buildings linked by tunnels and parks under transparent hoods, might be constructed in 20th century, Soviet architect Nikolay Kolomiyets suggested in Krasnaya Zvezda. Kolomiyets said the moon town should provide a safe shelter for its inhabitants and be attractive as well. Best construction material would probably be lunar rocks. "It can be expected that after treatment with alkalis, lunar rocks can be used to build walls and roofs by pouring, just as they are made on earth by pouring concrete.” (Tass, 10/29/66)
Clarence C. Gay, Jr., Acting Director of Gemini Test, became Chief, Apollo Spacecraft Test, Apollo Test Directorate at nasa Hq. (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
Fire in altitude chamber used to simulate environment of Apollo Command Module (Cm) at AiResearch Manufacturing Div. Torrance (Calif.) Facility severely damaged Apollo Environmental Control System, which had undergone 480 hrs. 37 min. of a 500-hr.-duration qualification test. Investigating board concluded that probable cause of ignition had been failure of electrical heater tape installed as part of the test set-up, and that some "ground test equipment and materials used . . . were not suitable for application in the vacuum aijd 5 psia 100% oxygen environments.” Board recommended improvement in selection of "some materials used in the Environmental Control System and Apollo Command Module” and pointed to a "potential fire hazard from arcing or direct short circuits.” (Senate, Hearing, Apollo Accident, Pt. 1, 2/7/67, 32-4)
Army Corps of Engineers had established Extra-Terrestrial Research Agency, headed by geologist Alice S. Allen, to coordinate studies of lunar surface in anticipation of moon exploration requirements. Comprehensive study of such surface properties as soil density, light reflectivity, and thermal and electrical conductivity, Corps of Engineers believed, would permit deductions about problems of "walking, digging, and moving of surface loads . . . providing shelter, water supply and necessary construction materials and tools.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, C3) o Properly managed, the value of the returns from Government investment in research and technology outweighed by "orders of magnitude” the investment itself, Dr. Chalmers W. Sherwin, deputy director (research and technology), Defense Department Research and Engineering, told a meeting in Chicago jointly sponsored by the Patent Law Assn, of Chicago and the Chicago Assn, of Commerce and Industry. Sherwin said the value of R&D had been confirmed by "Project Hindsight,” a study covering such systems as the Mark 46 torpedoes, Minuteman II, Hound Dog, Polaris, Sergeant, and Lance missiles. "We are not sure whether good ideas attract 'good5 (that is, flexible) money, or if innovative organizations just 'happen’ to always have such money. Available technology money simply must be spread all over the place in little pockets near the need. It is not the ivory towers which need flexible money the most, it is rather the organizations heavily involved in real problems— particularly in the early stages of development of new systems.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched two unmanned spacecraft, luna xiii, on mission to study the "moon and its close environments,” was following trajectory close to calculated one. cosmos Cxxxvii, carrying instruments for further investigation of outer space, was in orbit with 1,672-km. (1,032-mi.) apogee; 225-km. (140-mi.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 49° inclination, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A3; Anderson, NYT, 12/22/66, 20)
President Johnson’s statement on surveyor i’s successful soft-landing on the moon: "Overnight the eyes of Surveyor I have become the eyes of the world on the Moon. Another exciting chapter in the peaceful exploration of the universe is open for men to read and share. . . . "The odds against achieving full success in such a difficult mission on the first flight were understandably great. This moment of triumph for all who have participated in the Surveyor project has been well earned, for back of Surveyor’s perfect performance on this first flight are years of hard work, painstaking care, and brilliant engineering. "Today our Nation salutes the highly deserving team of scientists, engineers, technicians, and managers—in Government, industry, and the universities—who have a vision and the skills to pursue it successfully. "As the day approaches when men land on the Moon, it is of the greatest importance that we agree to exchange openly all information that could affect their safety and welfare. It is equally important that we preserve these regions for peaceful, scientific activities. I welcome the constructive approach of the Soviet statement of May 31 on a treaty I have proposed to cover these matters and hope that progress can be made rapidly.” (Pres. Doc., 6/6/66, 728)
LUNA x had detected electrons with energies higher than cosmic radiation, Tass reported: "Data have been obtained which may be interpreted as evidence of the existence in the near-lunar space of fluxes of electrons with energies of tens of thousands of electron volts. These fluxes are 70 to 100 times more intense than the cosmic ray background. Possibly, this phenomenon is due to the earth’s magnetic 'tail.’ Later measurements will permit more positive conclusions on the radiation conditions near the moon.” In addition, preliminary data analysis showed that intensity of the moon’s magnetic field was "somewhat above the level of magnetic fields in free interplanetary space” and that meteorite "particle density” near the moon was higher than in "interplanetary space.” upi reported that U.S. scientists, including Dr. James A. Van Allen, State Univ. of Iowa, believed radiation observed by LUNA X was either the earth’s comet tail or a similar feature produced by the moon itself. Reported level of radiation would be no threat to manned operations near the moon, they said. (Tass, 4/9/66; upi, NYT, 4/10/66, 79; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/10/66, A6)
Flight plan for Lunar Orbiter I, scheduled for launch between Aug. 9 and Aug. 13, had been changed to shift trajectory for mission so photographic spacecraft would pass over surveyor i twice. Stereographic photos, with resolution down to three feet, could thus be obtained. First seven areas selected for Lunar Orbiter photography remained unchanged and included examples of all major types of lurain to permit assessment of suitability for Apollo manned landing missions, (nasa Release 66-193)
NASA announced a change in sequence of two Apollo/Saturn IB launches scheduled for late 1966: AS-202 mission was rescheduled to follow AS-203 mission to "provide additional time for checkout of the Apollo spacecraft to be flown in . . . AS-202.” AS-203 would test Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and verify that orbital operations features of the liquid hydrogen propulsion system were satisfactory, (nasa Release 66-78)
nasa had eliminated final three Surveyors because of good results from Ranger series, surveyors i and n, and lunar ORHITERs i and ii. It had been determined that five remaining Surveyor spacecraft would provide necessary additional information about the moon to support Apollo manned lunar landing mission, (nasa Release 66-318)
Photographic proof that two clouds of "cosmic rubble”' were orbiting the earth in the same path as the moon was announced by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. engineer J. Wesley Simpson. The "rubble” might have come from all over the universe and could offer clues to the earth’s origin, solar winds, and the possibility of life in outer space. Although photographic images were too faint to be reproduced on papeT, they were visible on negatives and when projected on a smooth white surface, (upi, NYT, 9/1/66, 24) During August: Dr. Raymond L, BisplinghofF, head of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Special Consultant to NASA Administrator, wrote in Air Force and Space Digest that there appeared to be widespread lack of public understanding that aeronautical and space developments might have a profound effect on transformation of society: "It is not so much the possession of the new technologies . . . that counts. Of more importance are the quickened spirits, the sharpened intellects, and the developed resources that can permeate the whole fabric of a society.” (AF/SD, 8/66, 86-7)
State Dept, disclosed that on May 26 U.S.S.R. had given U.S. photos taken by luna ix after it softlanded on the moon Feb. 3. (upi, NYT, 6/10/66, 8)
AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg predicted at Univ. of Texas lecture that if man decided to colonize the moon or planets, he would need nuclear energy to make the environments habitable for human beings and large nuclear reactors to provide "planet conditioning”—an outer space version of air conditioning. In addition, reactors could furnish power "to extract water from the rock, to help produce synthetic food and to extract minerals and other materials from the surface.” Dr. Seaborg said he foresaw in the more immediate future the use of nuclear power plants on manned orbiting laboratories: "... it is desirable to operate these stations at the relatively low altitudes of between 100 and 200 nautical miles. For these low orbits the smaller exposed area of nuclear power systems results in greater reductions in the atmospheric drag—and in the pounds of propellant required to keep the station in its assigned orbit. An unmanned scientific or defense system which has to operate close to the Earth will similarly have the advantage of low atmospheric drag if nuclear power systems are used.” (Text; AEC Release s-<5-66)
msc awarded $70,000 contract to Rodana Research Corp. to develop emergency medical kits that would "satisfy all inflight and training requirements for the Apollo Command Module and the Lunar Excursion Module.” Two training units would be delivered for each flight, in addition to one mock-up and six prototype models; they would contain loaded injectors, tablets, capsules, ointment, inhalers, adhesives, and compressed dressings, (msc Release 66-8)
NASA and USN completed an agreement calling for studies by U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office to define a series of experiments aimed at enhancing oceanographic and marine-technology research from manned orbiting spacecraft. Experiments would be considered for use in NASA Apollo Applications earth-orbiting missions and would employ existing or modified Apollo hardware, (nasa Release 66-6)
Apollo Spacecraft Lem Adapter (Sla) was transported by helicopter from Tulsa to msc for series of vibration and acoustics tests in conjunction with other Apollo spacecraft modu’es and a Saturn IB instrument unit. (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1)
Lee R. Scherer, manager of nasa’s Lunar Orbiter program, in interview with Seattle Times reporter Robert L. Twiss, expressed confidence that the Boeing-built spacecraft could help resolve many unanswered questions about the moon. With funding and nasa approval, Lunar Orbiters equipped with devices that could be deployed to the moon could be launched in 1969, yielding valuable scientific information, Scherer said. "We could gain substantial information about other areas of the moon than the site chosen for manned landing.” (Twiss, Seattle Times, 5/12/66)
President Johnson sent a telegram to Nikolay Podgorny, Chairman, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R., on the success of luna ix: "You and the people of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are to be congratulated for the great success of Luna 9. Your accomplishment is one that can benefit all mankind. And all mankind applauds it. Your scientists have made a major contribution to man’s knowledge of the moon and of space.” (Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 166)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, Gerald M. Truszynski, testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "To provide effective support of flight projects, NASA has established a worldwide network of tracking and data acquisition stations. . . . This network, at the present time, consists of ground stations which are operational or under construction at 28 locations. These stations are located in the United States and 16 foreign countries and territories. They represent a total capital investment of over $600 million and are operated by more than 2,500 highly trained NASA, contractor, and foreign national personnel. . ... "Many of the stations being used for Gemini support will also be used for Apollo. Capabilities are being added at these stations while other stations are being established. The network for support of Apollo missions . . . will consist of 10 fixed land stations with 30-foot antennas, three stations with 85-foot antennas, 1 transportable station, 5 instrumentation ships, and 8 instrumentation aircraft. In addition, three 85-foot antenna stations normally used for deep space missions will be used for support of Apollo. . . . "Our efforts are directed toward having the network fully qualified for lunar mission support in 1967.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 383, 387)
msfc Director Dr, Wernher von Braun named Dr. Jerry C. McCall to organize and manage the Experiments and Applications Office—msfc’s portion of Apollo Applications; Stan Reinartz would assist him. (msfc Release 65-307)
