Second of three phases of tests to evaluate use of heavy-lift helicopters for Apollo crew and spacecraft recovery in ksc launch areas was being conducted by NASA and dod at Eglin afb. Tests would develop operational equipment, techniques, and procedures to be used at KSC where standard recovery equipment would he ineffective in case of a launch escape system abort during liftoff because of the surrounding marsh, beach, and surf, (msc Release 67-16)
News briefing on results of Lunar Module (lm) flammability tests, conducted as a result of Jan. 27 Apollo fire, was held at MSC. Using a full-scale boilerplate mockup of LM cabin interior fabricated specifically for the test program by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., fires were deliberately set in 41 tests to investigate the flammability and propagation properties of all interior lm materials, contractor fire-hazard fixes, crew equipment and stowage areas, and apparent propagation paths. Although results indicated that most LM areas were adequately protected against propagation of an accidental fire, four materials which under specific conditions might act as flame propagation media were ordered replaced. In addition, beta cloth containers for food and flight data would be modified to enclose the stored items completely; flight data file and crew procedure notebooks would be redesigned to minimize their flammability; and procedures would be developed to control location and quantity of loose items and to combat onboard fire. Similar tests would be conducted in the Command Module (cm) . (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 12/1/61, A3)
The moon is not a dead body, but a living, breathing organism,” Tass reported following successful completion of lunar surface studies by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XIII. Prof. Nikolay Kozyrev’s 1964 claim that Aristarchus crater had smoke, gas, or dust rising from it had been confirmed by observations from earth of possible lunar volcanoes or eruptions of lunar dust; results of lunar-surface studies; a “special glow” discovered by Pulkovo Observatory near Kepler crater; and “manifestation of moon’s geological life,” recorded in 1966. (upi, NYT, 1/3/67, 10)
House completed general debate on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10340) and was scheduled to resume discussion of bill June 27 when amendments would be considered and final vote taken. During debate Rep. Delbert L. Latta (R-Ohio) criticized the $444.7 million recommended by Committee on Science and Astronautics for the Apollo Applications (aa) program: “. . . we could spend [that money] toward research and possible cure of cancer, stroke, and heart disease, rather than some nebulous undefined program that will take place when—and I emphasize this point—and after we get to the moon. This money is to be spent on hardware after we get to the moon. No one knows when we are going to get there . . . [and] if we spend this money perfecting these vehicles and this hardware today, it might be out of date when we get to the moon. . . .” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, defended the 8444.7-million recommendation. “The manned space flight program—Apollo, Apollo applications and advanced manned missions—drives the Apollo effort into its final phases and begins the work of realizing benefits for man on earth. It supports national security, fosters national growth, expands knowledge, and retains options for the future at a cost the country can well afford. To delay this program is, in effect, to cancel it. Such a decision would put the space plum in the hands of the Soviet Union. . . .” (nasa lar V/68; OR, 6/22/67, H7782, H7797)
Soviet astronomers from Ukrainian Academy of Sciences had produced a lunar astronomical almanac containing data on the locations of stars as seen from the moon, Science Service reported. Star charts of the sky from earth become outdated after several years, but a star chart for the lunar sky had to be revised after only several days. Precession of earth’s axis causes each pole to complete a cone on the celestial sphere every 26,000 yrs; moon’s axis has only an 18.6-yr precessional period which makes construction of a star chart of the lunar sky extremely difficult. (SciServ, NYT, 3/28/67)
Launch of the first manned Apollo mission by March 31, 1968, “is a very difficult milestone to achieve, but it is possible,” George M. Low, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, told the press at msc. All changes in the Apollo spacecraft necessitated by the Jan. 27 Apollo fire had been planned, he said, but until daily scheduling was completed, no date could be set for the mission. Low noted that Apollo parachute landing system might require requalification because design changes had increased spacecraft’s weight by 200-300 lbs, but he indicated that testing, if necessary, could be conducted in summer 1967 without seriously affecting the Apollo schedule. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 15; SBD, 6/8/67, 217)
NASA announced incorporation of at least seven changes in Apollo Lunar Module (lm) program “to reduce the possibility of fire and to increase crew safety” in accordance with Apollo 204 Review Board findings [see April 9]. Changes, which would increase total weight by 25-125 lbs, included: (1) reassessing combustibility of all nonmetallic materials and substituting or redesigning where necessary; (2) reevaluating material acceptability by intentionally starting fires in lm mockup; (3)	modifying water hose and providing a hose nozzle to permit use of water as a fire extinguisher; (4) using a built-in handle, rather than a removable tool, to open hatches; (5) instituting more stringent standards and controls on electrical systems and wiring; (6) adding isolation switches to electrical systems to ensure that no connector is “hot” while being connected or disconnected; and (7) installing TV camera to monitor activity inside LM cabin during ground tests. Changes were being made at Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor, (nasa Release 67-159)
The five-out-of-five successful missions of $200-million Lunar Orbiter project to photograph moon to aid in selecting Surveyor and Apollo landing sites and to contribute to scientific knowledge of moon were reviewed at NASA Hq. press conference. Photographic data provided by Lunar Orbiter I, II, and III and Surveyor I resulted in selection of eight candidate sites. Lunar Orbiter IV provided basis for extending cartographic grid system for front-face mapping around to moon’s hidden side by photographing eastern limb areas. Lunar Orbiter V photographed scientifically interesting areas on moon’s front side, completed farside coverage, and provided supplementary photography of potential Apollo landing sites. Apollo Program Director, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, said that, when “approaching on a pretty flat trajectory at about 30 miles from the landing site . . . details of the topography and the radar return which is coupled into the automatic control and landing system [must be known].” In planning details of approach and landing maneuvers, Phillips said that “a very great deal” had been learned from Orbiter “about the rather unusual light conditions and; the effect of light reflections from the lunar surface under various angles.” Harold Masursky, usgs, explained Lunar Orbiter photographs showed that “apparently the earth and the Moon are very similar in their distribution of high and low ground.” He hoped that “by examination and comparison of ... geologic plot with the selenodetic information . . . [from] the Orbiter series, we will be able to plot the geopotential field . . . and tie it in with geology. ... By studying the Moon we know that it has a long, complex geologic history, that many of the same kinds of things that happen on the earth happen on the Moon. We can now play these two against each other, compare their simulari-ties, contrast their differences, and perhaps'be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth.” Strange moon features looking like watercourses might be dry-gulch arroyos, Harold Spradley said. Because watercourses had originated in volcanic craters and carried “fluidal materials,” volcano’s output— possibly slurry of ash and water—would exist long enough to cut its way through dry lunar surface material. Scientists agreed that orthodox existence of water on “the airless moon” was improbable. Clifford Nelson, LaRC Lunar Orbiter Project Manager, described results of experiments: “. . . density distribution [very nearly homogeneous] in the moon now seems to be resolved . . . center of mass of the moon is displaced toward the earth from the center of its geometrical figure, a situation which would have interesting scientific implications as to the stability of the moon and its origin and history.” Meteoroid penetration rate “in the region covered by lunar orbiter spacecraft is less than one-half the rate in the near earth environment. . . .’’ He said all 13 MSFN stations had successfully tracked and communicated with lunar orbiter, and “orbit determination programs ... in the initial stages of checkout. . . will continue with Lunar Orbiter V.” nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed overall significance of Lunar Orbiter program: “Before the first Lunar Orbiter mission this country had never placed spacecraft into orbit about any other celestial body other than the earth. In all five . . . missions, the spacecraft were not only placed into initial orbits as desired, but then the orbits were changed in accordance with a plan ... set up beforehand, in ... a precision type of operation. . . . Lunar Orbiter and its companion, Surveyor, have shown that we can use sophisticated technology in complicated spacecraft for automated missions to other bodies of the solar system. And it is this kind of capability that we will be using again and again as we continue the exploration of our solar system.” (Transcript)
NASA published the first extensive chart of the far side of the moon. Compiled by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center using NASA-supplied photos, map covered more than 75% of the moon’s hidden side. Approximately 85% of the photos used were provided by NASA Lunar Orbiters I, II, III, and IV; remaining 15% were provided by Soviet Zond III. Map was released to assist astronomers at the International Astronomical Union, convening Aug. 22 in Prague, in naming features on moon’s far side, (nasa Release 67-220)
NASA’s Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, after 1,014 days of flight, reached its closest approach to earth at 29.1 million mi (46.9 million km). (nasa Proj Off) commands to turn its transmitter to low power. Spacecraft telemetry indicated that all systems were operational. The Surveyor V midcourse correction was accomplished at 21:45 Edt Sept, 8, Immediately after the correction, the pressure in the helium supply tank was determined to be decreasing, indicating that the regulating valve did not make a positive closure. Correction of leak was not possible; a descent strategy was developed to overcome the resultant degradation of the vernier engine retrograde capability. Surveyor V softlanded on the moon at 20:46:38 edt on Sept. 10. The landing site was in the Sea of Tranquility at approximate coordinates 23.19°E, 1.52°N, some 18 mi from the target point. The spacecraft took 200- and 600-line pictures of the lunar surface and conducted an alpha backscattering experiment. At lunar sunset, 6:40 am edt, Sept. 24, 18,006 high-quality lunar photographs had been obtained (more than the combined totals from Surveyors / and III). The alpha-backscat-tering instrument had operated for 83 hours on the lunar surface, providing excellent data on the relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar material. To optimize the conditions for lunar-night survival, the spacecraft was operated for short periods at 2%-hr intervals, using compartment heaters, until the battery charge was down to 30 ampere hours, about 4-6 days after lunar sunset. The spacecraft then would be placed in hibernation for the remainder of the lunar night. The vernier engine erosion experiment was conducted at 01.38 edt on Sept, 13, to obtain information on effects of impingement of a high velocity jet-gas stream on the lunar surface. TV pictures were taken of the area under study before and after vernier engine firing. Initially no significant erosion was noted, but follow-on operations with low sun angle photographs and shadow progression studies revealed a crater-like depression under vernier engine number 3 which had not been visible at the higher sun elevations. Surveyor V accomplished all mission objectives. Before touchdown, radar reflectivity data were obtained; touchdown dynamics data were determined at landing time (bearing strength of lunar surface as the ultimate objective). Thermal data were obtained (accumulation of - data throughout the mission was the ultimate objective). The Surveyor program was managed by JPL under ossa direction. Hughes Aircraft Co., under contract to JPL, designed and built the Surveyor spacecraft. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—227; B Sun, 9/11/67; AP, W Star, 9/25/67; Hines, W Star, 9/29/67; W Post, 9/14/67; O’Toole, W Post, 9/30/67; Clark, NYT, 9/30/67)
NASA’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was still functioning after transmitting over 11,000 photos to earth, jpl’s scientist Leonard Jaffe said in Cal Tech lecture. Surveyor I mission had been officially terminated July 21, 1966, after spacecraft’s battery suffered a sudden dip in voltage. (LA Herald-Examiner, 2/1/61)
Injectors for Apollo Lunar Module’s ascent engine had performed in over 100 test firings at Rocketdyne Div.’s laboratory near Los Angeles, the company reported. Injectors had returned automatically to stable combustion after explosive charge was set off to deliberately create rough combustion in several tests. They were developed as backup to the original injectors after rough combustion was noted in test firings. Three designs would be continued through feasibility testing; then the best design would be chosen for development. (Rocketdyne Release)
Haste might have contributed to the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz 1 in which Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov died, Edmund Stevens suggested in Washington Evening Star. He speculated that Soviet leaders, influenced by the goal of orbiting men around the moon by Nov. 7—50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution—had launched Soyuz I before it was fully man-rated. (Stevens, W Star, 5/1/67, Al, A6)
LaRC selected Northrop Ventura Co. to negotiate .|3-million contract to conduct research flight-test program using an all-flexible parawing. Experiments would be performed at various scales with remotely controlled unmanned vehicles to establish a body of parawing technology which could be potentially adapted to manned spacecraft recovery systems. NASA’s goal was to extend recovery capabilities for the AA Program command module (cm) to include land landings in the early 1970’s. Northrop, relying on design criteria gained in earlier LaRC parawing research programs, would evaluate parawings in the 200-600-lb and 5,000-lb payload capacities, including flight tests, before designing 15,000-lb payload system required for the Apollo cm. (nasa Release 67-134)
Evaluation of Apollo 4 mission data . . . continues to confirm initial reports that Spacecraft 017 met all flight objectives without problems,” NASA announced. Detailed systems analyses were still in process, but evidence to date indicated spacecraft systems operated properly during Nov. 9 mission and met all specifications. First Service Propulsion System (sps) burn had occurred as scheduled; second sps burn, however, was 13 sec longer than planned, because of a switchover to ground control after burn was started by onboard guidance and navigation system. Although review of the burn was still being conducted, NASA had already determined that there had been no failure in onboard systems involved. Because of the longer-than-planned SPS burn, spacecraft’s reentry velocity was 0.0058% higher than expected; actual velocity was 24,913 mph, compared with nominal 24,772 mph. Increased velocity caused higher Command Module (cm) maximum heat rate—620 BTUs per sq ft per sec instead of planned 586 BTUs. Maximum rate expected on' lunar return was 480 btus. Maximum g on reentry was 7.3, compared with expected 8.33 g, because of a shallower reentry flight-path angle. Cabin pressure remained between 5.6 and 5.8 psi during entire mission, indicating negligible leakage rate. Cabin air temperature remained stable at 60° F during orbit and increased to 70° F during reentry. Structural performance of the spacecraft and Lunar Test Article 10-R (a simulated lunar module) during launch and boost phase was satisfactory. Earth landing system functioned as planned; all parachutes inflated properly, and recovery aids deployed and operated normally. Heat shield performance was good; maximum char thickness was 34 in, and charring of crew compartment heat shield was less than expected. Fuel cell and cryogenic subsystems functioned normally, with fuel cells producing potable sterile water and demonstrating excellent load-sharing and thermal-control capability. CM and sm reaction-control systems, electrical power subsystem, and spacecraft sequential devices operated normally, with all functions occurring at scheduled times. Guidance and control system and the mission control programmer performed properly. Range-to-go at drogue parachute deployment calculated was 2.2 nm. Comparisons with measured landing point indicated better than predicted performance. All communications objectives were accomplished. Each MSFN station, Apollo tracking ship Vanguard, and at least two of the Apollo/Range Instrumentation Aircraft established two-way communications with the spacecraft as planned. (NASA Release 67-294; Hines, W Star, 12/3/67, A20; SBD, 12/5/67, 172-3)
New York Times commented on congressional cuts in nasa’s FY 1968 budget: “The Senate, ignoring the most obvious of all opportunities to cut nonessential spending, has not only matched the $4.5 billion the House voted for space excursion but tacked on nearly $100 million more to start new programs after the first Americans land on the moon. The certainty that another huge space appropriation will come out of conference on Capitol Hill adds special interest to the fact that twice recently the leading space scientist of the Soviet Union, Prof. Leonid Sedov, has publicly stressed the importance of large-scale international cooperation for manned flights beyond the moon. . . . Now that Professor Sedov has opened the door, the Administration has an opportunity to begin diplomatic explorations to see if the Russians really are serious about replacing senseless rivalry in space with rational international cooperation.” {NYT, 10/7/67, 28) Launches of military espionage spacecraft dominated U.S. space program, Soviet scientists Dr. V. Denisov and F. Soluyanov charged in Krasnaya Zvezda. According to the scientists, of 455 U.S. spacecraft launched by mid-1967, 346 were military satellites which the Pentagon “proposed to use . . . for reconnaissance on a so-called real-time scale, followed by an immediate transmission of information.” Although U.S. “continues to persist that its aspirations are the peaceful utilization of space,” they said, officials “do not hide the fact that NASA builds the scientific-technological foundation for the development of military-space facilities . . . [while dod] finances and controls the planning ... of space armament.” (Miles, PInq, 10/8/67,13C)
Second Saturn V booster’s 1st and 2nd stages were mechanically mated at ksc in preparation for AS-502 unmanned mission to test Apollo spacecraft’s reentry heat shield. Booster’s 3rd stage was added July 13; instrument unit, July 14. (ksc Proj Off; Marshall Star, 7/12/67, 1)
Soviet Academy of Sciences, using results obtained from Luna III and Zond III probes, had handed over to International Commission on Lunar Nomenclature list of objects on other side of moon and their names—list containing 153 objects of invisible hemisphere and two areas of visible hemisphere. Names would honor great scientists of the past and renowned contemporaries from many countries of the world. For two areas of visible hemisphere, it was proposed to call region of first impact of Luna II (1959), the Bay of Lunik; and region of first nondestructive lunar landing of Luna IX apparatus (1966), Bay of Lunar Landing. (S/F, 2/67, 38-9)
Early findings from Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8 and softlanded on moon Sept. 10, were summarized in Science by jpl scientists Leonard D. Jaffe and Robert H. Steinbacher. The 18,006 TV pictures taken Sept. 11—24 included views of interior of crater in which Surveyor V landed, level surface surrounding crater, star and planet sightings for attitude reference, and solar-corona sequence after local sunset. Alpha-scattering instrument produced data on lunar surface chemical composition— oxygen, silicon, and aluminum identified in preliminary evaluation— and showed general chemical composition to be “similar to that of a silicate of a basaltic type.” “Material of basaltic composition at the Surveyor V landing site implies that differentiation has occurred in the moon,” which summary attributed to “internal sources of heat.” Early findings were consistent with hypothesis that “extensive volcanic flows have been responsible for flooding and filling the mare [sea] basins.” Erosion experiment, spacecraft landing effects, and other observations indicated soil had significant amounts of fine-grained material and measurable cohesion. Surveyor V had provided first direct chemical analysis of lunar surface. Lunar magnet experiment produced results, that “are most similar to a terrestrial plateau basalt with no addition of free iron.” (Science, 11/3/67, 631-52)
NASA Surveyor V spacecraft on the moon responded to turn-on commands from Goldstone, Calif., station at beginning of its tourth lunar day. Spacecraft had operated during its second lunar day but had failed to respond during third. Battery was still functioning, and camera and alpha-scattering instrument were responding to commands, (nasa Proj Off; WNews, 12/15/67,5)
NASA revised designations for Apollo and aa missions: (1) all Apollo missions would be numbered sequentially in the order flown with the next Apollo mission to be designated Apollo 4, followed by Apollo 5, etc.; (2) AA missions would be designated sequentially as AAP—1, AAP—2, etc. Number designations would not differentiate between manned or unmanned Uprated Saturn I and Saturn V missions. (Text)
nasa had amended its contract with Bendix Corp. for the ApoUo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) to add a heat flow experiment substation. $2.4-million amendment increased total value of contract to $23.6 million, plus incentive fees. Heat flow subsystem woud measure net outward flux of heat from moon’s interior, providing a comparison of radioactive content of the moon’s interior and earth’s mantle, a thermal history of moon, a lunar temperature-depth profile, and thermal parameters of the first three meters of moon’s crust. (NASA Release 67-135)
The ceremonies in Washington, Moscow and London putting the space treaty into effect mark not only the first major East-West agreement since the nuclear test ban treaty of 1963 but a potential starting point for an even more momentous accord,” New York Times commented on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10. It added that “recent statements by the Soviet Union’s leading space scientist, Professor Leonid Sedov, indicate that the Russians too may be coming around to the conclusion that the costs of going it alone to the moon and beyond outweigh the dimming propaganda magic.” (NYT, 10/11/67)
First two Apollo spacesuits incorporating changes recommended by NASA’s Apollo 204 Review Board were scheduled to arrive at msc in early September for thermo-vacuum and compatibility testing. New suit, designated A-7L, was an improved version of the original A-6L suit. Changes, primarily replacing flammable materials with nonflammable or low-flammability materials, included substitution of: (1) Beta fabric, a nonflammable fiberglass cloth, for Nomex, a high-temperature nylon, in outside layer; (2) Nomex for a more flammable nylon inner layer; and (3) fire-resistant Kapton/Beta fiberglass insulation for aluminized Mylar-Dacron insulation. In addition to its greater fire-resistant properties, spacesuit, which was white rather than blue, was more comfortable and mobile than A-6L. It would be used in all manned Apollo missions during prelaunch and launch phases, and reentry. First production model of spacesuit, manufactured by International Latex Corp.’s Government and Industrial Div. under msc contract, was scheduled for mid-October delivery, (nasa Release 67—222)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1968 budget said in part: “In 1961, this Nation resolved to send a manned expedition to the moon in this decade. Much hard work remains and many obstacles must still be overcome before that goal is met. Yet, in the last few years we have progressed far enough that we must now look beyond our original objective and set our course for the more distant future . . . we have no alternative unless we wish to abandon the manned space capability we have created. “This budget provides for the initiation of an effective follow-on to the manned lunar landing. We will explore the moon. We will learn to live in space for months at a time. Our astronauts will conduct scientific and engineering experiments in space to enhance man’s mastery of the environment. . . .” The President recommended that nasa proceed with the Voyager program for an unmanned landing on Mars in 1973 and continue “other unmanned investigations nearer the earth. . . . “These new ventures are the result of careful planning and selectivity,” Mr. Johnson said. “We are not doing everything in space that we are technologically capable of doing ... we are choosing those projects that give us the greatest return on our investment. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/24/67, S755)
msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, in welcoming address at msc’s twoday Gemini Summary Conference, urged space scientists to avoid “second-guessing” Apollo 204 Review Board because undue speculation on the Jan. 27 accident was a disservice both to the Nation and the Board, (msc Roundup, 2/3/67, 8; W Post, 2/2/61, A2)
Three-man crew for NASA’s first manned Apollo spaceflight (AS
New York Times editorial praised success of nasa’s Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8: “If present indications are confirmed, Surveyor 5 has made one the fundamental scientific discoveries of the century . . . that earth’s natural satellite is made up of the same kind of material as is the earth. “Surveyor 5’s historic finding, if backed by later experiments, must force new consideration of the possibility that the moon was tom from the earth. . . . Certainly much more evidence is required . . . [but] Surveyor 5 has performed a notable feat. Moreover it has demonstrated again how much can be learned from instruments delivered by relatively inexpensive unmanned rockets without the great dangers and huge costs required to send a man to the moon and return him safely to earth.” (NYT, 10/1/67, 12E)
nasa announced Boeing Co. had been awarded incentive fee of 81,811,611 for two missions—Lunar Orbiter IV, 81,061,111; Lunar Orbiter V, 8750,500—completing performance fee portions of Boeing contract and totaling 86,809,053 in such awards for all five Lunar Orbiters. Previous incentive awards—Lunar Orbiter 1, 81,995,312; Lunar Orbiter II, $1,948,725; Lunar Orbiter III, $1,053,405-—had been earned by Boeing. After initial goal to photograph potential moon landing sites had been achieved by first three Lunar Orbiters, NASA’s contract modification set a new goal of more advanced scientific missions for Lunar Orbiter IV and V; Boeing could earn through outstanding performance remaining award fees not earned on previous flights. Modified contract provisions still recognized amounts of original Lunar Orbiter IV and V award fees. nasa’s Incentive Award Fee Board for Lunar Orbiter noted that Lunar Orbiter IV had photographed moon’s “entire front,” and Lunar Orbiter V had completed photography of “opposite side.” (nasa Release 67285)
At MSC the TRW Systems Group had received $10.7-million NASA contract extension to perform spacecraft analysis for Apollo, including studies, technical fact-finding, and investigations for systems in Command, Service, and Lunar Modules. Contract extension would carry through June 1968 and increased total cost of contract to $65.5 million, (msc Release 67-66)
l/g Nikolay P. Kamanin, military commander of Soviet manned spaceflight program, hinted in Zemlya o Vselennaya that U.S.S.R. would use Soyuz-type spacecraft for manned lunar landing. He made no direct mention of Soyuz I spacecraft [see April 23-24]—believed to be heaviest Soviet space vehicle ever launched—but said “payloads of more than 15 tons have already been put into orbit.” These payloads, he said, could soft-land on moon from lunar orbit. (AP, B Sun, 5/10/67)
NASA-sponsored research on equipment used for surviving hard landing on the moon and planets had been conducted by Cal Tech-JPL engineers in simulated operations. Split-second jpl impact tests, which used powerful compressed air guns and a giant slingshot, hurtled equipment against solid backstops at speeds up to 500 feet per second (340 mph). JPl’s engineer, Stan Taylor, explained: “During the brief instant that the test specimen is experiencing the 10,000 g shock, every part of it behaves as though it weighed 10,000 times its normal weight. The bolts supporting a one pound test item have to be good for about five tons.” The experiments had proved that intricate, delicate components required in sophisticated unmanned spacecraft of today and tomorrow could be protected to withstand shocks of 10,000 g. (jpl Release)
msc awarded Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. a $97,000, cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to evaluate Beta fiber, a noncombustible fabric, for possible use in Apollo spacecraft and crew systems equipment, (nasa Release 67—90)
Serious difficulties” had developed in Soviet program to land a man on the moon and it would take “no little time” to solve them, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 2i)
Lunar Orbiter III continued transmitting photos of the lunar surface [see Feb. 8-28]. On March 2—during 149th orbit—final photographic readout was interrupted when film failed to advance in the camera system. Efforts to clear the jammed film and continue readout were unsuccessful. Photographic data had been received on all but 29 of 211 frames, including six of the 12 primary Apollo landing sites and 29 of 31 secondary areas, nasa Hq. program and project officials and LaRC engineers would make an on-site analysis of telemetry time histories and engineering tapes at jpl to determine exact cause of failure. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-46)
msc selected naa’s Rocketdyne Div. to negotiate $5-million, costplusfixedfee contract for design, development, and qualification of a backup injector for Apollo Lunar Module (lm) ascent engine. Contract would provide initially for design feasibility and development testing with provision for delivery of four production injectors if required. Two of the injectors would be used in ground testing at wsmr and remaining two would be held for possible use in flight engines. NASA said present injector, which was being built by Bell Aerospace Corp., was causing unstable combustion in engine chamber and excessive erosion of ablative thrust chamber. Bell was attempting to correct the deficiencies, but “it was decided to develop an injector of a different design in the event the problems cannot be corrected.” (nasa Release 67—207)
jpl announced that 24-hr efforts—begun May 23—to reactivate nasa’s Surveyor 111 spacecraft on the moon after two-week lunar night were continuing. Officials said they were not concerned about spacecraft’s temporary failure to respond, noting that it had taken seven days to reestablish contact with its predecessor Surveyor /. (upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 2)	_	_ On May 29, Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev entered the Apollo spacecraft during a visit to the U.S. pavilion and discussed the instruments, levers, and buttons inside the spacecraft with Astronaut David Scott. Belyayev was first Soviet cosmonaut ever to have entered a U.S. spacecraft. On May 31, it was announced that two usaf rescue and recovery helicopters had left New York enroute to Paris, attempting to achieve the first nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic. Helicopters would refuel in flight about eight times during flight, which was expected to take 28-32 hrs. usaf said purpose of the crossing was to demonstrate “the long-range capability of die HH—3E [helicopter] for employment in long range recovery of personnel who may be forced down at sea a great distance from land.” Helicopters landed safely at Le Bourget Airport June 1. (Long, NYT, 5/21/67, 88; upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 50M; W Post, 5/27/67, D20; W Post, 5/30/67, A1)
nasa awarded Boeing Co. net bonus of Si,895,312 in accordance with incentive contract provisions for superior performance of Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft. Boeing Co. was prime contractor for Lunar Orbiter I, launched by nasa Aug. 10, 1966, on mission to orbit the moon and 324—SOI O—69
U.S.S.R.’s long-held superiority in large boosters had given it an advantage over U.S. in nuclear warhead protection, according to Pentagon sources. The advantage would become significant both offensively and defensively because of present developments in abm defenses—developments designed to destroy incoming warheads in outer space with intensive x-ray emissions. Soviet scientists could easily add more shielding to their warheads to halt x-ray bombardments from U.S. antimissile missiles, article noted, but U.S. was handicapped by weight limitations of its lower-thrust boosters. “Some officials,” article said, “are concerned that the hardness of Russian warheads will lessen seriously the protective capability of the Pentagon’s planned [abm systems] . . . [and] that U.S. offensive missiles now need more protection ... to survive Russian anti-missile explosions and reach their targets.” U.S. answer might lie in new lightweight composite materials under development; made by winding and inorganically bonding filaments of such materials as carbon, silica, and graphite, they would strengthen heat shield at little penalty in weight. (B Sun, 11/21/61, Al) November 27: In apparent sharp increase in testing, U.S.S.R. would launch fourth 1967 test series of “carrier rockets” into the Pacific between Nov. 28 and Dec. 30, according to Tass announcement. Aircraft and ships were warned not to enter either of two 129-km (80-mi) -wide target areas northwest and south of Midway Island, a U.S. possession, between noon and midnight local time each day, Tass said. UPI quoted observers on Soviet aims: to test new and bigger Soviet rockets needed to send a man to the moon and bring him back, and to expand recent Soviet experiments on the landing of space capsules at sea. upi said series would include launchings of 3,000-4,000 mi on down-range course from the Soviet Union, change from maximum of 6,000 mi for past launchings. Past announcements by U.S.S.R. on three 1967 “carrier-rocket” series had termed all three “successful.” (upi, W Star, 11/27/67, A5)
jpl scientists abandoned attempts to contact Surveyor IV spacecraft resting on the moon [see July 14-16]. A jpl spokesman said both Canberra and Goldstone tracking stations had sent signals to the spacecraft July 17, but had received no response. A committee was attempting to determine whether Surveyor IV had softlanded on the moon as planned or crashed out of control. (AP, W Star, 7/18/67, A3; AP, NYT, 7/20/67, 11)	_
High probability of mission success for Saturn project was born of sound engineering, judgment built on extensive experience, and supported by modern analytical techniques, Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to MSC Apollo Spacecraft Program Mgr. (former msfc Deputy Director) Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees said in interview with Aerospace Management. He summarized the factors which had enhanced the probability: “Considering that one Saturn V, including the launching costs, amounts to over 150 million, it is not hard to see why the test launchings preceding manned flights must be limited to only a few. What this limitation has done then is to stress more than ever before the critical need for intensive engineering, almost a compulsive meticulousness in manufacturing assembly, quality control, and most extensive testing on the ground, such as component qualification testing, and subsystem and system testing.” (Rees, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 23-27)	'
The Nation’s press commented on photos transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V. New York Times: “Orbiter 5 is currently adding some enduring contributions to mankind’s cultural heritage as photographic by-products of the space effort. “Some of the close-up pictures of the moon have been among the wildest, most disordered and most surrealistic scenes ever viewed by human eyes. Yet its distant views of the far side of the moon convey a sense of desolate tranquillity, of peace achieved after many storms. “This new art form has been produced by machines hundreds of thousands and millions of miles away, in realms where men have never been. Yet many of these pictures have far more power to move than much of the output of contemporary artists. . . .” {NYT, 8/13/67,10E) Washington Evening Star: “The pictures of the moon we have been getting back from our assorted orbiting cameras have been fine and fascinating, but the most interesting of all has turned out to be the picture of the earth from the distance of the moon. “This is natural enough: self-portraits are always the best portraits, especially from the point of view of the sitter. “But the thing about this self-portrait is the inescapable conclusion that the earth is really a rather lovely place, when seen from 214,806 miles away____” (W Star, 8/18/67)
NASA announced it had asked Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to deliver second Lunar Module {LM-2) in unmanned configuration, changing earlier plan for manned configuration. With the change, NASA could provide a backup for the Apollo V launch scheduled for early 1968 without a wait for modifications. If backup for LM-2 was not needed, manned launch would make use of LM-2 at later date, (nasa Release 67-266; Transcript)
msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $496,024 contract to study advanced versions of Saturn S—IVB orbital workshop. Study would explore concepts for a follow-on workshop for the Uprated Saturn I and several more sophisticated versions for the Saturn V, with initial emphasis on uses of the stage in Apollo Applications (aa) program. (msfc Release 67-145) 324-801 0—69----14	199
Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, had sent full photographic coverage of six primary Apollo sites west of 20° east longitude and partial coverage, including high-resolution photographs, of six remaining sites in east. One objective had been to photograph a landed Surveyor with sufficient resolution to detect the spacecraft. NASA-appointed study group established location of image on Lunar Orbiter photographs that fitted all Surveyor l identification criteria. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. to negotiate 27-mo, $25-million, costplus-incentive-award-fee contract for payload integration of experiments and experiment support equipment on Apollo Applications (aa) spacecraft. Tasks would be performed at NASA’s three manned spaceflight centers: (1) msfc work would involve the orbital workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) ; (2) msc work, the meteorological and earth resources payloads; and (3) KSC work, the test integration planning and support for launch operations. Selection of contractor followed competitive definition phase in which Martin Marietta Corp. and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. studied aa payload integration under parallel, $2-million, fixed-price contracts, (nasa Release 67-199)
Lunar Orbiter V’s photographs had revealed flow patterns characteristic of hardened fluid material on the floor of the moon’s Tycho Crater, NASA announced [see Aug. 5-27]. Preliminary study of new photographs tended to confirm prevailing theory held by scientists that the big crater had been formed by a great meteoroid crashing into the visible side of the moon. Some scientists believed much of the fluid material ejected when the three-mile-deep crater was formed might have resulted from the intense heat generated by the meteoroid’s impact. They also suggested that the appearance of the dark halo resulted from the manner in which pulverized ejected material had been deposited. Material might have traveled outward from the impact point in a “base surge” close to the moon’s surface, giving a windswept appearance to the terrain. NASA photo afforded scientists first close-up view of the crater floor, providing new clues to its origin. Orbiter Vs high resolution telephoto picture showed fractures, flow markings, and protruding domelike hills with exposed layers. The Tycho region was one of the 36 areas of high scientific interest on the moon photographed by Lunar Orbiter V. (nasa Release 67-231)
President Johnson told White House news conference he was “very hopeful” of landing men on the moon by 1970, but did not think “there is any guarantee that we will at all.” The President noted that a manned lunar landing was “a very difficult undertaking. I think it has been a very close question since the original target date was set.” (PD, 3/13/67, 419)
Robert F. Thompson, Assistant Manager of MSc’s Apollo Applications Program Office since its establishment in July 1966, was appointed Manager of that program. Post had been vacant since April 1967 when MSC Deputy Director George M. Low, who had been Acting Manager, became Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, (msc Release 67-73; msc Roundup, 12/22/67,1) Kurt Jung, member of West Germany’s Bundestag Defense Committee, said West Germany had allotted $25 million to purchase 220 F-4 Phantom jet aircraft from McDonnell Douglas Co., to replace ill-fated Lockheed F-104G Starfighter aircraft that had been worn out in use or lost in air crashes. (AP, B Sun, 12/9/67, 1)
JPL scientists continued efforts to reestablish contact with Surveyors V and VI resting on the moon. Surveyor V (launched Sept. 8) had responded immediately to turn-on commands during its fourth lunar day Dec. 14 and later transmitted 67 recognizable 200-line pictures. Following unsuccessful attempts to reposition the Antenna/Solar Panel Positioner on Dec. 16, transponder signals were lost, and complete loss of signal occurred. Surveyor VI (launched Nov. 7) had also responded to turnon commands Dec. 14, but telemetry lock-up was poor, and erratic signals were lost completely after 21/2 hrs. Attempts to reactivate both spacecraft for simultaneous communications and additional data would continue until end of lunar day Dec. 22. (NASA Proj Off; AP, NYT, 12/20/67, 29)
Hugo Gernsback, an inventor, author, editor, and publisher who was often called the father of modern science fiction, died in New York at age 83. Gernsback described radar in 1911—35 yrs before communications experts bounced a radar signal off the moon. In 1927 he began pub324-801 o—69lishing Amazing Stories, one of the earliest magazines devoted entirely to science fiction. In 1928 he sponsored New York’s first television broadcasts: images only slightly larger than postage stamps were received on crude scanners owned by 2,000 amateurs. (NYT, 8/21/67, 29)
Soviet scientists had compiled a structural and geological map of the lighted side of the moon to aid in selection of lunar landing sites, Tass announced. (Reuters, W Post, 12/29/67, D6)
Explorer XXXV, launched July 19, had completed 33 orbits of the moon. Results from gsfc’s magnetic field experiment aboard spacecraft indicated moon was not magnetized. Capture of interplanetary magnetic field lines by the moon and formation of lunar magnetosphere (theorized •by T. Gold in 1966) was not substantiated. A lunar bow shock wave had not yet been observed when moon was located in the interplanetary medium or the magnetosheath of the earth, (nasa Proj Off)
New York Times commented on Apollo 204 Review Board’s final report on Jan. 27 flash fire: “Two months ago, on the basis of the incomplete evidence then available, we suggested that the Apollo catastrophe had taken place because ‘many men miscalculated—grossly.’ The official report . . . suggests that that conclusion was too kind . . . [since] the report convicts those in charge of Project Apollo of incompetence and negligence. “The core of the problem is indicated in the board’s fifth finding: ‘Those organizations responsible for the planning, conduct and safety of this test failed to identify it as being hazardous. Contingency preparations to permit escape or rescue of the crew from an internal command module fire were not made.’ “How could those in charge of the test have ‘failed to identify it as being hazardous?’ The three astronauts had been put into what even a high school chemistry student would know was a potential oxygen incendiary bomb, one needing only a spark to initiate catastrophe. . . . But at Cape Kennedy, in the report’s words, ‘No procedures for this type of emergency had been established either for the crew or for the spacecraft pad work team.’ “The incredible complacency thus revealed overshadows even the other disgraceful and disheartening findings of the review board. . . . And as the record of incompetence and careless work—devastating in its impact—is recited in the report, one wonders how many of the previous manned space flights succeeded rather than how the Apollo tragedy occurred. . . .” (AIT, 4/11/67, 44M)
ksc awarded General Electric Co. a $7.7-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for additional Apollo engineering support services. Modification, effective through Sept. 30, 1967, increased total value of original contract to $49 million, (nasa Release 67-158)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite had made the first well-substantiated observation from space of a volcanic eruption when it recorded the eruption of Iceland’s Surtsey volcano in 1966, U.S. Geological Survey reported. “During August 1966, the Nimbus II satellite was in a near-polar orbit and passed over the island the day after the eruption began with its infrared sensing devices working. “The Surtsey eruption in its entirety was recorded as a minute black spot on infrared images during more than eight orbital sweeps of the Nimbus II satellite—first on August 20 and definitely identified as late as October 3.” Nimbus II was participating in a three-dimensional study of Surtsey by scientists from U.S. Geological Survey and afcrl using infrared survey techniques. Experiment marked first time volcanic heat had been monitored almost simultaneously from ground, aircraft, and space. Scientists believed the ability to measure heat radiation could be applied to studies of volcanoes on the earth, moon, and planets, (usgs Release, 7/30/67; Clark, NYT, 7/30/67, 41)
nasa awarded Carco Electronics Co. a $692,000 contract to design, fabricate, install, and check out a dynamic test stand for prototype Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) control moment gyro system. Installation at LaRC was scheduled for completion by spring 1968. (nasa Release 67-41)
msfc awarded $100,000 six-month contract to Bell Aerosystems Co. for flight testing of Bell’s “pogo stick” one-man flying vehicle at LaRc’s 1/6 gravity test facility. Pogo stick was being evaluated for Apollo lunar surface mission use. (msfc Release 67-12; Marshall Star, 1/25/67, 3) .
Bistatic radar detection—experimental technique for mapping celestial bodies by bouncing signals off them from an orbiting spacecraft—had been used successfully to map a portion of the lunar surface, Stanford Univ. Center for Radar Astronomy scientists Dr. G. L. Tyler, V. R. Eshleman, G. Fjeldbo, H. T. Howard, and A. M. Peterson reported in Science, Radar waves emitted Oct. 12, 1966, from an antenna on nasa’s Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft had reached earth as two signals: one directly, and one after being reflected by the moon. Both underwent different shifts in frequency. From a measurement made on the ground scientists were able to tell the direction from the spacecraft to the site on the moon. Other measurements related to the same site enabled them to triangulate the position. (Science, 1/Y4J61, 193-5)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller outlined Apollo Applications (aa) program at aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Series of innovations would be made, he said, to permit sufficient reductions in unit costs: (1) reuse of Command Module (cm) ; (2) addition of land-landing capability which would facilitate CM reuse, permit increase in crew capacity, and, possibly, make use of naval recovery forces unnecessary; (3) “double use” of Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage as booster during launch phase and as Orbital Workshop in space; (4) repeated use of Orbital Workshop as an embryonic space station; (5) longer-duration flights of one year or more; and (6) use of Apollo flight hardware and physical plant and employment of Apollo program officials and industrial organizations as they become available. “. . . this is a program that provides for a detailed measurement of the utility of man in space at a relatively low cost. The measurement is obtained by doing useful things—astronomical observation, extended exploration of the moon and experiments with sensing equipment that can lead to benefits of enormous significance to all mankind.” (Text)
A correlation between earthquakes and the forces exerted on the earth by the sun and moon was reported by Dr. Alan Ryall, Director of Univ. of Nevada seismological station. Dr. Ryall said he could support with scientific data the theory that where the earth’s crust is fractured and weakened, all that is necessary to cause earthquakes might be the pulling force or gravity of the sun and moon. (W Post, 3/24/67)
nasa’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was reactivated on the lunar surface for 12 hrs to transmit data on the motion of the moon. JPL said the new data would be used to help “refine the Moon’s distance from the Earth, its position in orbit at a given time, and other elements of its velocity and motion.” (SBD, 1/11/67, 42)
nasa had agreed to fly four dod experiments on Apollo Applications (aa) missions to support USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Aviation Week reported; more would be added. Experiments selected to date included: study of an inflatable elastic air lock; use of alternate restraints to determine standard workshop technique in weightlessness; evaluation of suit donning and sleep stations; and integration of multipurpose equipment maintenance, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 18)
Technology Week editorial criticized Los Angeles Times editor Marvin Miles’ accusation that Jan. 27 Apollo accident was caused in large part by NASA’s shortsightedness and that NASA was trying to hide its negligence. “Mr. Miles discusses the hatch hazard and NASA’s failure to provide an explosive hatch and its failure to develop a fire suppression system. Then comes the ringing finale . . . ‘The nation should be told the whole truth.’ “It is our impression that the agency is trying valiantly to come up with just such information and we don’t understand the implication of a cover-up.” Editorial noted that in the past NASA had often been criticized for being too stringent and that despite all precautions, “something somewhere went wrong. . . . “We think the agency’s standard of conduct has been high. Its statement before Congress was a frank and honest appraisal of the fact that, despite very strong efforts, somehow it had failed to take the steps to 324-801 O—69----6	71 protect against the unlikely chain of circumstances that led to disaster.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 3/13/67, 50)
Moscow Aviation Institute professor Feliks Zigel had called for a “joint effort of all the scientists of the world,” to determine the nature of unidentified flying objects (ufos), according to Soviet press agency Novosti. Group of which he was a member had had 200 reports of sightings, Zigel said. Typical of these was “a luminous orange-colored crescent flying with its outward bend forward. Its surface is only a little duller than that of the moon. The horns of the crescent throw out jets, sometimes with sparks. The outer contour of the crescent is sharp and the inner contour blurred and wavy.” The main task, Zigel asserted, was to organize a systematic study of the phenomena from astronomical and meteorological observatories to determine whether the objects were of protoplasmic or extraterrestrial origin. “Unfortunately, certain scientists both in . . . [U.S.S.R. and U.S.] deny the very existence of the problem instead of helping to solve it. . . . The U.F.o. phenomenon is a challenge to mankind. It is the duty of scientists to take up this challenge, to disclose the nature of the u.F.O. and to establish the scientific truth.” (Kamm, NYT, 12/10/67, 70)
NASA’s Surveyor III spacecraft, resting on the moon, would not be reactivated until about May 23 despite the end of the two-week lunar night, nasa announced. Officials said they wanted spacecraft to warm up gradually before resuming communications, (upi, NYT, 5/18/67, 22)
Apollo 204 Review Board announced that completion of its final report on Jan. 27 fire would be delayed one week until April 8. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC and Chairman of the Board, issued another call for any information that might aid the probe. Board also announced that it had completed piece-by-piece disassembly of Apollo I spacecraft, although testing and analysis of spacecraft systems and parts were continuing, (upi, W Star, 3/25/67, A5; W Post, 3/25/67, A5)
msc awarded Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co. a $3.4-million, costplusfixed-fee contract for development and testing of an improved fuel cell power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-33)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant stated that “the very important treaty governing the activities of states in outer space, on the moon and other celestial bodies, forged in the conference room of the United Nations, has reaffirmed the principle first stated in the General Assembly that outer space is the province of all mankind.” [Space law treaty signed Jan. 27 would go into effect Oct. 10.] (NYT, 10/5/67)
Planned launch of Apollo 4/Saturn V for Oct. 17 was postponed until early November, according to NASA spokesmen at etr, reported upi. Troubles with ground support equipment had stalled countdown rehearsal. Once rehearsal was finished, engineers would evaluate results and set date for unmanned launch, (upi, W Post, 10/11/67, A18)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at Msc, received Virginia Press Assn.’s (vpa) “Virginian of the Year” award at joint banquet of the vpa and National Newspaper Assn, (nna) during nna’s annual meeting in Richmond. Kraft said U.S. might miss 1970 target date to land the first man on the moon. “If we are lucky, and if everything works well, we can probably do it. But if we have a normal share of problems, as happens with any large research effort, then I don’t think we can.” (AP, W Star, 6/26/61, B5)
NASA awarded Boeing Co. a $2.275-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for procurement of long-lead-time materials for two additional Saturn V launch vehicles. Contract, which would expire Jan. 1, 1968, was first Saturn V procurement in support of Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-200)
NASA reported success of Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, noted that final readout of all photographs had been completed. Photographs would provide photo coverage of 99% of the moon’s front face and show high resolution photos of polar and limb areas with extensive geological detail. Report said convergent stereoscopic coverage had been obtained of entire Apollo zone of interest; photographic coverage obtained of the back side of the moon was still under review (nasa Proj
Water might have played an important role in shaping the lunar surface, Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told National Academy of Sciences. As evidence to support his theory of the former existence of “lakes” on the lunar surface, Dr. Urey showed spacecraft photos of the moon’s surface in which material had filled in depressions as though it were free-flowing. He also cited carbon-rich meteorites which seemed to be fragments of ancient lake beds. Dr. Urey believed many, if not all, the stony meteorites were fragments dislodged from the moon by impacting objects such as iron meteorites. As further evidence of water action, he noted the presence of meteorites within which numerous founded fragments were embedded which appeared to have been shaped by frictional effects within flowing material. A body much smaller than the moon would not have had sufficient gravity for this flow effect, Dr. Urey argued. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/67,23)
First aerial drop in test series to develop and qualify Earth Landing System (els) for heavier Block II Apollo spacecraft was conducted by Northrop Ventura at El Centro, Calif. Tests were studying the use of a two-stage reefing system for three main els chutes and larger diameter drogue parachutes for the els. Block I Apollo spacecraft used only a single-stage reefing. (NAA Skywriter, 7/21/67,1,2)
Univ. of Iowa professor Dr. James A. Van Allen, writing in Science, warned against “abandoning in situ study of the planets to the Soviet Union.” Citing important contributions made by unmanned planetary probes, he noted that intelligible telemetry signals had been received from Mariner IV from ranges as great as 320 million km and that the spacecraft was still operating properly 36 mo after launch. Entire Mariner V mission, he said, “was conducted with such precision and competence as to draw cheers from even the most hardened professionals.” Although successful Mariner missions had been accomplished at a cost of less than 2% of NASA budget, Congress had failed to provide for preparatory work for any specific planetary mission beyond Mariner Mars ’69, he said. “Even more devastating is the reluctance of NASA to forcefully request December IS: The Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nevada, as the NEftVA nuclear rocket reactor, NRX-A6, is operated at or above design power of 1,100 m energy (55,000-lb thrust) for 60 min. adequate funding for such work . . . despite the existence of well-conceived programs of great scientific potential. . . . The basic technology is available, and a rich diversity of feasible experiments has been proposed. . . .” Despite evidence that U.S.S.R.’s planetary exploration plans were both ambitious and increasingly competent, he said, U.S, “is now allowing its own high competency in planetary exploration to decay. . .	(Science, 12/15/67) The New York Times later commented: “Professor Van Allen is en* tirely right in his complaint . . . that [U.S.] is spending a ridiculously small sum ... on planetary exploration by unmanned rockets. “. . . the cost-effectiveness in scientific terms of the nation’s planetary program is far greater than that of the Apollo program for a manned flight to the moon, the nearly bottomless well into which the vast majority of NASA’s funds are now going. The existing allocation of funds is scientifically irrational, explicable principally in terms of the propaganda and public relations returns envisaged from ‘winning’ the moon race.” (NYT, 12/19/67,46)
msfc would design and build inhouse a multiple docking adapter (Mda) for use in Apollo Applications (AA) payload cluster scheduled for launch in 1968-69 [see Jan. 26]. Preliminary designs called for a 10-ft-dia, 15-ft-long cylinder surrounded by five 36-in-dia tunnels with docking collars and sealing hatches for orbital docking, (msfc Release 67-42)
Expanded memory units for tracking facility computers of the Apollo lunar landing program had been added by NASA as a modification to its fixed price contract with the Sperry-Rand Corp. The work would be performed at Sperry-Rand’s Univac Defense Systems Div., St. Paul, Minn., which would expand existing memory bank units for digital data processing systems from a storage capacity of 32,000 to 48,000 words. The systems would be installed in ground stations and aboard ships in the worldwide tracking network for Apollo flights. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67-246)
Announcement of major breakthrough in Soviet space program—probably an orbiting manned space platform—was imminent according to unidentified U.S. scientist recently returned from two weeks in U.S.S.R., Marquis Childs reported in Washington Post: “The likelihood of a dramatic new Soviet achievement takes on particular weight in view of the tragedy to the three American astronauts at Cape Kennedy. It will dramatize the degree to which the Soviets are ahead in heavy boosters essential to carry out a landing on the moon. Repeated denials from both sides that this is not a race to the moon are all very well. The fact remains that the first power to land men on that silver orb will gain enormous prestige.” (Childs, W Post, 2/1/67)
