Sen. Mark 0. Hatfield (R-Ore.), addressing ieee Region Six Conference in Portland, criticized order of priorities by which “survival” was superseded by “our desire to explore new technological frontiers. . . . We must rationally decide if our goal of promoting the well-being of man is better served through huge expenditures to beat the Russians to the moon or through developing methods to feed a hungry world. It is a very black mark on our sense of values and a contradiction of man’s quest for progress when one part of the world competes for the moon while the other part competes for a loaf of bread.” (Text)
Apollo 7 spacecraft and launch vehicle were electrically mated at ksc Launch Complex 34. (NASA Apollo Status Summary, 9/4/68)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, stressed urgency of funding Apollo Applications and advanced missions programs in continuing “this country’s position as a space pioneer.” These programs, he said, “are an investment in our national posture and the future of manned space flight . . . [and provide] the opportunity to stabilize the manned space flight program so that it can effectively and efficiently respond to the challenges of the next decade. We have the resources, the facilities, the people, and the knowledge of Apollo upon which to build, and the crucial question posed by this minimum request for Apollo Applications is whether we are going to pursue the manned exploration of space. . . . Man will prevail in space. On that there can be no serious question. The only question is whether they will be Americans.” (Testimony)
In This Week, Erik Bergaust discussed improvements in safety made by nasa since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Though nasa leaders in Washington and at MSC believed this was “doing the job, other experts in and out of NASA privately are expressing their doubts,” he said. They felt “NASA had been slow to correct [and] ... its solutions have been more political than practical.” Experts insisted, “that while progress has been made, there have been very few significant improvements in NASA’s own management. . . . reports circulating in Washington [since] the accident indicated the conditions that led to the Apollo fire may not have been corrected.” (This Week, W Star, 9/22/68, 7)
Dr. Dinsmore Alter, astronomer, first to provide evidence that moon was not as inactive as had been thought, died in Oakland, Calif., at age 80. He had been director of Griffith Planetarium in Los Angeles from 1935 until his retirement in 1958. On Oct. 26, 1956, from Mt. Wilson, Calif., he had seen apparent mistiness at bottom of crater which later led to re-evaluation of concepts of moon. (NYT, 9/24/68, 47)
U.S.S.R. would probably launch several spacecraft, possibly containing dogs, on circumlunar missions and return them to earth before launching manned lunar spacecraft, Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky said in Hungarian Army newspaper interview. Quoted in Nephadsreg, he said that first Soviet passengers around moon might be offspring of space dog Laika. Manned spacecraft would not be launched until necessary experience had been gained. (AP, B Sun, 2/26/68, A3)
nasa awarded Allis-Chalmers $3,500,000 contract to flight-qualify Multimission Fuel Cell Assembly, an improved fuel cell electrical power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program. System had been developed under three previous NASA contracts since 1962. Allis-Chalmers would produce two assemblies for use in qualification program and two for delivery to msc. (NASA Procurement Off; MCS Roundup, 12/6/68,
Commercial irradiation of foods by gamma rays for protection against spoilage had begun, at Nuclear Materials Equipment Corp. (numec), Apollo, Pa. Bacon would be processed initially, although FDA had also approved irradiation for potatoes, wheat, and wheat flour. Bacon would be treated by exposure to 4.5 million rads of gamma rays to destroy all bacteria; product could be stored indefinitely without refrigeration. Neither texture nor wholesomeness would be affected, according to aec and Army tests conducted over past 15 yr. (NYT, 1/2/67, 58)
Apollo 7 prime crew successfully completed water egress training in Gulf of Mexico, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 8/7/68)
NASA outlined six steps which would lead to final decision during week of Nov. 11 on next Apollo manned mission. Apollo 8, scheduled for December, was planned as manned earth-orbital mission on Saturn V vehicle. Because of Apollo 7 success, nasa was considering alternative mission possibilities: earth-orbital mission deeper into space, circumlunar flyby, and lunar orbit. Steps—laid out by Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, and Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips—were: detailed analysis and review of Apollo 7 results to determine any necessary spacecraft changes; final certification of solutions to Apollo 6 problems; certification of strengthened Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stage fuel lines and elimination of pogo in 1st stage; completion of ground tests before Apollo 8 command and service module (csm) certification for lunar flight; completion of flight computer programs for deep space and lunar missions; rehearsal of CSM operations tests with mathematical models and delivery of Apollo 8 cm computer program; and completion of design certification reviews of launch vehicle and spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, said, “The final decision on whether to send Apollo 8 around the Moon will be made after a thorough assessment of the total risks involved and the total gains to be realized in this next step toward a manned lunar landing. We will fly the most advanced mission for which we are fully prepared that does not unduly risk the safety of the crew.” (NASA Release 68-190; upi, NYT, 10/29/68,14)
MSFC announced award to Harvard Univ. of $1,942,300 supplementary contract for development of UV scanning spectrometer to be flown as solar experiment on first launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. Award increased total value to $6,458,544 for experiments for use with manned solar observatories, (msfc Release 68-68; SBD, 4/8/68, 210)
Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of ksc, said Saturn IB Launch Complexes 34 and 37 would be put on standby basis until beginning of Apollo Applications program in late 1970, with reduction of 1,315 personnel. Shutdown, forced by space budget cuts, would save nasa $20 million. Some 10% of 2,400 contract work force would be affected, with 1,000 engineers and technicians continuing to work in other areas. Complexes were to have been maintained in event Saturn V launch vehicle encountered serious development problems, but Dr. Debus said this insurance was no longer needed, (ksc Release 463-68; AP, B Sun, 10/16/68, A7)
nasa and dod would spend estimated $1,406 billion during next decade for parachutes, aerodynamic decelerators, aerial recovery systems, planetary landing devices, and spacecraft escape systems, according to Frank A. Burnham in Aerospace Technology. Technology was marked by rapid growth and widespread applications, including drogue chutes for supersonic aircraft; personnel parachutes capable of being “flown” to spot landings; recovery systems for Apollo, mol, military spacecraft, drones, and test missiles; systems to drop cargo from altitude and deposit it on ground from aircraft in flight; and air “snatch” rescue systems. (Aero Tech, 6/3/68, 26)
In Paris Match, Raymond Cartier said, “With Apollo 8 the summit is human daring is attained.” (Paris Match, 12/28/68, 37)
ARC reported that 90 U.S. scientists at ARC working group sessions had agreed electromagnetic systems would provide best data on moon’s interior and recommended three techniques, magnetometer systems, radio-frequency systems, and radar. Magnetometer systems could measure blocking of fluctuating solar magnetic field borne by solar wind by using network of emplacements on moon’s surface. Highly conductive hot lunar core would cut off field completely, while cold core would let most of field pass through. Magnetometer on lunar crawler could make similar measurements to find highly conductive masses of water, lava, or ore. Radio-frequency probes could make inexpensive subsurface surveys through spacecraft radio signals which would penetrate moon’s surface and bounce back to be measured as to wave characteristics. Wave-change data could help define ore, ice deposits, or permafrost. High-frequency radar systems could study lunar surface through radar bounced off moon from earth with return signal received by earth antennas, or beamed from spacecraft in lunar orbit or from lunar crawler at lunar surface, with return signals received by spacecraft or crawler, (arc Release 68—9)
Proposal for four additional basic Block II Apollo spacecraft command and service modules would be made by nar Space Div. in accordance with NASA request. Action would bring total purchase to 19 for flights on Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. Delivery would start in 1970. (nasa Release 68—12)
New York Times commented on Apollo 8 flight: “Space contains more than enough opportunity for fruitful application of the energies that all mankind can devote to its exploration, development and eventual settlement. There is no need here for wasteful rivalry deriving from earthbound nationalistic and political ambitions. In the face of the most breathtaking challenge humanity has ever faced, the only rational response is cooperation to make space an arena of unity and international brotherhood. Man’s hopes and prayers ride with the pre-Christmas voyagers. After them must come ships bearing the United Nations flag, each carrying men of different citizenship, language, political and religious convictions and color.” (NYT, 12/22/68, E10)
In Moscow interview with Turin, Italy, newspaper La Stampa, Soviet space scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on perfecting unmanned spaceships for exploration of celestial bodies deeper in space than moon. “There does not exist at present a similar project [to Apollo 8] in our program. In the near future we will not send a man around the moon. We start from the principle that certain problems can he resolved with the use of automatic soundings.” Sedov hailed Apollo 8 mission as “a great scientific conquest.” (upi, W Post, 12/29/68, A4)
usaf awarded Big Three Industrial Gas and Equipment Co. $1,156,845 fixed-price contract for production of propellant nitrogen to support Project Apollo at ksc. (dod Release 183—68)
msfc announced Boeing Co. had been issued $239,000 contract for 10mo study defining two-stage derivative of Saturn V launch vehicle. With 1st (S—IC) and 3rd (S—IVB) stages and instrument unit of Saturn V, vehicle could place up to 158,000 lb in low earth orbit. Varying the number of F—1 engines in S—IC could tailor vehicle to specific missions. Five-engine configuration could put into orbit Saturn I Workshop with airlock and multiple docking adapter, plus Apollo Telescope Mount and Apollo CSM and three-man crew. Three Saturn IB vehicles would be required to do same job. Vehicle could resupply space stations and could be used for synchronous orbits and unmanned lunar and planetary flights at major savings over three-stage Saturn V. Two-stage version was called “Intermediate 20.” With Centaur 3rd stage, vehicle could send about 15,000 lb to Jupiter or Saturn. msfc also had signed $22,826,736 contract modification with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued production support of J—2 engines used on Saturn IB and Saturn V boosters. Modifications would improve engines’ versatility, (msfc Releases 68-264, 68-266)
Apollo 6 (launched April 4) was adjudged unsuccessful by nasa. Although three of five primary mission objectives had been fully accomplished and two partially accomplished, overall mission was not a success. Apollo 6 had entered elliptical parking orbit instead of planned circular orbit when 2nd stage engines shut down prematurely and 3rd stage failed to reignite on command. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc issued report on preliminary results of April 4 Apollo 6 flight. Although “basic source of the difficulties” had not yet been determined, scientists and engineers speculated that wires carrying cutoff commands to the malfunctioning engines were interchanged. First stage had performed as planned and stage thrust was near predicted during first portion of flight. Second stage had performed satisfactorily through 1st-stage boost, 2nd-stage ignition, and early portion of 2nd-stage powered flight. First indications of anomaly were decreasing temperatures on main oxidizer valve and its control line on fifth engine and steady decrease in second engine’s yaw actuator pressure. Third stage performed satisfactorily through first bum and orbital coast. Although engine and stage prestart conditions appeared normal, engine received start signal, and valves opened properly, engine did not restart. Initial data suggested that leak in one of two propellant lines to engine’s augmented spark igniter might have caused insufficient or inadequately mixed propellant for proper start condition. Investigations were continuing on longitudinal oscillation of vehicle. Guidance and other instrumentation functions, telemetry performance, and onboard TV camera operation were satisfactory, (msfc Release 68—74; AP, NYT, 4/12/68, 20)
Apollo 8 launch crew began lengthy countdown on time at ksc at 7:00 pm est, for launch scheduled for 7:51 am est Dec. 21. (W Post, 12/16/68, A12; W Star, 12/16/68, A5; W News, 12/16/68, 3)
Press conference on preliminary scientific results from NASA’s Surveyor VII, which landed on moon Jan. 9, revealed spacecraft could make safe landing in highland area with “major ejecta blanket” (rim of debris ejected from center of crater). Data indicated Tycho region of moon’s surface contained larger rocks, fewer craters, and thinner debris layer than did maria. Fine particles and rocks near Tycho crater had higher albedo, or lighter color. Iron content was lower, accounting for lower density. In Tycho region, where iron group of elements was less concentrated, reflection of light from moon’s surface was greater than from area where iron group elements existed in greater concentration. Low iron content was “probably strongest direct evidence” that moon had undergone chemical fractionation, suggesting it “has been hot, has been melted at least partially, and has been differentiated into different types of rock.” (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 2/29/68, A8; W News, 3/21/68)
aec and U.S. Geological Survey experiments had shown that neutrons from man-made californium-252 hitting gold and silver atoms excited atoms to radioactive state; atoms then emitted characteristic gamma rays by which they were identified. With californium, irradiation equipment for technique already known could he reduced about 200,000 times, making it ideal for sea bottom probes and for devices to analyze materials on moon’s surface as well as for mining and industrial purposes. Geological Survey was working with GSFC on use for study of moon, (nea, W News, 8/8/68)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on statement by physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp warning of possible dangers in Apollo 8 mission [see Dec. 14] : “There are perhaps sound reasons involving national prestige for trying to be the first nation to send men into a moon orbit. But surely no such reasons are compelling enough to cut corners on safety. The technical arguments advanced by Dr. Lapp are far too complex to be resolved by laymen. But after the tragic fire that took the lives of three of our Apollo spacemen two years ago it should not be necessary to urge that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration exercise all due prudence—even at the risk of losing the race around the moon.” (W News, 12/10/68, 24)
In Apollo/Saturn 503 program, Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages were being modified to correct radar lock-on problem in rendezvous radar subsystem. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages were mated, with pogo suppressor modification kits on 1st stage being verified. Third-stage propulsion subsystem checks were in progress. In South Atlantic Anomaly Probe, computer analysis had confirmed radiation levels presented no hazard to low-altitude manned Apollo orbital flights. (Text)
Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on Senate floor presented General Accounting Office review of source selection and award of major subcontract by NASA and its prime contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., for development of landing and rendezvous radar equipment for Apollo lunar module, compiled at her request. Sen. Smith explained that although another electronics firm had expressed interest in performing under fixed-price contract, rca had received contract because of agreement between Grumman and RCA “before the requirements and specifications for the radar components had been defined.” Noting that rca estimated cost of $23.4 million had now increased to about $112 million, she suggested that if Grumman radar subcontract was illustrative of how NASA “maintains surveillance over its appropriated funds, it would appear that substantial savings could be realized merely by strengthening the agency’s contracting practices.” (nasa LAR VII/36; CR, 4/17/68, S4138-46; AP, B Sun, 4/23/68, A5)
Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said in TV program to viewers in Texas, New Mexico, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, Republican administration would strive to make U.S. “first in space.” “I don’t want the Soviet Union or any other nation to be ahead of the United States. . . . Let’s emphasize the moon shot and others where we can make a direct break-through.” (W Star, 10/12/68, Al)
Neither Peking Radio nor New China News Agency covered Apollo 8 Mission. (N Va Sun, 12/28/68, 1)
New York Times editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “What was illustrated . . . was the extraordinary difficulty of assuring that every one of the literally millions of components in such an extremely complicated system as the Saturn 5 works perfectly. But the complexity of the total Apollo mechanism for the planned manned voyage to the moon ... is even greater. . . . This fact argues for a slow but sure approach to future Apollo tests, rather than an adventuresome policy aimed primarily at completing the job by the end of 1969. “Regrettable as were Saturn 5’s deficiencies as demonstrated in this week’s test, they provide a useful warning against renewed overconfidence and the costs it could again impose.” (NYT, 4/6/68, 36)
Flammability characteristics of mixed gas atmosphere (60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen at 16 psi) in Apollo command module had been evaluated by msc in 24 “enriched air” tests, with “all but two ignition points” showing self-extinguishing characteristics. Two ignition points on circuit breaker panels exhibited what msc termed “moderate fire propagation” because fire spread “beyond the point of self extinguishment.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, retained three major options for “mixed gas” for Apollo launch phase: regular air, enriched air using oxygen and nitrogen, or pure oxygen. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 10)
Surveyor VII, launched Jan. 7 for softlanding on moon. Jan. 9, photographed crescent earth from lunar surface Jan. 20 and recorded two laser beams (.arrow) aimed toward landing site from earth. Spacecraft kies last in NASA’s Surveyor prograjn. cording to utc manager Douglas D. Ordahl, engine had performed well during five-minute flight over Eglin AFB, Fla., aerial test range and “proved for the first time that hybrids are practical and can fly.” {W Post, 1/7/68, A7; Wilford, NYT, 1/8/68,3)
NASA issued request for quotations for design, development, fabrication, test, qualification, and delivery of actuator system for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calling for completion within nine months. System, expected to weigh 20 lb, would be contained in cylinder 18 in long and 1 ft in dia. It would be used to deploy solar panels of ATM which would be placed in orbit and docked with Saturn I workshop, (msfc Release 68-178)
msfc reported “all mission objectives were met” by Saturn IB launch vehicle used in first unmanned Bight test of Apollo lunar module, Jan. 22, Flight was fourth consecutive success for Saturn IB and 15th out of 15 for msfc-developed Saturn launch vehicles. Flight events had been “exactly on time or within a few hundredths of a second until second stage but still within tolerance limits.’’ Trajectories of both stages had been within expected tolerances, and orbit insertion conditions had been met satisfactorily, (msfc Release 68-17)
One out of every four persons on earth—nearly one billion people in 64 countries-—heard Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by moon orbiting Apollo 8 crew either on radio or TV, according to TV Guide. Delayed broadcasts same day reached 30 additional countries. “The fantastic success of TV on that flight echoed around the world.” {TV Guide, 5/10-16/69, 9)
Analysis of Luna IX (launched Jan. 31, 1966) TV photos showed lunar mass was decreasing because of micrometeoroid bombardment, Soviet scientist A. A. Gurshteyn reported. He explained that speed of particles dislodged by falling micrometeoroids often exceeded second escape velocity for moon of only 2.4 km per sec. (SBD, 3/12/68, 61)
Shipment of LM—2, second Apollo lunar module, and associated Saturn IB launch vehicle to ksc had been postponed pending further evaluation of Apollo 5 mission results [see Jan. 27 and 30]. Initial evaluations of first lm flight, Jan. 22—23, had indicated that second unmanned flight might not be required to qualify spacecraft for manned flight. NASA announced that further “detailed review of Apollo 5 flight data and deliberations by a [nasa] design certification review board in March will determine the final decision.” (nasa Release 68-21).
Atmospheric scientists at Jpl and Ohio State Univ. announced successful high-altitude test of balloon-borne spectrometer to measure atmospheric radiation emitted in four-micron region. Data, obtained on flight from National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information station at Palestine, Tex., indicated sunlight reflected from earth would pose no significant obstacle to continuous effective operation of radiation sensors on spacecraft in earth orbit. Researchers concluded satellite-borne instrument could probe earth’s lower atmosphere for global weather prediction. Test marked step in NASA program to define experiments for manned earth-orbiting missions in Apollo Applications program. (NASA Release 68—176; Pasadena Star-News, 10/17/68)
Editorial comment on Soviet space achievements, including successful orbiting of Luna XIV and docking of Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII, urged U.S. to acknowledge challenge: “The Soviet Union’s sense of purpose in space is apparently as steady and unwavering as it ever was. The U.S. . . . after coming up fast from behind in a wave of feverish anxiety and enthusiasm, now seems to have lost interest. That could be a dangerous—even fatal— tendency in an age where space is of key importance to the security of the Nation. It should be reversed, before great harm is done.” (P lnq, 4/17/68) “If we muff what now looks like a good chance to beat the Russians to the moon with manned space ships, the prestige loss to this nation will probably be immeasurable. And if our space people aren’t paying at least as much attention as the Russians to the military possibilities of space, then we are in grave danger and growing more so. All of which adds up . . . to a whole string of dire warnings to Congress not to be stingy about space projects of any description.” (NY News, 4/17/68)
Data collected for 17 mo by five Lunar Orbiters indicated rate of penetration of 0.025-mm beryllium copper surface of pressurized cells by meteoroids in near-lunar environment was approximately half the rate in near-earth environment as measured by similar detectors aboard Explorer XVI and Explorer XXIII. Each experiment used 20 pressur-ized-cell detectors with total exposed area of 0.186 sq m, carried aboard spacecraft in both equatorial and polar orbits at altitudes between 18.6 and 3,852.5 mi (30 and 6,200 km). Estimates of hazard near moon had ranged from less to much greater than hazard near earth. Major uncertainty had been contribution by secondary meteoroids created by impacts of primary meteoroids on moon, according to report by NASA LaRC scientists C. A. Gurtler and Gary W. Grew. Data showed no evidence of increase in hazard from such “backsplash.” (Science, 8/2/68, 462-4)	_
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on scheduled December launch of Apollo 8:	. this promises to be one Christmas when the thoughts of all . . . will contain more than visions of sugarplums, of laden stockings, of gifts about to be received and bills about to come due. It is, in fact, just possible that NASA will succeed in putting that missing ingredient back into the yule season, and that more prayers will be offered this Christmas than at any time in the past 2,000 years.” (W Star, 11/14/68, A14)
Apollo 7 prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—held news conference at MSC. Crew saw no reason to delay Apollo 7 launch beyond scheduled lift-off on Oct. 11 but results of flight readiness test following week would determine definite plans. Questioned about safety, mission commander Schirra said, “when we go over the sill for launch day, we will consider that all those risks that are appropriate for this type of mission are either understood by us or that they are low enough that we have a very, very high probability. . . . We would like 10.8 days and we will do our best to do it. . . . We’ve had a goal that is rather a hard one to achieve, particularly one that we have to follow on when we lost three of our compatriots, and we don’t want any mistakes ... to happen again. We have not been the ‘kid-around’ types that we might have been in the past, we’re much more serious about it, because this is a much more complicated machine and there are many, many more people involved in it. ... I think you will find that you will see a good performance out of this total crew and we have tried very hard to make this machine work just the way it should. We have basically lived with it at the plant [and] at the Cape . . . and if somebody even takes a small component off it, we become furious and say, ‘Why did you remove it?’ We expect answers immediately . . . that is the way we are working.” In answer to question, Schirra said it had taken 1 min 5 sec for all three to exit from spacecraft to white room in simulated emergency, while still being careful not to damage equipment. In real emergency, crew could probably exit in 45 sec. (Transcript)
Apollo 6 mission, second flight of Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle, would be launched from etr on or after April 3, NASA announced. Primary mission objective would be qualification of launch vehicle for future manned flights; spacecraft objectives, including recovery, would be secondary. (nasa Release 68—54)
msfc awarded Ball Brothers Research Corp. $134,500 contract for six solar sensor systems, including one prototype and five flight units, for Apollo Telescope Mount pointing control system, (msfc Release 68-76)
Business Week editorial: “. . . since the tragedy on the launch pad . . . [ Jan. 27, 1967] NASA and its thousands of supporting companies have done a tremendous job in rebuilding the spacecraft and in perfecting the safety and reliability of the entire Apollo system. The clear message of Apollo 7 is that NASA now has a spacecraft that can take men to the moon and back safely. This is a triumph for NASA and for U.S. science, engineering, and management. (Bus Wk, 10/26/68) Tass later announced that during first revolution Soyuz III “approached” to within 200 m (656 ft) of unmanned Soyuz II (launched Oct. 25), initially by “an automatic system”; subsequent operations were performed manually by Beregovoy. On Oct. 27, Tass said, Beregovoy “independently oriented the ship in space and switched on the motor,” to alter spacecraft’s orbit; continued conducting scientific, technical, medical, and biological experiments and research; transmitted TV pictures of cabin interior; and approached Soyuz II for second time before it reentered Oct. 28. Soyuz III remained in orbit until Oct. 30, completing 94 hrs 51 min and 64 orbits, before it softlanded “with the use of aerodynamics,” in a preset area in Soviet territory. (Lannan, W Star, 10/27/68, Al; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/68, Al; Kamm, NYT, 10/27/68; SBD, 10/28/68, 279; 10/31/68, 297; AP, W Post, 10/28/68, Al; gsfc SSR, 10/31/68)
NASA would negotiate $3.5-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for Apollo Applications engineering support. GE, under direction of NASA Hq. Apollo Applications Program Office, would provide engineering support in areas of quality and reliability, configuration and data management, test, and checkout, (nasa Release 68—61)
Apollo 8 lunar flight was voted top news story of 1968 in Dec. 24 repolling of editors of Associated Press member newspapers, radio, and TV stations. Previous poll, completed before Dec. 21—27 mission, had selected assassinations of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy and Rev. Martin Luther King as No. 1 and No. 2 stories of year. (W Star, 12/26/68, A8)
New York Times said of Apollo 8 telecast of earth: “. . . the drama and interest of yesterday’s view of earth from space transcended any prosaic considerations of practical utility. Rather the excitement these pictures aroused among millions of stay-at-homes flowed from the visual evidence they provided of man’s successful entrance into a completely new realm, one which poses challenges, opportunities and dangers such as the human species has never before faced. And yesterday’s pictures provided a sobering perspective on man’s puny earthly works and rivalries, reminding all humanity that nature is the basic antagonist, not other men.” (NYT, 12/24/68, 22)
New York Times editiorial, “After the Lunar Landing,” said first priority would probably go to study of moon’s surface and resources. “Beyond this exploration, the moon—once accessible to men—will immediately become a laboratory world for expanding knowledge in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology and a host of other sciences. For both purposes ... it will be desirable to create one or more permanent manned communities on the moon as soon as possible. ... As the pioneers in space, the United States and the Soviet Union have the responsibility now to begin organization of the vast international effort that must follow the coming triumph of human courage and human ingenuity. And the United Nations, of course, is the body whose flag must fly over future lunar settlements.” (NYT, 11/13/68, 40)
Tests to evaluate propellant lines for J—2 engine had been successfully conducted in vacuum chamber at Arnold Engineering and Development Center, B. J. Richey reported in Huntsville Times. Engineers had discovered that frosting which enveloped lines and provided extra protection when engine was fired at ground temperatures failed to form in vacuum or simulated vacuum, so lines burned through. Lines leading to engine’s augmented spark indicator, believed to have caused engine shutdowns and restart failure during Apollo 6 flight April 4, had been redesigned and strengthened without affecting engine performance. (Richey, Huntsville Times, 6/17/68)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 space vehicle Flight Readiness Test was under way at ksc, with prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—to participate without spacesuits and with hatch open. Apollo 8 manned altitude runs had been successfully completed, with prime crew spending 13]/2 hr in its spacecraft Sept. 20 and backup crew spending 101/2 hr Sept. 22. (Text)
President Johnson nominated b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) , msfc Director of Industrial Operations, for promotion to Major General. Assigned to NASA through special nasa—DOD personnel exchange agreement in 1964, Gen. O’Connor had been responsible for technical and administrative management of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 68-33)
First Lady, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and daughter Mrs. Lynda Robb paid their first visit to KSC and participated in simulated moon landing in lunar landing module replica. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, presented model of Apollo lunar landing module for display in Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library. He said model would bear plaque listing “a few of the many contributions to our space program of Lyndon B. Johnson—as Senate Majority Leader, as Chairman of the Senate Aeronautics and Space Sciences Committee, as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council when he was Vice President, and then as President of the United States.” Dr. Paine told Mrs. Johnson, “We trust that this model of the lunar landing module will signify to the many visitors . . . the President’s vision and leadership that has carried this nation outward into the new ocean of space.” (ksc Release ksc—500-68; Shelton, W Star, 11/25/68, E3; Blair, NYT, 11/24/68, 41)
In bbc TV interview Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said U.S. Apollo 8 plan for manned lunar orbit was, “On a scientific basis . . . wasteful and silly. . . . We’ve reached the stage with automatic landings when it’s not necessary to risk human life to get information about the moon. Within a few years this information could be obtained by automatic, unmanned instruments.” Sir Bernard said he was full of admiration for project but added, there was “a dangerous element of deadline beating in it.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, commented, “The purpose is not scientific but to take an important step in developing the capability of landing men on the moon.” In telephone interview from Huntsville, Ala., he said, “We are taking no undue risks.” Apollo 8 crewman William A. Anders told news conference at KSC, “We are flying primarily an operational mission and we strongly feel that a manned platform in lunar orbit with the operational equipment we have can add significant bits and pieces to scientific knowledge. . . . We think it will be a real boon for future Apollo flights to have the photographic, navigation, tracking, mapping, and other knowledge we’ll bring back.” (AP, B Sun, 11/21/68, 1; NYT, 11/21/68, 19; O’Toole, W Post, 11/21/68, A3)
Apollo 8 crew, wearing their spacesuits, participated in final 2 hr 45 min of countdown rehearsal for Dec. 21 launch. Spacecraft had completed four-day rehearsal fully fueled Dec. 10. (AP, B Sun, 12/11/68, A9; UPl, W Star, 12/11/68, C4)
International Flat Earth Society said in London that earth was definitely flat despite pictures from Apollo 8. Society Secretary Samuel Shenton said moon was circular but there was no proof it was a globe. (Reuters, BSim, 12/30/68)
msc had awarded $2-million contract extension to mit’s Div. of Sponsored Research for design and developmental support of Apollo guidance and navigation systems, including flight test and operational support for Apollo command and service modules. Contract extension brought total estimated value of mit contract since April 1965 to $48.7 million, (nasa Release 68-15)
Apollo 7 mission (Oct. 11—22) was adjudged successful by nasa. All launch vehicle systems had performed satisfactorily throughout expected lifetime and spacecraft systems functioned with few minor anomalies, which were countered, preventing loss of systems support. Splashdown occurred within one mile of guidance system target point and recovery of flight crew and CM was successful. All test objectives had been successfully accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA announced end of Lunar Orbiter project. Lunar Orbiter V, launched Aug. 1, 1967, had obeyed spacecraft controllers and crashed on lunar surface after 1,200 orbits. Final operation of spacecraft had consisted of 18.9-sec burn of velocity control engine at apolune to decrease speed by 64 mph for orbit decay. Impact occurred at 2:58.5 am, est, near equator on moon’s western limb. Destruction of Lunar Orbiter V had become necessary because its supply of attitude control gas was nearly depleted. In concentrating on 36 areas of moon’s face, spacecraft had completed coverage necessary for full photographic survey of moon’s hidden side, photographing and transmitting 212 telephoto and 212 wide-angle pictures of lunar surface. Spacecraft had also been used to provide tracking target to msfn stations and for crew training and computer program verification. Lunar Orbiters I, II, and III had been crashed on Oct. 29, 1966, Oct. 11, 1967, and Oct. 9, 1967, as their control gas became exhausted. Communications were lost with Lunar Orbiter IV, and it had apparently crashed on lunar surface. During Lunar Orbiter project, since first launch Aug. 10, 1966, 6,034 orbits of moon had been completed and more than 99% of lunar surface had been photographed by orbiting cameras to provide data for selection of eight candidate landing sites for Apollo project. Lunar Orbiter program was directed by ossa and managed by LaRC. Boeing Co. was prime spacecraft contractor, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68-23)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft had been moved from altitude chamber at ksc. During week it would be mated with lunar module adapter and prepared for mechanical mate with Saturn IB launch vehicle. In Apollo Saturn 503 project, radar lock-on problem in Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages’ rendezvous radar subsystem was being isolated. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages had been mated. Last in series of seven water impact tests in support of first manned Apollo mission was scheduled for Aug. 13. (Text)
George Alexander reviewed in Washington Post Erik Bergaust’s Murder on Pad 34, story of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Book was “characterized by sloppy errors of omission and commission, innuendo and pointlessness,” Alexander said. “It was good fortune, nothing else, that the various mechanical flaws and human faults that occurred in the . . . Mercury and Gemini programs did not coincide ... as they did inside Apollo-one. Foresight tries to prevent such coincidence, but . . . not all possible coincidence can be foreseen. . . . Accidents . . . will happen. And the searching investigation conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into Apollo-one could find no evidence that the fatal fire was anything but an accident.” (Book World, W Post, 7/14/68,4-5)
Washington Evening Star editorial: “The Russians are going to the moon just as fast as their technology will carry them. ... It is, of course, impossible to judge what lies ahead or guess what problems either nation may encounter before the lunar landings are carried out. But if all goes well it looks as though both nations might be ready to go in about a year. We would have no objection at all if a way could be found to ‘fix’ the race, and an agreement reached to make the landings literally simultaneous. It would be one way of assuring that neither nation would pursue the goal of national prestige to the point of tragedy.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A10)
Mathematical tools used to predict lunar motions were so imprecise that they hampered evaluation of lunar flights and use of moon as timepiece, according to two articles in Science by group of JPL scientists. Amplifying report, Dr. J. Derral Mulholland, JPL scientist in charge of revision of methods of prediction, said errors seemed to derive largely from inadequate emphasis on gravital influence of other planets, particularly Jupiter and Venus. JPL was preparing computer program to prediet lunar position for future space flights. (Science, 5/24/68, 874-8; Sullivan, NYT, 5/24/68,47)
In Apollo spacecraft loading tests, drogue parachutes would be tested within several days at Naval Air Facility, with 13,000-lb test vehicle dropped from aircraft at 46,000-ft altitude, subjecting parachutes to “ultimate loads” in reefed condition before they opened fully. Drop, repeat of previous test which failed, was to 'complete verification test series which had begun in 1967. (Text)
Under Administrator James E. Webb’s leadership, Don Kirkman commented in Washington Daily News, NASA had “put John Glenn in orbit in the Mercury capsule, brought back all the Gemini spacemen without mishap, and intended to put U.S. astronauts on the moon before the 1960s ended.” Unmanned spaceships had photographed moon and Mars and probed Venus host of weather, communications, and navigation satellites had been launched. But since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire and with needs of Vietnam war, “every new budget brought new blows.” ( W News, 9/17/68, 9)
In Pravda, Prof. Boris Petrov, Soviet guidance mechanisms specialist, said U.S.S.R. preferred not to send men to moon at this point, though unmanned Zond V and Zond VI “were adapted for piloted flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/31/68, A3)
