Pope Paul VI hailed Apollo 10 flight and said man’s presence in cosmos was sign of God’s presence “in our world and our life.” Pope told 30,000 persons at St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome, “Even more than the face of the moon, the face of man shines before us; no other being known to us, no animal, even the strongest and most perfect in its vital instincts, can be compared to the prodigious beings we men are.” (NYT, 5/22/69)
At televised news conference in Moscow on Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII mission [see Oct. 12—18], Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. hoped to have permanent space station in earth orbit “certainly” within 10 yrs “and I think less than five years.” Station plans did not rule out manned lunar exploration but, he said, “I can only say such operations are not planned for the coming months. Shall we study the universe with the help of automatic (unmanned) spacecraft? We shall. Shall we fly to the moon and the other planets of the solar system in the future? I think we shall because such travel is one of the further aims of mankind in conquering outer space.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 11/5/69, 16)
Moon was gray and colorless, rather than orange from oxidation of ferrous oxide in rocks by photolytically liberated oxygen, ucla geophysicist Dr. Willard F. Libby noted in Science. He suggested reason “lies in the solar wind’s bringing in atomic hydrogen to replace that lost by the photolytic decomposition of water vapor.” (Science, 12/12/69, 1437-8)
Apollo 12 spacecraft was lashed by 40-mph winds during second day of countdown demonstration test (cddt) at KSC. Officials said exercise proceeded without difficulty. (W Post, 10/25/69, A9; upi, NYT, 10/25/69)	'
Post Office Dept, announced delay in delivery of moon landing stamp first day covers because of “unprecedented number of requests.” Processing crew of 100—more than twice number normally employed— were working longer shifts with more special canceling equipment than ever before to handle “response from people all over the world.” (PO Dept. Philatelic Release 50)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, presented Public Service Group Achievement Award Certificates to 12 representatives of communications organizations which had supported Apollo 8 mission. Award to Apollo 8 Communications Network cited “the dedication and skill of the leaders and all personnel in these organizations in maintaining reliable communications which insured the success of the first manned lunar orbit mission.” British External Telecommunication Executive and Hawaiian Telephone Co. had received same award. (nasa Release 69—20)
Apollo program after lunar landing was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Fight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearing on NASA FY 1970 appropriations: “A thorough exploration plan has been evolved by the scientific community which will be initiated with the remainder of the fifteen Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft available under the Apollo program. Three initial phases of lunar exploration have been defined. The first phase will consist of landings that sample and observe the major classes of regions on the moon. To establish these norms, it will be necessary to land, carry out geological prospecting, and obtain rock and soil samples for return to earth from four separate sites. . . . “The second phase would include the investigation of the major classes of lunar anomalies . . . volcanic types, sinuous riverlike channel-ways, fracture zones and impact craters. Six additional sites have been identified as the minimum ... to provide answers to basic questions about the moon and to evaluate locations of potential resources, building materials or underground shelter openings. The third phase would be to tie together this information from 10 or more sites by making a remote sensing survey of the moon from lunar orbit.” Apollo Applications FY 1970 budget provided for “continuation of flight hardware development and for integration of modified subsystems into hardware for a set of five earth-orbital flights.” Their completion in 1972 “terminates the manned flight activity until other manned flight programs are established.” (Testimony)
Pride Inc. Operations Director Marion Barry called on black community to work during July 21 National Day of Participation declared by President Nixon in honor of Apollo 11 lunar landing. During Washington press conference he said, “Why should blacks rejoice when two white Americans land on the moon when white America’s money and technology have not even reached” the inner city? “Why should blacks celebrate Monday . . . when President Nixon didn’t feel that Dr. Martin Luther King’s assassination deserved to he observed?” (Paka, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
Apollo 11 and current nationwide water shortage were “two illustrations of man’s efficiency in achieving the thrills of life and man’s inefficiency in not achieving the necessities of life,’’.Drew Pearson said in Washington Post. “At Cape Kennedy, the United States is about to launch the most carefully rehearsed, most expensive, most unnecessary project of this century by which man will reach a piece of drab, radioactive, lava-like real estate hitherto romantic because of distance—the moon. The launching will succeed because a vast amount of money and the best scientific brains in America over a period of seven years have been lavished on this moon shot. Meanwhile, up the Atlantic Coast, the Capital which voted the $20 billion to reach the moon is desperately short of the second essential to man’s life—water—all because of lack of planning, lack of foresight, and lack of money—the same ingredients which have put the moon shot on the verge of success.” (W Post, 7/10/69, Fll)
New York Times said Dr. Carlos Varsavsky, Director of Argentine Radio Astronomy Institute at La Plata, and 23 team members engaged in international research in radioastronomy faced dismissal for joining general strike May 10 in defiance of Argentine government. They had received notifications of termination of appointment. (NYT, 6/15/69, 24) lated lunar landings in third lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) at Ellington afb, Tex, Armstrong piloted lltv to 100- and 300-ft altitude and practiced touchdown maneuvers in preparation for lunar landing during Apollo 11 mission, to be launched July 16. Armstrong told newsmen lLtv did “excellent job in simulating the landing characteristics of the lunar module.” Flights were first for Armstrong since crash of second lltv Dec. 8, 1968. First lltv, piloted by Armstrong, had crashed May 6, 1968. (upi, NYT, 6/16/69, 1; msc Release 69—49; W Star, 6/17/69, A5)
Paul Haney, described by press as “Voice of Apollo,” announced resignation after 10 yrs with NASA following NASA Hq. discussion of his April 22 appointment as assistant to Associate Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer. Haney said decision to resign resulted from personal differences with Scheer, who told press he had tried to persuade Haney to remain with agency. (AP, NYT, 4/26/69, 2; O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 11 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
Apollo 11 might signal end to KSC area’s economic boom, Wall Street Journal said. NASA had announced slack in Apollo launchings and cut in ksc employment from 23,500 to 18,500 persons. Brevard County (site of ksc) housing construction had fallen some 40%, from 3,438 units in 1967 to 2,080 in 1968, and was currently down another 40%. (Prugh, WSJ, 7/3/69, 28)
NASA was combining Apollo 11 spectacular with “bit of spectacular lobbying,” Washington Evening Star said. It had invited all 533 members of House and Senate to fly at NASA’s expense to witness Apollo 11 launch from Cape Kennedy. Total bill could come to nearly $28,000. (W Star, 6/21/69, A3)
U.S.S.R. launched Luna XV unmanned spacecraft from Baikonur into selenocentric orbit to conduct “further scientific studies of the moon and near lunar space,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was expected to reach moon late July 16—scheduled date of launch of NASA’s Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. There was speculation that Luna XV was Soviet attempt to land spacecraft on moon and return it to earth with sample of lunar soil before U.S. landed. (W Post, 7/14/69, Al; SBD, 7/18/69, 22; B Sun, 7/14/69, Al; gsfc SSR, 7/15/69)
Hughes Aircraft Co. executive team held press conference aboard private yacht near Cape Kennedy, Fla., to announce company President Howard R. Hughes’ intention to rename Surveyor 111 “Hughes Automated Lunar Observer” (halo). Hughes’ assistant, Peter Maheuson, said Hughes was understood to have asked NASA to use acronym in all air-to-groUnd communications. Hughes Aircraft Co. had manufactured Surveyor III, which landed on moon April 19, 1967. Pieces of unmanned spacecraft were to be returned by Apollo 12 for examination at lrl. (Lannan, W Star, 11/12/69, Al)
nas—nrc Space Science Board published Lunar Exploration: Strategy for Research 1969—1975. Best use of manned lunar-landing capability in lunar exploration would entail shift of emphasis from technological development to exploitation of existing Apollo technology for scientific objectives. Board recommended: immediately focusing lunar program on optimizing returns on investment already made in Apollo through maximum use of existing Apollo technology; giving priority to current Apollo lunar-exploration phase should choice be necessary in early 1970s between funding major new manned exploration technology and funding extensions of Apollo lunar technology; periodic reevaluation of NASA’s proposed lunar landing sites; earliest possible extensions of Apollo technology to increase scientific returns and increasing interval up to six months between missions to allow incorporation of improvements; early provision of roving vehicle to transport astronauts at least 3.1—6.2 mi (5—10 km) from LM; inclusion in Apollo 16 to 20 time frame, in high-inclination orbit, of experiments in gravimetry by satellite-to-satellite tracking technique, altimetry, magnetometry, x-ray and gamma-ray spectrometry, and medium- and high-resolution photography; and increase in supporting research in orbital sensing techniques, both active and passive. Board also recommended high-priority consideration for long-distance, remotely controlled, traversing vehicle for later missions; careful review of Apollo program management structure to increase role of scientists in influencing basic policy and mission hardware; specific support to lunar experiment definition as integral part of Apollo program and more substantial investment in developing experiment packages easily modified and interchanged even shortly before flight; and high-priority attention to management, handling, distribution, and analysis of lunar samples brought to earth. (Text; nrc Release)
Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu met President and Mrs. Nixon on arrival at Otopeni Airport, Bucharest. President Nixon replied to welcome: “. . . this significant moment in the history of relations between our two countries coincides with a great moment in the history of the human race. Mankind has landed on the moon. We have established a foothold in outer space. But there are goals we have not reached here on earth. We are still building a just peace in the world. This is a work that requires the same cooperation and patience and perseverance from men of good will that it took to launch that vehicle to the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1065)
London Times published four-page space supplement On the Edge of the Moon. Man had been traveling to moon for centuries in transport which was “romantic, ingenious, foolish and brilliant: chariots of swans, giant guns, artificial clouds and enormous metal springs; even rockets.” Journeys, “dreams that ranged between ludicrous fantasy and prophetic imagination,” had not been recorded much before second century A.D. “But later, as writers discovered science fiction and the appetite men had for it, the stories proliferated.” At times, either by luck, reasoning, knowledge of science, or uncanny inspiration, they foresaw details of voyages like Apollo 10’s and that planned for next month.” Article traced 1,800 yrs of space travel “from dream to reality.” Supplement also described stage sequences planned for NASA’s lunar landing, specifications of lunar module and its achievements, data which scientists hoped to extract from lunar explorations, and possible construction of lunar observatory. Costs of observatory would be justified “only as part of a space programme much larger than what is envisaged for the immediate future, and too large, perhaps, for the resources of any one nation.” (London Times, 6/3/69, I—IV) June 3—5: NASA held Spacemobile Conference in Washington, D.C., to familiarize all personnel with Vice President’s Summer Space Education Program for the Cities conducted by NASA in cooperation with President’s Council on Youth Opportunity. (Program)
Teletype from German ship Vegesack reported numerous pieces of Saturn V	launch vehicle from Apollo 11 were sighted dropping into sea around ship. Vegesack had been at position some 375 mi east-northeast of Cape Kennedy when Apollo 11 lifted off toward moon July 16. (W News, 2/3/70)
In Look, science writer Arthur C. Clarke, Nobel Prize nuclear physicist Dr. Isidor I. Rabi, novelist C. P. Snow, and Catholic theologian Prof. Leslie Dewart wrote personal reactions to Apollo 8 mission. Clarke said: “The Apollo 8 mission marks one of those rare turning points in human history after which nothing will ever be the same again. The immense technical achievement is already obvious to every one and has been universally praised; yet the psychological impact may be even more important and will take some time to make itself fully felt. We no longer live in the world which existed before Christmas 1968. It has passed away as irrevocably as the earth-centered universe of the Middle Ages.” Dr. Rabi said: “It would be misleading to talk of the events that led to the journey of Apollo 8 in terms of the vast sums of money that are involved, even though it cost several times as much as the development of the first atomic bomb. What is more important and more impressive is that Apollo 8 represents the cooperation of hundreds of thousands of people over a period of years in a gigantic effort with no clearly set practical goals, except perhaps the profound desire of mankind to prove to itself that it had the knowledge and the ability to overcome its earthbound limitations.” Prof. Dewart said: “Man has taken his first, halting steps into the cosmos beyond that earthly world in which he was born and within which he had always lived. The impact of Apollo 8 in other areas of human experience is obvious; in religion, it is much less immediately evident. And yet, in the end, it may be more significant for the development of man’s religious consciousness.” {Look, 2/4/69, 72—8)
Excited U.S. residents called air control towers, police departments, and newspapers to report citing NASA’s Apollo 10 spacecraft circling moon. Weather Bureau explained bright object actually was planet Jupiter, which was approaching its nearest distance to earth. (W Star, 5/26/69, A7)
At state dinner in Manila, Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos exchanged toasts with President Nixon and commented on Apollo 11: “. . . we participate in the celebration of this achievement as man aspires for the steers, the stars outside of this world and the stars within himself and within his spirit. It is the hope of humanity, as it is the hope of the Philippines, that this vision and this genius, this courage and this ingenuity shall be utilized for the solution of man’s problems.” {PD, 8/4/69, 1036-7)
Delegation of 10 Soviet scientists visited Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, N.Y. During luncheon they peered through microscope at 12-gm piece of lunar matter brought back by Apollo 11 for study at laboratory’s nuclear research facilities. Scientists were on two-week tour arranged through memorandum of cooperation on peaceful uses of atomic energy. Group of U.S. scientists would pay reciprocal visit to U.S.S.R. early in 1970. (Kaufman, NYT, 11/20/69, 45)
Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia toured msc during five-day visit to U.S. (Reuters, W Post, 7/10/69, A23; Apollo Status Rpt; NASA pao)
Washington Daily News reported song called “The Wondrous Telephone,” by Thomas P. Westendorf, had been published in 1877 with cover showing group of men talking by telephone to man in the moon. (W News, 11/20/69, 52)
New York weathermen were being deluged with calls blaming 10 days of rain and overcast weather in northeastern U.S. on Apollo 11, Associated Press said, wcbs radio news meteorologist Dr. Robert Harris had said, “We’ve had an abundance of calls from all sorts of people who are absolutely certain, through their Bible studies, that the Lord has taken the sun away from us.” (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, A6)
msfc announced it had extended contract with Mason-Rust for continued support services at Michoud Assembly Facility for six months. Contract modification amounted to $3,786,203. (msfc Release 69—46) February 27: NASA postponed Apollo 9 earth-orbital mission, scheduled for launch Feb. 28, after intensive medical examinations of prime crew revealed viral infections. (W Star, 2/27/69, Al)
Poor People’s Campaign” Director, the Rev. Hosea Williams of Southern Christian Leadership Conference, said “hungry” people from five southern states would demonstrate at Cape Kennedy July 15 on eve of Apollo 11 launch and would try to get “as close as possible” to launch site with mules and wagons. “We’re not against things like the space shot, but there’s been a miscalculation in priorities.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
Moon landing would change human lives, British novelist and scientist C. P. Snow said in Look. “I am afraid that in the long run, perhaps a generation, perhaps longer, it will have a bad effect. It will give us the feeling, and the perfectly justified feeling, that our world has finally closed in. This is forever the end of the mortal frontier.” Space enthusiasts thought lunar landing would liberate human imagination but “I believe . . . that human imagination is going to be restricted—as to an extent it was when the last spots on the globe had been visited, the South Pole and the summit of Everest. Nowhere on earth for adventurous man to go. Very soon, there will be no place in the universe for adventurous man to go.” {Look, 8/26/69, 68—72)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 11 samples and expressed surprise at discovery of tiny glasslike crystals in lunar dust. Analyses had revealed samples were crystalline, igneous, fragmented, scoriaceous, and vesicular. They confirmed theory based on Surveyor V data that lunar material contained titanium and indicated presence of number of minerals. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Paul Gast said, “The most exciting discovery to date has been that of the glass. There is something going on on the moon far different than on the earth.” He said scientists speculated impact of meteoroids on moon had vaporized lunar material and caused it to rain back on surface in small drops which formed tiny yellow, brown, and clear pieces of glass few tenths of millimeter in diameter. (Lyons, NYT, 7/29/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/29/69, Al)
Americans had generated only “scant enthusiasm” for Apollo 12 launch, New York Times said. In contrast to Apollo 11, July 16, “television sets in bars and business offices drew only small, languid crowds. . . .” Collective sense of anticlimax was “perhaps predictable considering the intense national emotion spent on the first moon landing four months ago.” Contributing to indifference might have been “the mounting preoccupation with the war in Vietnam, the peace rallies, the controversy surrounding Vice President Agnew and earthly social problems.” However, “there were no reports of the kind of demonstrations that protested the Apollo 11 flight.” Marchers in antiwar protests had appeared “to show little interest” in Apollo 12. (Reinhold, NYT, 11/15/69)	_
Space Business Daily said poll of 1,400 U.S. adults conducted after Apollo 10 splashdown by A. Singlinger & Co. had found 51.3% in favor of lunar exploration program. Of those polled, 39% disapproved of program and 9.7% had no opinion. (SBD, 6/10/69, 174)
While there was some “feeling of dejavu” at Cocoa Beach, near Apollo 12 launch site, some residents, especially local business men, believed interest in Apollo 12 was “just as keen as in any other launching,” New York Times said. Manager Hal Saunders of Cape Kennedy Hilton Hotel had said, while pace seemed calmer and more organized, people were no less excited than before. He felt there were more tourists at Cape Kennedy this week than in July bcause “fewer were scared by press reports . . . that all facilities would be jammed.” Many were seeing launch for first time “and it is still a thoroughly thrilling experience.” (Blakeslee, NYT, 11/14/69, 33)
First stage of Saturn V (SA—508) launch vehicle, to be used on Apollo 13, reached ksc. Second stage, scheduled to leave mtf June 25, would reach ksc June 30. Third stage had arrived at ksc June 13. Instrument unit would be flown from mtf to ksc July 7. (msfc Release 69—148)
Apollo 11 countdown began at ksc at 8:00 pm EDT in preparation for launch toward moon at 9:32 am EDT July 16. (Apollo 11 Status Rpt)
U.S. newspaper editorials hailed Apollo 11 launch. Miami News: “All America, represented by three lonely men in space, is on its way to the moon. In fact, this is a people’s effort, arousing the interest and participation of all the people of this country. This is evidenced by the more than one million persons on hand at Cape Kennedy . . . for the start of the moon voyage and by the many millions who join in the adventure by television. Today’s magnificent launch, and the elan stirred in our people by it, makes this one of America’s most splendid hours.” (Miami News, 7/17/69, A16) Washington Evening Star: countdown which culminated in Apollo 11 liftoff, “regardless of NASA’s official records,” had begun, “when primitive man first looked up into the night sky to gaze at the moon, and to feel the first stirring of wonder.” (W Star, 7/16/69, A22) Huntsville Times: Manhattan Project had climaxed with July 16, 1945, explosion of world’s first successful atomic bomb. “Men, it seems, can only pray that the consequences of the quest of the planets may be better than those born in the irreversible explosion on a New Mexico desert 24 years ago.” (Huntsville Times, 7/16/69) Chicago Sun-Times: “Man has always looked upward to the stars, first in fear and awe, then in need to know. Today the first great step to the firmament will be taken. If it is successful man will stand on the threshold of outer space—and standing there will reach outward.” (C Sun-Times, 7/16/69)
Apollo 8 mission (Dec. 21—27, 1968) was adjudged successful by NASA. All objectives of manned circumlunar mission were attained, as well as four detailed test objectives not originally planned, (nasa Proj Off)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 12’s man-made lunar quake: “It seems that when the lunar lander was sent rocketing down to crash on the Ocean of Storms, it left the moon ‘ringing like a gong’ for some 30 minutes. This, in the words of one ecstatic scientist, constitutes ‘a major discovery . . . quite beyond the range of our experience.’ ” Scientific curiosity “is a good thing—provided it’s kept within reasonable limits. ... Just suppose that their first reading was right, and that the moon really is some sort of celestial gong. Remember what happened when people got too enthusiastic with the Liberty Bell.” (W Star, 11/24/69, A12)
Apollo 12 countdown began at KSC at 12:00 pm EST for launch toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Countdown, originally scheduled to begin at 7:00 pm est Nov. 8, had been started early to reduce costs by eliminating overtime that would have been paid to launch crews. (upi, NYT, 11/8/69, 20)
msfc announced award of $1,712,000 contract change to Bendix Corp. for construction of three additional control computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, to be delivered from April 1970 through July 1970. (msfc Release 69-141)
Stacked spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo 11, first lunar landing mission, rolled out to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at KSC. (ksc Hist Off; McGehan, B Sun, 5/21/69)
Several thousand gallons of fuel escaped from prevalves in Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC) while it was being prepared for Apollo 10 countdown demonstration test (cddt) at ksc. Prevalves opened while leak was being repaired in nitrogen pressurization system on mobile launcher, cddt, scheduled to begin April 28, was delayed 24 hrs while vehicle was examined for damage. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3; Marshall Star, 4/30/69, 1)
Apollo 10 mission (May 18—26), first lunar orbital mission with complete Apollo spacecraft, was adjudged successful by NASA. Mission had achieved all objectives; systems had performed according to plan with only minor anomalies and crew had acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for subsequent Apollo missions. (nasa Proj Off)
Moon was twin planet of earth, formed from same whirling gas cloud, in early view of two lrl scientists studying Apollo 11 samples. Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Astri National Univ., Canberra, Australia, said, “Moon’s composition is unlike the earth’s. But it is not outside our experience. It is like the material you would expect if the earth and moon were formed as a double planet.” He thought moon was younger twin, while Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York thought it might be equally old. Age of two lunar rocks had been estimated at 3.1 billion yrs, “give or take . . . 200 million years,” by measuring proportion of argon 40 to potassium in rocks, Dr. Schaeffer said. Lunar highlands might be 4.5	billion yrs old. Moon, he thought, never grew big enough to melt internally and produce geologic activity to change lunar surface and leave younger rocks. Dr. Taylor’s studies had shown unusually high amounts of refractory material and absence or low concentration of volatile materials, implying volatile material had boiled away in melting process. He inferred rock chemistry was different from deep mantle of earth and from cosmic abundances—distribution of elements that would be expected in distant, more primitive planet captured by earth. (Cohn, W Post, 8/28/69, Al)
Gravity at Apollo 11 lunar landing site had been determined to be 162,821,680 milligals from data telemetered to earth by lm on lunar surface, msc scientist Richard L. Nance reported in Science. Gravity was measured with pulsed integrating pendulous accelerometer. Measurement could suggest order of magnitude of other anomalies, provide guide for future surveys, and indicate degree of homogeneity of moon. Radius of moon at an observation point could be determined independently of other methods of measurement. (Science, 10/17/69, 384-5)
msfc announced $7,384,543 modification to contract with Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for assembly of two boosters for Saturn IB rockets 2l3 and 214 for use in Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 69—93)
Observers on earth would have two opportunities to see Apollo 12 after launch Nov. 14, NASA announced. During first opportunity, 57 min after liftoff, oxygen release from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) would be visible on east coasts of North and South America and western Europe and Africa. During second opportunity, about 15 hrs after liftoff, spacecraft would be visible during translunar coast through telescopes in U.S., Mexico, Central America, South America, Europe, and western Africa, (nasa Release 69—148C)
U.K.’s first lunar samples—3 oz of moon dust in 16 contamination-proof boxes—arrived in London and were shown to scientists and press at Science Research Council. Dr. S. O. Agrell of Cambridge Univ. and Dr. P. E. Clegg of London Univ. had flown to MSC to collect them. They would be examined by 14 British research teams. (AP, Kansas City Times, 9/20/69)
Washington Post editorial on Apollo 12 launch: “Through the peculiarities of our time, we are all about to become participants, albeit vicariously, in the kind of research and exploration that has been carried out previously by lonely scientists almost in isolation. Radio and television make it possible for us to watch and to hear two explorers as they go about the somewhat mundane business of making and recording observations, picking up rocks, and setting up equipment. As these flights roll on through the next few years, we will watch the slow process of exploration proceed. In a way, it will be like being there when Darwin traveled around the world and made the observations that resulted in his theory of evolution or when Lewis and Clark explored the Northwest. Not too much should be expected from any one trip or any one set of experiments. It is the totality of knowledge, not its fragments, that counts.” (W Post, 11/15/69, A20)
With Apollo 11 launch “minus-23 days” MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, visited 3,000-yr-old temple of Apollo at Delphi, Greece. After consultation with oracle, Dr. von Braun said, “I am convinced that we will succeed because no other space operation was ever so well prepared in advance.” Oracle, he said, “was ambiguous, as usual.” {Time, 7/4/69, 35; AP, W Post, 6/25/69)
Scientists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory opened last box of Apollo 11 lunar samples containing charcoal-gray dust and assorted rocks ranging from gravel to size of orange. NASA geologist Dr. Jeffrey L.	Warner described rocks as “different from anything we have on earth.” Some of rocks had flat faces and appeared to have been broken off larger chunks of material. Rocks in first box of samples had been rounded. Some rocks contained unidentified crystals that sparkled; others had “an unusual smattering of what appeared to be metallics,” possibly ilmenite (iron-titanium mineral oxide), important source of titanium, (upi, W Post, 8/5/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 8/5/69, Al)
Every scientist-astronaut except one—geologist Harrison Schmitt—had been removed from NASA’s lunar landing training list, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Report was later denied by nasa. Cohn said remaining scientists had been assigned to train for iong-duration, earth-orbiting Apollo Applications missions beginning in 1972. {W Post, 8/21/69, Al; 8/22/69, A18)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists told press at msc rocks retrieved from moon by Apollo 12 crew were younger, lower in titanium, and higher in nickel than those retrieved by Apollo 11 and showed no signs of bacteria or toxicity. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of New York State Univ. at Stony Brook said Apollo 12 samples seemed to be 2.2 billion to 2.5 billion yrs old, compared to 3.8 billion to 4.6 billion yrs old for Apollo 11 samples. “The younger age means the . . . activity, whether volcanic or meteorite impact, took place over an extended period of time, not on a short time scale.” Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Australian National Univ. said chemistry of Apollo 12 and Apollo 11 samples was basically similar but had many interesting differences. “The surface is not completely homogeneous across the moon. There are differences in chemistry probably reflecting in the underlying rock. ... it looks as though we could have two extremes of differences.” Apollo 12 samples from Ocean of Storms had about half titanium content found in Apollo 11 samples from Sea of Tranquility. They had few refractory elements and fewer volatile elements. (Wilford, NYT, 12/13/69, 20; Cohn, W Post, 12/13/69, A10)
nasa announced Apollo 12 lm guidance-system targeting for Site 7 landing point on moon’s Ocean of Storms had been changed to improve crew’s ability to observe landing point during late portion of descent. Crew would attempt to land close to Surveyor 111 spacecraft at 2.990 south latitude by 23.204 west longitude. Original aiming point was 2.982 south latitude by 23.392 west longitude—1,118 ft northeast of Surveyor 111. (nasa Release 69—148B)
Apollo 11 CSM and LM were mated with Saturn V (SA—506) launch vehicle at ksc in preparation for July 16 lunar landing mission. (SBD, 4/15/69, 209)
Moon “loomed large in Chinese tradition,” but 700 million people of Communist China had not been told of Apollo 12 lunar landing, Christian Science Monitor said. Though “elite hierarchy in Peking . . . learned of Intrepid’s touchdown as fast as the Soviets,” story of Apollo 12 had not passed beyond select group of leaders. “Indeed the Chinese people have yet to be told by their government-controlled press and radio of the flight of Apollo 11. . . .” Some might hear of flight from foreign radio broadcast, but many were jammed by Peking. VOA report to Hong Kong on Intrepid’s lunar landing had been “curiously overlaid with martial music from a Chinese Communist radio station on the mainland.” (Hughes, CSM, 11/20/69)
Washington Evening Star special supplement, “Voyage to the Moon,” commented: “Hanging in the sky, attracting man’s attention for untold generations, the moon has been the reputed home of gods and goddesses of all religions, primitive and modern. If all these deities lived there at any one time, the reasons for its battle-scarred appearance would be obvious. But assuming that none did . . . that pock-marked face still poses more questions than it answers.” (W Star, 7/14/69)
New York Times editorial: “This is the week of the moon. The countdown is on at Cape Kennedy and, if all goes well, a week from today a manned vehicle will for the first time alight on another celestial body. ... all mankind will share in the exhilaration of discovery. Ever since man evolved he has been exploring, extending his domain over all parts of his planet. Now that insatiable curiosity is bursting its terrestrial bounds to provide our first personal knowledge of the nearest neighbor in the cosmos. It is an inspiring adventure, a testimony not only to man’s imagination in amassing knowledge of nature, but to his courage, his perseverance and his indomitable spirit.” {NYT, 7/13/69)
Atlas published translation of article in L’Espresso, Rome, by Italian novelist Alberto Moravia on implications of Apollo 11. “In Columbus’s days, men were offered finite goals, like the discovery of America; or they were offered spiritual aims, like the search for goodness, truth and beauty. At that time, no one could have guessed that Columbus’s discovery was only a beginning. That other discoveries would follow, a second America, a third, a fourth, and so on through millions of years and billions of kilometers. But today that is happening. Compared to our new set of goals, the aims of Marx and communism are pure imagination. For the first time the real and the rational are about to become one. We are now at the end of history—and post-history is just beginning.” (Atlas, 9/69, 40—3)
Analysis of lunar surface would provide key to earth’s history by indicating whether moon’s origin was catastrophic or noncatastrophic, Dr. H. Alfven and Dr. G. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in Science. Radiometric dating of igneous lunar rocks might provide information on time of their solidification. If catastrophic alternative was correct, rocks should date to less than 4.5 eons, minimum age of moon, and predominant age should be approximately 0.7 eon, with major surface and subsurface features less than 0.7 eon. If noncatastrophic alternative proved correct, predominant age of lunar rocks should exceed 4 eons, at least, since it was likely moon predated earth. {Science, 7/4/69, 11-7)
erc Director James C. Elms discussed NASA’s role in computer R&D at Spring Joint Computer Conference in Boston. While Apollo guidance computer was best known among major computer activities undertaken by NASA in its first decade, other onboard computer developments “of considerable technical challenge” had been pursued. Versatile test-bed multiprocessor exam was oriented toward use of “hierarchy of memories” to increase capability to evaluate advanced technology for very large bulk-storage systems, particularly for spaceborne computers. trim—for Transformation of Imagery—was experimental tool for advancing state of art in imagery processing; computer-driven flying-spot scanner with color capability had auxiliary display terminal permitting man-machine-interactive operation, sofix—for Software Fix—was coordinated university research program on problems in developing computer software at same pace as hardware. (Text)
Press commented on Apollo 10 mission: Washington Post editorial: “The mission of Messrs. Cernan, Stafford and Young, as dramatic and daring as it is, is only an interim step between the first trip to the moon and the first landing on the moon. It is, however, a crucial step since any major problems in this mission or any major unanticipated discoveries about the moon’s gravity might well delay the ultimate landing. Because it is both so crucial and so risky, the Nation will wait with special concern when they disappear behind the moon for the first time this afternoon and when the lunar landing craft breaks away from the mother ship tomorrow afternoon for its descent toward the moon’s surface. The hope hardly needs to be expressed that these maneuvers, like those in the other Apollo flights,
msfc announced it had awarded $1,954,999 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to IBM Federal Systems Div.' for designing, developing, and building five general-purpose digital computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, (msfc Release 69—71)
There appears to be much more to be squeezed from Apollo than just the incalculable value of national prestige or scientific discovery,” Michael Getler wrote in Space/Aeronautics. “The ability to mine these supporting talents, to judge their value outside manned space flight and disseminate and apply them may well prove the most telling and measurable argument in the debate which is bound to continue over Apollo’s real value.” Apollo had combined “much of what we have with what we do best. Though complex, it was manageable. It had clear goals, was well funded, enjoyed fairly widespread public support, and dangled the element of competition in front of our involuntary reflex. Most importantly, it tapped an industrial base and an enthusiasm for gadgetry that are unmatched anywhere. . . . Because many of today’s challenges confront human nature and not technology, Apollo can be made to seem irrelevant. In fact, however, we are not left alone with our behavioral troubles. There is still an economy to keep sound, industry and commerce to be kept competitive, and a government to be made more efficient. Failure to take this extraordinary project apart, piece by piece, and examine its usefulness in these areas would indeed be wasteful.” (S/A, 9/69, 42—53)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said time was “ripe” for NASA reorganization, “not merely the firing, promoting and transferring of officials, but the functional restructuring of the agency as well.” There was some suspicion that no place existed for Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, who was “not only a Johnson-administration holdover, but a card-carrying Democrat as well.” Some observers believed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, “the President’s current darling and space confidant,” might be next NASA Administrator. “The idea of putting astronauts in charge of the space program may seem incongruous, but it is clearly not beyond the realm of possibility in the image-conscious Nixon regime.” Paine’s fate would determine that of Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. With lunar landing, Apollo had changed from developmental to operational effort. Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations at msc, would likely transfer to Washington as Apollo Program Manager—possibly “controlling all space missions for NASA.” Hines saw possibility of Apollo Program Director, George H. Hage’s moving into position being vacated by l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, who was rejoining usaf. “George M. Low, Apollo chief at Houston, may replace the Houston Center director, Robert R. Gilruth, if Gilruth can be prevailed upon to retire.” There was talk about moving msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun to Washington “to do what he does best: charm money out of Congress.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, “may retire to make way for Rocco Petrone. . . .” (W Star, 8/10/69, G4)
Newsiveek’s 42nd space age cover story since October 1957 contained comments from “opinion makers” on Apollo 11 mission. Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said scientific basis for mission was to discover secret of earth’s past through study of lunar rocks. Resolution of “cold moon” versus “hot moon” theory controversy—whether moon was formed cold, or cooled off shortly after its birth, or whether it was like earth molten or partly molten inside with volcanic surface—“may ride with Apollo 11.” Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy, said: “A society that can resolve to conquer space; to put man in a place where in ages past it was considered only God could reach; to appropriate vast billions; to systematically set about to discover the necessary scientific knowledge; that society deserves both acclaim and our contempt . . . acclaim for achievement and contempt for bizarre social values. For though it has the capacity to meet extraordinary challenges, it has failed to use its ability to rid itself of the scourges of racism, poverty and war, all of which were brutally scarring the nation even as it mobilized for the assault on the solar system.” Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead said: “This can be a first step, not into space alone, but into the disciplined and courageous use of enhanced human powers for man, ennobled as he is today, as the first men step on the moon.” Philosopher Lewis Mumford said: “Space exploration . . . is strictly a military by-product; and without pressure from the Pentagon and the Kremlin it would never have found a place in any national budget.” Best hope was “that this colossal perversion of energy, thought and other precious human resources may awaken a spontaneous collective reaction sufficient to bring us down to earth again. Any square mile of inhabited earth has more significance for man’s future than all the planets in our solar system.” (Newsweek, 6/7/69, S, 60—1)
Pittsfield, Mass., Berkshire Eagle editorial said: “It subtracts nothing from the extraordinary human and technical achievement represented by Apollo 11 to say that the projected lunar landing is an occasion not only for awe and pride but also for a thoughtful reappraisal of our whole approach to the new frontier of space.” (B Eagle, 7/19/69)
In Washington Sunday Star, David Van Praagh discussed President Nixon’s planned Asian tour, to follow mid-Pacific recovery of Apollo 11 crew: Nixon would find “the problems of this planet’s most populous continent present a striking contrast. They are not subject to quick, rational, scientific or dramatic solutions. Usually they can not even be tackled through modern communications. The vast majority of Indians and Pakistanis for example, can’t read or write and do not own a tiny transistor radio or TV set to monitor the Pacific splashdown. They live in a rather backward age and most of them are hungry.” (W Star, 7/6/69, D14)
Motion picture footage of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission would be released for sale to commercial producers after quarantine period, NASA announced. Two 600-ft rolls would be made available initially: one would include prelaunch, launch, and recovery operations; other would include all usable onboard footage, (nasa Release 69-83L)
Countdown for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission continued at ksc despite discovery of leak in fuel tank. Officials said launch crews would have ample time to replace tank and check out replacement without delaying liftoff Nov. 14. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/13/69, Al)
Apollo 11 lunar landing had been selected number one foreign news story of year by Japan’s Kyodo news service, Associated Press said. Second was President Nixon’s decision to reduce U.S. troops in Vietnam; third was Communist China’s ninth party congress in Peking. {St. Louis G-D, 12/8/69)
At Salzburg news conference preceding celebration of his 75th birthday, German rocketry pioneer Prof. Hermann Oberth proposed that man extract usable raw materials from moon and store them suspended in gravity-free zone between moon and earth. Materials could then be retrieved from area and brought to earth. He suggested erection of giant concave “space mirrors” to gather celestial light and reflect it on earth as heat to melt polar caps and improve earth’s climate. He predicted development of electrically propelled spacecraft and electromagnetic catapults to launch spacecraft without consuming fuel. During celebration, sponsored by Hermann Oberth Society of Nuremberg, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said Oberth’s ideas on rocketry published in 1923 remained valid to date. (NYT, 6/29/69, 3)
msc announced award of $4.1-million modification to IBM Corp. contract for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of real-time computer complex (rttc) which supported Apollo lunar landing missions. Modification definitized requirements to support Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) and continued work under multi-inventive arrangement covering cost, performance, schedule, and equipment management, (msc Release 69—69)
Aquanauts Dr. Larry Hallanger, Dr. David Youngblood, Wally Jenkins, and Richard A. Waller had successfully completed two-day experiment in first self-contained undersea laboratory 50 ft below Atlantic near Riviera Beach, Fla., Associated Press reported. Hydro-Lab, 16 ft long and 8 ft in diameter, supplied its own electricity from fuel cell similar to cell used for power in Apollo spacecraft. It was built by Perry Oceanographies, Inc. (W Star, 10/20/69, A3)
Board of Investigation which probed Feb. 17 death of Sealab III Aquanaut Berry L. Cannon had concluded probable cause was carbon dioxide poisoning due to faulty diving gear, usn announced. Gear had lacked substance for filtering carbon dioxide from exhaled breath. Associated Press said Sealab III project had been “shelved” because of insufficient funds for FY 1970 and quoted USN spokesman as saying it would be continued later. Project had been suspended since Cannon death, (dod Release 794-69; W Star, 9/24/69, A9) *	Shawbury, England, innkeeper Jack Warner had asked U.S. Government for license to open first pub on moon, Associated Press said. He would call it “The Space Inn” or “The Lunatic Tavern.” (W Star, 9/24/69, A16)
Some observers on earth might be able to see moon-bound Apollo 11 on two occasions, NASA announced. At 2:44:18 GET, exhaust plumes from S—IVB firing in parking orbit over Gilbert Islands in South Pacific would be visible to naked eye for several minutes over large part of sky. For several hours after translunar injection burn, csm/lm, S—IVB, and four spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter (sla) panels would be visible through telescope to observers in U.S., Mexico, Central and South America, and western Africa, (nasa Special Release)
Cross-country ceremonies for Apollo 11 astronauts constituted “probably the single greatest peacetime celebration in the nation’s history,” New York Times editorial said. “It was more than a tribute to three courageous and able men; it was also an act of homage to the hundreds of thousands of workers, engineers, technicians and scientists whose hard work over almost a decade made the moon landing possible. At the most fundamental level, perhaps, the outpouring of national rejoicing stemmed from the renewed sense of purpose the Apollo’s incredible feat had brought to a nation long torn and depressed by military travail abroad and racial and generational antagonisms at home. The essence of that sentiment was well stated by Mr. Armstrong when he declared at the United Nations that ‘we citizens of earth who can solve the problem of leaving earth can also solve the problems of staying on earth.’ ” (NYT, 8/14/69)
msfc announced contract awards: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. was awarded $97,340,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract to provide for two Saturn V Workshops—one for launch in 1972 and second for backup. McDonnell Douglas also received $87,450,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract modification for continued work on two airlock modules for Apollo Applications (aa) program cluster, including tests, checkout, documentation, and logistics support. Boeing Co. received $25,130,376 contract modification extending period for completion of Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—15) from June 30, 1970, to June 30,1971. (msfc Releases 69—199, 69—200, 69—201)
Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. moon flight was, again, advocated by Jess Gorkin in Parade. Magazine had proposed cooperative space venture Jan. 9, 1966. “The idea had international appeal. Residents of Moscow spoke warmly of the concept. Letters of approval poured in from all over the United States as well as Europe and Asia. The proposal was supported by newspapers around the world.” NASA had “been sharing the country’s space knowledge with other nations for years.” U.S. scientists had worked closely with scientists from nations whose scientific payloads were launched aboard U.S. rockets. (Parade, 11/9/69)
Washington Sunday Star commented on display of moon rocks at Smithsonian Institution: “The lunar chunk does indeed look like something that, if it turned up in a Bethesda [Md.] backyard, would not draw a second glance. And yet it is something that, until two months ago, no man had seen before. ... It is a promise of unimagined things to come.” Judging by crowds queued up, “Smithsonian has booked its best act since the Mona Lisa came to town six years ago.” (W Star, 9/21/69, Cl)
In Huntsville interview, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said accomplishment of first lunar landing would not necessarily mean U.S. was first in space race. “. . . whether the Russians have this particular objective in their program, I just don’t know.” It was no longer possible to decide in simple terms who was ahead. “. . . today the space program has so many facets that it may be impossible for all eternity from now on to be ahead of them in all fields. And . . . impossible for them to be ahead of us in all fields.” It was still possible for U.S.S.R. to reach moon first if July launching date for Apollo 11 was delayed. Russians now had rocket more powerful than Saturn V, which would allow direct lunar flight. “If this rocket is flown in the very near future—which it might—they may still have a chance of landing a man on the moon in the latter part of 1969.” As for Soviet unmanned lunar landing, Dr. von Braun said, “I think the Russians very definitely have the capability as far as their equipment is concerned to soft land enough payload on the moon to take a sample of lunar soil and fly it back to earth.” (upi, NYT, 6/6/69, 18)
NASA published Lunar Orbiter I Preliminary Results (SP—197), including assessment of lunar terrain and results of secondary experiments in selenodesy, micrometeoroids, and radiation. Launched Aug. 10, 1966, spacecraft had been first U.S. vehicle to orbit moon, first to obtain detailed photographic coverage of near and far sides of moon, and first to photograph earth from moon’s vicinity. Photos showed fractured and faulted lunar crust with mass-wasting where large boulders had tumbled into craters. Moon appeared to have been highly dynamic and affected by volcanic activity, but despite overall roughness, some photos showed regions of relative smoothness. Surface of far side appeared much rougher than near side with higher terra-to-mare ratio. Meteoroid sensors registered no impacts during mission, indicating meteor activity near moon was no greater than that near earth. Radiation dose rate during transit to moon corresponded to that produced by galactic cosmic rays, but dose rates as high as 70 mrad per hr and 7 rad per hr were experienced during solar flares Aug. 26 and Sept. 2, 1966. (Text)
Terminal countdown for Apollo 9 mission, scheduled for launch March 3, began at 10:00 pm EST. (NASA Proj Off)
Completion of multimillion-dollar electron microscope, twice as powerful as any previously existing, at Laboratory of Electronic Optics in Toulouse, France, opened question “Will we ever be able to look into the very heart of things?” Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Instrument, without its accelerator, weighed 22 tons and stood 10 ft tall. Interviews with U.S., French, and U.K. scientists had revealed wide feeling that “before long it may be possible ... to see individual atoms and ‘read’ the genetic message in a strand of dna (deoxyribonucleic acid).” Univ. of Chicago biophysicist Dr. Humberto Fernandez-Moran had said when that stage was reached, it might be possible not only to predict, but also to design life at the molecular level. {NYT, 11/30/69, E9) During November: It was “no government secret” that NASA, “preoccupied with putting men on the moon,” had neglected aeronautics in favor of space, C. V. Glines said in Armed Forces Management. But pressures generated by “airways crisis of 1st year, an ever-growing divergence between civilian and military aeronautical R&D requirements and applications and concern for loss of U.S. preeminence in aeronautics are demanding that attention be given to national aeronautical research and development policies.” Effects of Nixon Administration “study timetable” for long-range NASA—DOT civil R&D program would affect dot—FAA 1972 budgets. Meanwhile, “quiet gains are being made in the aeronautics side of the NASA house.” NASA aircraft technology budget would increase from $94.9 million in FY 1969 to over $100 million in FY 1970, with further increase in FY 1971 and new high in FY 1972, “when the long-range study gives new directions for aeronautical research.” (Armed Forces Management, 11/69, 34-8)
Soviet space scientist Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko said at news conference during meeting of International Academy of Astronautics at Cloudcroft, N.Mex., it would be desirable and technically feasible for cosmonaut to be member of future Apollo moon-landing crew. (AP, B Sun, 10/2/69, A15)
m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Program Management at msfc, would return to duty with usaf after Apollo 11 mission, msfc Deputy Director, Technical, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, announced. Maj. O’Connor would be replaced by Lee B. James, Manager of Saturn Program Office, (msfc Release 69—155)
New York Times—while urging precautions against contamination on Apollo 11 lunar landing mission—praised Apollo 10 mission as “triumphant scientific climax” of Apollo effort: “The breathtaking virtuosity of Apollo 10’s equipment and crew leaves little doubt that similar apparatus can deposit properly trained men on the moon and bring them back safely to earth—always barring the possibility of unexpected mechanical or other malfunction. At the cost of more than $20 billion the United States has acquired the capability of manned travel to the moon. Whatever the wisdom of concentrating such vast resources on the space race, the accomplishment is brilliant and merits awed congratulations for all those whose work and talent made it possible.” (NYT, 5/25/69, E16)
usn reported eight-ship Soviet Naval fleet was heading south 25 mi eastsoutheast of Miami, Fla., on course that could provide view of Apollo 11 launch. U.S. carrier aircraft and destroyer escort Gary shadowed squadron, officially en route to Havana for July 26 commemoration of Cuhan revolution. (Homan, W Post, 7/12/69, Al; AP, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
Svenska Dagbladet, Stockholm, Sweden, welcomed Apollo 11 launch: “One of the greatest adventures of human history begins today. . . . Studies of the moon will to a great degree enrich our knowledge of both the earth and space. Among other things it will be possible to make comparisons which will propel science by leaps in various disciplines. . . . While we can predict much that may result from conquest of the moon, there will in all likelihood be many results which we cannot even imagine now. All great discoveries and bold undertakings have brought advances which no one could have foreseen from the outset.” Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden: “There is an irrational element in these feats of discovery which fortunately dominates the prosaic calculation of gains. Then one can regret that man’s fantasy seems incapable of being fired for such a tremendous task as eliminating starvation from our earth, or for bringing peace to Biafra or for eliminating the U.S. Negro ghettos. . . . Three men will be lifted to world acclaim today on the crest of mankind’s greatest ever coordinated effort. . . .” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
Following publication Nov. 29 by Pravda of article describing U.S. moon rock exhibit in Moscow, crowd of “thousands,” eager to see display, smashed glass door and nearly demolished room in which Apollo films were shown. (Clarity, NYT, 12/1/69, 14)
NASA announced it was proceeding with plans and preparations for launch of Apollo 18 manned lunar landing mission to Fra Mauro on March 12, 1970. Decision was based on review of photos taken of Fra Mauro area and successful demonstration of pinpoint landing techniques by Apollo 12. Fra Mauro was flat, vast highland area about 110 mi east of Apollo 12 landing point on Ocean of Storms, (nasa Release 69—162)
Swiss physicist Dr. Johannes Geiss, originator of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface, would use “deliberate speed” in assaying results, New York Times reported. NASA courier had delivered square foot of aluminum foil exposed on moon for an hour to catch particles emitted by sun. Dr. Geiss and associates in Berne Univ.’s Physics Institute had devised plan for dual study of foil in Berne and at Federal Polytechnic at Zurich. Analyses, determining components by spectrometer, would require several weeks. NASA would not release remaining three square feet of foil to him until 1970. {NYT, 8/18/69, 34)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during Moscow interview with Soyuz cosmonauts there were “some advantages” to joint space experiments with U.S. “We have no objection in principle,” he said, “and the setting of this type of goal has some merit. Even now the two countries participate in a number of international programs.” He added, “One would have to think, and choose this kind of joint program carefully. Maybe one of the flights to a planet in the future, or maybe around the earth also could be interesting. It is difficult to say exactly what I would like to see.” Keldysh said Soviet scientists had not received special technical data on Apollo 8 flight from U.S. However, “Certainly the success of such an outstanding flight, even if it does not produce any concrete new data, still gives something to all mankind.” (Winters, B Sun, 1/25/69, A2; Shabad, NYT, 1/25/69, 6)
Preliminary investigation had revealed leak in small fuel line on Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—II) No. 3 engine had caused June 26 fire, msfc announced. Board had been convened to conduct further investigations and recommend preventive measures. Stage’s No. 3 and No. 5 engines would be replaced; other three engines received minor damage and would be repaired in place. Accident would not affect launch preparations for Apollo 11 mission; inspection of Apollo 11 vehicle SA—506 had confirmed that its high-pressure fuel lines were in good condition. (msfc Release 69—156)
NASA released “Debrief: Apollo 8,” 28-min, 16-mm color film showing first manned lunar orbit. (NASA PAO; Nelson, Science, 1/24/69, 371)
Apollo 12 countdown demonstration test (cddt) began at KSC in preparation for launch to moon Nov. 14. (upi, NYT, 10/25/69)
Christian Science Monitor editorial asked, “Would it not he possible, as America’s eventual space aim, to see the moon treated much as Antarctica today is treated?” That is “as a ‘continent’ where nationality does not play a significant role. There could be a research station on the moon, manned the year around—not merely by Americans but by invitation to the scientists and technicians of other interested nations.” (■CSM, 1/7/69)
South Korea dedicated its first superhighway, linking Seoul with Inchon. It was named Apollo in honor of U.S. moon landing. (AP, W Post, 7/23/69, C5)
Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov said in Moscow interview: “Exploration of moon and planets is a most noble task and our generation can rightly be proud it has opened the space era. Any scientific achievement accomplished in any country in die long run becomes an achievement of world science. Space efforts of the United States and the USSR sometimes complement one another.” (upi, P Bull, 6/22/69)
As part of NASA and Washington National Gallery of Art program, Eyewitness to Space, group of artists attended Apollo 11 launch to paint facets of mission. Program originated in 1963 when artists were invited to cover Mercury 9 mission. Among those commissioned to record Apollo 11 were Peter Hurd, Robert Rauschenberg, Lamar Dodd, and James B. Wyeth. Since program started, 25 artists had produced more than 500 sketches and paintings. (Casey, W Post, 7/13/69, Gl; Hicks, NYT, 7/15/69, 33; W Star, 7/17/69, A12)
In Science, JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe said despite successful landing of seven unmanned spacecraft on moon controversy over density of lunar surface material continued. Further analysis of data showed relation of density of lunar surface layer to depth was best determined from spacecraft measurements of bearing capacity as function of depth. Comparison of these values with laboratory measurements of bearing capacity of low-cohesion particulate materials as a function of percentage of solid indicated bulk density at lunar surface was approximately 1.1 gr per cc at depth of 5 cm. (Science, 6/27/69, 1514-6)
National and international press continued comment on Apollo 11 lunar Philadelphia Inquirer; “Will this magnificent accomplishment serve as inspiration, urging Americans and all mankind on to a genuine ‘giant leap’ forward, not merely into the infinite reaches of space but into the infinite possibilities of achievement on earth where the space age has recorded many more failures than successes? Or will the inspiration be abandoned before the veiled censure of those who seem to suggest the solution of all human dilemmas lies in turning away from space to other priorities?” Cutbacks at hour of triumph would be only waste of investment in technology which could be helped in solving earth problems. “This is no time to falter, our astronauts should come home to a world and nation determined to fulfill the prophecy in Commander Armstrong’s words.” (P Inq, 7/22/69) W.ashington Post: It was foolish “to leap from this historic moment to eager expectations of the day when men will live and work in space, when colonies will be established, food raised and industrial products built on heavenly bodies other than the earth. These things will doubtless come in their own good time. But this is not the occasion on which to make a new national commitment in space that would keep NASA’s program going at the frantic pace which fulfilled President Kennedy’s great promise for the moon. Now is the occasion, rather, to establish a steady program of space development, one removed from the political debate <Jver national priorities, which will ensure that we establish a firm base for future generations to build upon while creating at home ... a kind of society which will allow them to use fully the new opportunities opened up by the three new American heroes and the tens of thousands of other people who made their flight possible.” (W Post, 7/22/69, A24) Handels Och Sjofartstidning, Goteborg, Sweden: “This is a small step for a man, but a great one for humanity. Neil Armstrong’s commentary when he stepped down onto the surface of the moon has every prospect of becoming one of those winged expressions which generations of school children will commit to memory. ... Now should be the time to replace the extraordinarily costly space race with cooperation between the Soviet and the U.S.A.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Stockholm Expressen: “The ‘moonshot’ . . . was imposing. But it also gives a horrible feeling to think that the U.S.A. can handle tremendous technical problems with such ease while it is considerably more difficult to cope with those of a complicated social, political and human nature.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Canadian Montreal Star: “The scientific information which results from Apollo 11 is an extra dividend from an enterprise which has produced its own benefits for the human spirit and, perhaps, for human solidarity.” (Am Consul, Montreal)	,
Washington Post published letter from Irene S. Rubin in Lampang, Thailand. Real impact of Apollo 11 success in Thailand had been “on the group of educated men who have some effect on government. Their primary reaction was not one of shared accomplishment but of shame in the gap thus dramatized between themselves and the developed countries.” Though U.S. could not hide technological capacity, “I think we should be more aware of the context into which news of the Apollo mission is received. Far from bringing the world closer together with such performances, we may be arousing bitterness and obstinacy in the misallocation of development funds.” (W Post, 8/21/69, A18)
International comment on NASA’s Apollo 10 mission: U.N. Secretary General U Thant said flight was “a thrilling compound of great skill, boundless courage and fabulous technology, as impressive for its perfection as for its informality and its great humor. ... It is refreshing to have been able to turn for a moment from all our troubles on earth to this magnificent spectacle of man’s extraordinary capacity for achievement and peaceful quest.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said mission represented almost miraculous achievement attainable only by finest technology and engineering in world: “Every part of the Apollo 10 concept now appears to have been performed perfectly. . . . We are nearly about to enter an epoch when men and materials can be transferred to other planets in the solar system.” U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson termed flight “a great triumph in both human and technical terms.” Soviet space scientist, Dr. Vassily V. Parin, called mission “big event in the history of cosmonautics,” impressive because of “the accuracy of all its maneuvers.” Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, said of Apollo 10 crew, “These men who could have come back with moon dust on their feet are leaving that for others in the true spirit of detachment of great pioneers.” Heinrich Luebke, President of West Germany, said mission “brings the United States to the brink of an historical high point—the landing of the first man on the moon.” (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; AP, B Sun, 5/27/69, Al)	__	'
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—8) was successfully captive-fired at Mississippi Test Facility for 385 secs, with only four outboard engines functioning for final 86 secs. Center engine was intentionally cut off early to evaluate early cutoff as suppressor of longitudinal oscillations (pogo effect) which had occurred on Apollo 8 and 9 flights. If test data were satisfactory, center engine might be cut off early during Apollo 10 mission in May. (msfc Release 69—107)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, spoke before student seminar at California Museum of Science and Technology in Los Angeles: “Besides serving as a subject of scientific exploration for its own secrets, the moon may be an important base for outward looking space science programs of the future.” It might eventually support large optical telescopes. There was strong evidence “that the most ideal location for large radio telescopes will eventually be the far side of the moon. This may be the only place within our convenient reach where the earth, which will become increasingly noisy as a radio source, may be completely screened out. In addition, the lunar surface presents us with a very large stable base, with only 1/6 gravity, no wind disturbance and no atmosphere absorption at any wave length. . . . Another attractive possibility is to use stations on both the moon and earth as a radio interferometer baseline for highly precise directional radio astronomy.” (Text)
Rep. George A. Goodling (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 13838 “to provide for the distribution to the several States, for display to the public . . . samples of the lunar rocks and other lunar materials brought back by the Apollo 11 mission.” {CR, 9/17/69, H8098)
Apollo 11 flight was public relations man’s and reporter’s dream, James Clayton said in Washington Post. NASA had kept “very little, if anything” from hundreds of U.S. and foreign press. More than 3,500 sets of press credentials had been issued at msc and Cape Kennedy. Most went to Americans, but 55 foreign countries were represented, including Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania. There were 111 newsmen representing Japan among 800 foreign newsmen, several of whom had been waiting in Houston since Apollo 10 flight May 18—26. Voice of America joined in transmitting news abroad. At peak, Apollo 11 story was going out in 22 languages to every world area except some Communist countries. “Even those had the radio beams directed at them.” (W Post, 7/27/69, B6)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 12 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (AP, W Star, 11/26/69, A2)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 12 Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., to wish crew good luck on eve of launch. {PD, 11/17/69, 1604)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 12 lunar samples and expressed surprise at samples’ differences from rocks retrieved by Apollo 11. Preliminary examination of samples showed they were crystalline and larger than anticipated. Dr. Jeffrey L. Warner, MSC geologist, said rocks returned by Apollo 11 contained up to 12% titanium oxide, but those from Apollo 12 contained only about 2%—amount consistent with terrestrial rocks. He said geologists were very puzzled by absence of breccia rocks in Apollo 12 samples because 75% of rocks from Apollo 11 were breccia. Crystalline rocks were similar to volcanic rocks found by Apollo 11, but some of Apollo 12 rocks were coated with glass and had protruding crystals up to 2% in long. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3; W Star, 11/29/69, Al)
msfc announced selection of Bendix Corp. and Boeing Co. for further competitive negotiations on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, test, and delivery of four manned lunar roving vehicles for flight to lunar surface aboard descent stage of Apollo lm [see July 11]. First operational vehicle would be delivered in early 1971 for launch late that year. msfc also had awarded $238,400 contract to Bryson Construction and $224,888 contract to Miller and Berry for construction of two clean rooms for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) assembly and test and had called for bids for checkout station construction. Bids were due Oct. 21. (msfc Releases 69-220; 69-221)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched May 18, one day later than originally planned, nasa announced. Change from first to second day of launch window would permit observation and collection of data on Apollo landing site 2, as area of primary interest, and observation of site 3 after sunrise on moon. Final decision on specific nature of mission would be made after review of Apollo 9 mission. (NASA Release 69-41)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna XV (launched July 13) had landed on moon at 6:45 pm Moscow time (11:45 am EDT) and had ended its work, Tass announced. Spacecraft had “reached the moon’s surface in the preset area” after 52 revolutions around moon and 86 communications sessions during which “the work of the new systems of the station was checked, the parameters of the trajectory of the movement was measured, and scientific research was conducted.” Tass said Luna XV had demonstrated capability to land on various areas of lunar surface by changing selenocentric orbit and that mission had yielded important data on spacecraft systems. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said signals from spacecraft had ended suddenly and estimated craft might have landed in Sea of Crises, about 500 mi from Sea of Tranquility. “If we don’t get any more signals, we will assume it crash-landed. But we don’t make that assumption at the moment.” (Gwertz-man, NYT, 7/22/69, 1, 29)
Australian marathon runner Bill Emmerton left Houston, Tex., on 1,034-mi jog to Cape Kennedy, Fla., where he would watch Apollo 11 launch. He would travel on foot approximately 40 mi per day, arriving morning of July 16. Purpose of run was to publicize benefits of physical conditioning, pay tribute to fitness of lunar crew, and commemorate Apollo 11 flight. (Spaceland News, 6/69, 11; pmr Release 916—69)
Australian Civil Aviation Minister Reginald Swartz said passengers on transpacific Qantas Airlines flight would see Apollo 11 reentry July 24 when command module would parallel their aircraft for four minutes during descent near Gilbert and Ellice Islands. (Reuters, W Post, 7/23/69, A12)
Lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey said in lecture at Univ. of California at San Diego that new evidence had been uncovered during Apollo 11 mission that moon had been formed by collision process begun about 4.5	billion yrs ago. Water might have been present on moon temporarily and might still be beneath lunar surface. Information was to be made public by NASA in January 1970. (upi, W Post, 10/10/69, A5)
Univ. of Iowa astronomers Dr. James A. Van Allen and Dr. Richard S. Yeh reported in Science that abstract measurements made by lunar orbiting Explorer XXXV during 1967—68 showed it unlikely that alpha-particle emissivity of moon was greater than 0.064 per square cm per sec per steradian. And it was extremely unlikely it was greater than 0.128. (Values were 0.1 and 0.2 of 1966 provisional estimates by H. W. Kraner and others.) Result implied abundance of uranium-238 in outer crust of moon was much less than typical of earth’s lithosphere, though it was consistent with abundance of uranium-238 in terrestrial basalt cr in chondritic meteorites. (Science, 10/17/69,
Apollo 9 mission to prove capability of LM to operate in space (March 3—13) was adjudged successful by NASA. Overall performance of launch vehicle, spacecraft, flight crew, ground support and control facilities, and personnel was satisfactory and all primary mission objectives were accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA announced withdrawal of three Apollo range instrumentation ships —usns Redstone, Mercury, and Huntsville—from tracking network supporting Apollo flights. Remaining tracking ship, usns Vanguard, would be continued on station in Atlantic about 1,000 mi southeast of Bermuda. NASA said reduction of Apollo ship support was based on high success of Apollo missions, particularly their excellent “launch on time” record, (nasa Release 69-133)
In Washington Evening Star, Judith Randal said world’s first successful heart transplant and Apollo 8 mission made 1968 year “of spectacular scientific achievement” but that critics of both events had charged that technology “was being exploited at the expense of basic research and social worth.” It did no harm, she said, to celebrate heart transplants and voyages to moon, “but, with the advent of a new administration, it also is worth reflecting what the price may be— when so much else needs doing—of deciding to climb Mount Everest just because Mount Everest is there and we have learned how to climb it.” (W'Star, 1/2/69, A14)
During CBS TV interview at Cape Kennedy following Apollo 11 launch, former President Lyndon B. Johnson said, “If our industrial people, these great managers of industry, the laboring people of the country, the government, the scientists, all with the help of Congress, can get together and do a job like this there’s just nothing we can’t do.” To world’s ills, “we must apply some of the great talent that we’ve applied to space.” There wasn’t “a single thing that our country does, that our government does, that our people do, that has greater potential for peace than the space effort.” (upi, NYT, 7/17/69, 20)
Apollo 9 prime crew—Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot)—held press briefing at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Describing 10-day mission scheduled to begin Feb. 28 as primarily engineering evaluation of lunar module, McDivitt said: “. . . we will be giving the . . . lm hardware a very close scrutiny. We don’t expect to find anything, but our job is to go up there and look for it. Now after we have discovered that the lm is a good vehicle, we have ... to prove the joint operations techniques that we’ve tried to develop on the ground over the last 3 years. It’s one thing to fly one spacecraft in orbit, and have it controlled by the ground, but when you get 2 of them up there, they are trying to look at 2 vehicles simultaneously so that . . . you find the ground talking to 2 spacecraft and 2 spacecraft talking back to each other and also to the ground, and it becomes a rather unwieldly communications effort.” He added reminder that “only one of these vehicles has the capability to land— safely, I guess I should add. They both have the capability of landing. We only have one set of parachutes and one heat shield.” He described lm as “a tissue paper spacecraft,” explaining it did not have to reenter earth’s atmosphere and there was no atmosphere on moon. Scott said they now had “a new vehicle ... a command module lm combination ... a particularly unique situation, in that ... we have to do the lunar orbit insertion [in lunar mission] with the two vehicles joined together with a very large mass on the end of the command module, so it’s a completely new guidance task” to be checked out. McDivitt explained separation of lm from cm on rendezvous day, with two vehicles pulling away from each other and performing maneuvers, moving up to 100 mi apart: “The object ... is to evaluate our systems from a propulsion standpoint, electrical standpoint, the staging sequence, all of the components that we can and still get back safely to the command module.” In response to question on relation of Apollo program to life on earth, McDivitt replied: “. . . if you’re not moving forward ... the rest of the world is and they’re going to pass you by. We’re gaining something and we’re gaining knowledge. . . . We’re going to move forward on all fronts, we’re not moving forward on just the space front. . . . Any organized system of intelligence moves forward in all directions, and . . . that is what we are doing.” (Transcript) 0 Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council payload to 73.3-mi (118-km) altitude to obtain atmospheric data by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Flight, last in series of four [see Jan. 23], was successful; 24 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in Paris before departure for visit with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and return to U.S. after goodwill tour:	. . the success of a policy depends upon thousands of people around, in an embassy like this and an establishment like this, and millions around this world,” in same way that success of Apollo 8
New York Times editorial asked: “Why should lunar research be limited to what this country can afford? Even if the Soviet Union is unwilling to cooperate, there are very substantial human and material resources in Western Europe, Japan and other areas that could be mobilized for the task of lunar exploration and settlement that lies ahead. President Nixon could demonstrate high statesmanship by offering to turn the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into the International Aeronautics and Space Administration if others will join to help carry the burdens of the effort and provide additional talents for the job. And if NASA became IASA, even Moscow—after its recent space disappointments—might see advantages in joining the common effort to make the moon a lever for uniting mankind.” (NYT, 11/18/69)
NASA said Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin had rejected U.S. invitation to watch Apollo 11 launch. U.S.S.R. originally had accepted, but Soviet Embassy in Washington said Dobrynin would be out of the country. (AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Czechoslovakian Communist Party Central Committee’s weekly Tribuna said of Apollo 11 landing: “It would be premature today to try to attempt a detailed evaluation of the historical significance of this act. Surely its influence will be no smaller than that of Columbus’ travels many centuries ago.” (Am Embassy, Prague)
In his fourth reference to Apollo 11 within week, Pope Paul VI said at summer palace, Castel Gondolfo, Italy: “Catholic faith, not only does not fear this powerful confrontation of its humble doctrine with the wonderful riches of modern scientific thought, but it desires it . . . because truth although diverse on various levels ... is one and because such a confrontation is of mutual advantage to faith and to study in every field.” (AP, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
Jack C. Swearingen, former Chief of Program Control in msfc Apollo Applications Program Office, became Assistant Director in Science and Engineering. (Marshall Star, 11/12/69, 1)
Worldwide program to provide widest display possible of Apollo 11 lunar samples was announced by NASA. Of 15 moon rocks weighing between % and 2% oz, 8 were for U.S. display and 7 had been released to usia for overseas showing. In addition to Smithsonian Institution display, exhibits would include rock traveling with Apollo 11 cm on tour of 50 state capitals and two-month showings in 30 museums and planetariums during year, usia would show six stones on world tour, and seventh at Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, (nasa Release 69—155)
Apollo 9 press briefing was held at NASA Hq. Countdown would begin Feb. 22, for launch from ETR at 11 am EST Feb. 28. Ten-day earth-orbital mission would demonstrate lm manned crew performance for first time and carry out intervehicular activities between spacecraft, through-docking-tunnel activities, and eva. Number of small aluminum-alloy brackets and fittings had been replaced or reinforced in LM—3 and LM—4 because they were sensitive to stress or corrosion. Both vehicles were ready for flight. Apollo Program Director George H. Hage said number of activities would be performed on Apollo 9 that had not been done before “in the sense of wringing out the spacecraft.” NASA was “working the hardware launch readiness of Apollo 10 to a late April date” so that “if we have difficulty on Apollo 9 and need to repeat some element or all of the D mission, we can get that mission off as early as possible.” If Apollo 9 was successful Apollo 10 could be launched as early as May 17 on lunar landing mission. (Transcript)
Original equipment of field-sequential color TV system which would be used by Apollo 11 to transmit pictures from moon [see April 5] was presented to Smithsonian Institution by inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, President of cbs Laboratories. Apollo 11 would carry three-pound miniaturization of system in Westinghouse camera. (Schaden, W Star, 7/8/69, Bl)
Scientists monitoring seismometer left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts told press at msc five-minute event recorded July 22 was either meteoroid strike or moonquake similar to mild California earthquake recorded on East Coast, mit geologist, Dr. Frank Press, said tremor would have magnitude of four or five according to Richter scale, on which major earthquake registered seven or eight. Seismic reading was strong indication that moon was layered with outer crust and inner mantle like earth and supported theories that moon was formed near or torn from earth. Layering, he said, “would imply that at one time there was enough heat so that the heavier rocks went to the interior and the lighter ones to the surface.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/24/69, Al; Lyons, NYT, 7/24/69, 1)
Gloom and embarrassment over Apollo 11 success and crash of Luna XV on moon had caused controversy among Soviet leaders, including Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Nikolay V. Podgorny, at July 21—23 meeting of Eastern European leaders in Warsaw, New York Times said. Reports of enthusiastic public response to Apollo feat across Eastern Europe had been interpreted as sign of lingering and latent sympathy for U.S. It was strongest in technologically advanced East Germany and Czechoslovakia, but had been noted as well in Poland, Hungary, and Romania. (Hofmann, NYT, 7/28/69, 7)
Apollo 11 lunar samples would not be first moon material to reach earth and to undergo scientific examination, Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Dean R. Chapman, Chief of arc Thermo- and Gas-Dynamics Div., as saying in interview. Tektites—molten pieces of lunar surface in form of chunks of black glass—had fallen to earth when meteorites struck moon with tremendous force. Most recent tektite shower had occurred 700.000	yrs ago. While tektites’ origin was matter of scientific dispute, Dr. Chapman believed most commonly held theory—lunar origin. In working out shower’s trajectory, he had determined tektites came from Tycho crater on moon’s southern hemisphere. He believed Tycho to be 700.000	yrs old and that crusts of earth and of moon were intimately related. (Getze, LA Times, 7/7/69)
faa said preliminary figures showed its 27 air route traffic control centers handled 19.5 million aircraft in 1968, an increase of 17% over 1967. Chicago, New York, and Cleveland each logged 1.5 million operations —first time any center had reached this mark, (faa Release 69-15) During January: jpl Senior Staff Scientist Albert R. Hibbs summarized results of NASA’s Surveyor program in Astronautics and Aeronautics. Experiments on five Surveyor spacecraft which successfully landed on moon between May 30, 1966, and Jan. 7, 1968, indicated surface material was granular and very fine with 10 3 dynes/cm2 cohesion. Slightly deeper material had lower normal albedo than undisturbed surface. Chemical composition of surface material was similar to basaltic rocks on earth; mare material contained more iron elements than highland material; and highland material had higher albedo than mare material. Chemical analyses indicated material did not resemble chondritic meteorites. From observed data scientists concluded that moon had undergone significant chemical differentiation during its history and had been subjected to basaltic lava flows; surface was continually being “churned and pulverized” by meteoroid impacts; some undefined process lightened optical surface and darkened buried material; and mare areas were “surprisingly similar and offer numerous safe-landing zones for future lunar missions.” (A&A, 1/69, 50—63)
Commentary in West Berlin’s independent Tagesspiegel: “Some people take off for the moon while others try to learn to operate a farm tractor. Our culture will depend on mastering this schizophrenic situation.” (Atlas, 7/69, 16)
Soviet scientist Nikolay A. Kozyrev told Soviet Committee for Inventions and Discoveries he had discovered active volcano on moon. He had detected glowing rocks in Aristarchus crater in 1955 and obtained spectrogram of crater’s gas in 1958. Comparing spectrogram with others obtained from active volcanos in Soviet Far East, he had found them similar, (upi, W News, 12/31/69, 9)
George Gallup released results of first poll of President Nixon’s popularity since Apollo 11 success. Poll showed 65% of U.S. public approved his performance in office. Poll July 11—14, before Apollo 11 mission, had shown 58% approval. (W Post, 8/11/69, A2)
nasa adoption of field sequential color TV system to relay pictures from moon on future Apollo flights was “solace” to inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, president of CBS Laboratories, New York Times said. System, employing small revolving filter disc to inject primary colors in front of camera, had been rejected by industry and FCC some 15 yrs earlier in favor of all-electronic compatible system now in worldwide use. Advantage of Goldmark system on moon flights was ability to pick up usable color images under exceptionally low levels of light intensity—important where stars might be major illumination source. Images received from space would then be converted through compatible system for home reception. Dr. Goldmark said system might be “first technological breakthrough that is 28 years old.” (NYT, 4/5/69, 30)
Christian Science Monitor congratulated “Gumdrop, Spider, and their gallant crew” for successful Apollo 9 mission to date: “In a series of smoothly executed maneuvers, they have opened the way for landing on the moon. They have removed any doubt that the machinery and tactics designed to set men down and recover them safely can indeed do the job.” Spectacular view from space symbolized “men’s ability to surmount human and natural obstacles to reach the most difficult goals when they want to. It bespeaks a spirit running counter to the rivalries, hatreds, and selfishness that often seem to prevent a similar attack on tough human problems on earth. The spirit now has brought the moon within mankind’s grasp. It could bring a better life on earth within their grasp, too.” (csm, 3/8-10/69)
Trans World Airlines filed first application with Civil Aeronautics Board for routes between earth and moon. Airline said it had received 1,200 reservations during final four days of Apollo 11 mission, (twa Release)
Washington Post published letter from John M. Raymond, Jr., of Washington, D.C., which praised decision of Florida Legislature to ask for return of original name “Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy [see June 6]. “It is for us today a thrilling thought that men will leap to the moon from a cape discovered by Spanish adventurers early in the 16th century—a cape with one of the very earliest American place names to be retained to the present day. Or almost to the present day. Let the NASA center bear the name Kennedy. It is an appropriate tribute to the man who set us on the course to the moon. But let us restore to the cape the proud name it carried for 400 years.” (W Post, 6/14/69, A24)
Retiring Chief Justice of Supreme Court Earl Warren said at Lincoln Univ. commencement in Oxford, Pa., “We’re going to be on the moon —perhaps by July, they tell us. But it would be better if our universities taught us how to live in our great cities.” (AP, W Post, 6/3/69, A9)
Five segments of Apollo 9’s 6,500,000-lb “stack” remained in space, making total 1,613 objects floating in earth orbit after Apollo 9, said James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Armed Forces Journal. Descent stage of lm, in eccentric low orbit, would soon be captured by earth gravity and burn on reentry; ascent stage might remain in high orbit 20 yrs, along with lm adapter [gsfc reported later that LM descent stage had reentered March 22; ascent stage was still in orbit], S—IVB 3rd stage mated to instrument unit was directed into solar orbit. Of 1,613 orbiting objects listed by norad, 356 were payloads, both active and expired. Remaining 1,257 pieces were debris. Items in solar orbit included 3rd-stage and instrument-unit combinations from Apollo 8 and 9, four U.S. Pioneers and Mariner VI still sending useful data, and U.S. and U.S.S.R. planetary explorers launched before 1969. About 20 solar orbiting objects would remain in space a long time, along with 28 spacecraft which had crashed on other celestial bodies, including'U.S.S.R.’s Venus III and IV on Venus, 9 Soviet Lunas, 5 U.S. Rangers, 7 Surveyors, and 5 Lunar Orbiters. (AFI, 3/22/69, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/31/69)
Biggest engineering problem facing 108-yr-old mit at close of 1960s was one of identity, Eric Wentworth said in Washington Post, “namely the increasingly disputed place of war-related research within its academic confines.” mit ranked first among U.S. universities in receipt of dod funding, which in 1968 accounted for almost half of Institute’s $17-million budget. Since March 4 day-long work stoppage by students and young faculty members protesting mit’s heavy military involvement, President Howard W. Johnson and other mit leaders had moved to reassess mit’s role. They had declared temporary halt on accepting new contracts for classified research at Instrumentation Laboratory and Lincoln Laboratory and established commission to review laboratories’ role. Commission had recommended continuing basic dod research but avoiding advanced development of weaponry, reducing secrecy, and shifting efforts toward meeting domestic and social needs. Meanwhile, Instrumentation Laboratory had already “come to the end of an era.” Its founder and head, Dr. Charles S. Draper, had been “eased out of his job as director although he may continue in other capacities.” His accomplishments with laboratory had included onboard guidance navigation systems “that took Apollo 11 spacemen to the moon last summer.” (W Post, 11/10/69, 2)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory examined several large, dust-covered, crystalline rocks from first box of Apollo 12 lunar samples. Largest rock weighed 3—4 lbs and was 5 in long and 4^2 in thick. (Rossiter, W Star, 11/27/69, A4)
Special message to Apollo 10 crew from five Soviet cosmonauts was released by Soviet Embassy: “We Soviet cosmonauts followed your difficult work very closely. We sincerely admire the high accuracy with which you carried out all the maneuvers planned, your excellent preparedness and courage.” Message was signed by Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Andrian G. Nikolayev, Aleksey Leonov, Georgy Beregovoy, and Vladimir Shatalov. (upi, W Post, 5/28/69, A13)
nasa established 14-member Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team to provide scientific guidance in design, operation, and data utilization of photographic systems for Apollo lunar orbital science program. Chairman was Frederick J. Doyle of U.S. Geological Survey. (Apollo Prog Off)
Apollo 10 spacecraft, atop Saturn V launch vehicle, rolled out of Vehicle Assembly Building at ksc to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for May liftoff to lunar orbit. (AP, NYT, 3/12/69, 14; UPl, Huntsville News, 3/12/69)
Second largest lunar sample shown to public to date—67.7-gm moon rock—went on display at usia “Education—U.S.A.” exhibit at Sekoniki Park in Moscow. One of 14 moon rocks thus far released by NASA for publicity tours, rock later would travel with usia exhibit to Tashkent, Baku, and Novosibirsk, where it would become first U.S. exhibit ever shown in Siberia. Other moon rocks had been scheduled for showing at 30 U.S. museums. Largest lunar sample—Smithsonian Institution’s 478.8-gm rock—was expected to be only permanent display. NASA also had approved display of samples entrusted to U.S. scientists who wished to show them in their home towns. (Lardner, W Post, 11/24/69, Al; usia pio)
Visiting U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov went on “Flight to the Moon” ride at Disneyland, Calif., during U.S. tour. They received Mickey Mouse watches and caps from employees dressed as cartoon characters in spacesuits. Beregovoy said, “Now we are admitted to this particular society.” (upi, NYT, 10/25/69, 3)
Montreal, Canada, Gazette commented on Apollo 11 mission: “Lyndon Johnson, more than any other man, is responsible for meeting the moon-shot deadline this week. . . .” (Am Consul, Montreal)
Expectation of one million tourists to witness Apollo 11 launch had led to extraordinary precautions at Cocoa Beach, Fla., Washington Post said. Tank truck would be stationed at City Hall to fuel police cars; airboats would stand by to rush casualties to hospital if ambulances could not penetrate automobile traffic; and officials were concerned about scores of aircraft circling overhead to glimpse spacecraft. (Greider, W Post, 7/14/69, Al)
NASA announced it had signed $2,919,000 supplemental agreement with Div. of Sponsored Research of mit for fabrication and delivery of 40 inertial reference integrating gyros (irigs) for Apollo guidance and navigation system, bringing total contract to $81,000,000. (nasa Release 69—11)
Leading lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey told conference on nuclear energy at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago he was “pleased” at discovery that age of lunar rocks might range between 3 billion and 4.5 billion yrs [see Aug. 23] and had “expected this for a long time. . . . But I’m not making any more bets on the moon’s origin.” He was “puzzled” by once-molten iunar sea material; it might have been formed by huge meteor or asteroid impacts rather than volcanism and moon might have originated out of cluster of such aster-oidal debris. (Cohn, W Post, 8/29/69, A3)
Sen. Robert J. Dole (R-Kans.) introduced S.R. 167 “providing for the display in the Capitol Building of a portion of the moon.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. {CR, 12/9/69, S16142)
nasa awarded Grumann Aircraft Engineering Corp. $3,438,400 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lunar module contract. Modifications—to documentation and reporting procedures for lm test and checkout, to flight and ground test hardware, to test and effect analyses, and to crew safety hardware—brought total value of contract to $1.6 billion since January 1963. (msc Release 69—14)
Tom Wicker commented in New York Times on suggested detonation of nuclear device on moon [see Dec. 15]. “Aside from the obvious questions about the effects of nuclear fallout in the moon’s atmosphere, what might be the total environmental consequences of such an explosion— for the moon itself, for those who will be visiting it from earth, for other objects in the solar system?” Past performances had indicated “some unexpected and probably unwelcome result.” Indus and Ganges River irrigation systems had contaminated soil in India with salt that rose from earth with water and Aswan Dam was spreading disease with irrigation waters in Egypt and damaging fertile Nile delta by interfering with ancient silting process. In U.S., oil leaks from ocean floor set off by scientific drilling techniques had ruined Santa Barbara, Calif., coast. “Monstrous engines” of Boeing 747, Concorde supersonic airliner, C—5A Galaxy jet, and sst would “spew their poisons on mankind.” Could man master anything that really mattered? “Certainly not nature, and least of all himself; rather it is altogether likely that if the Biblical flood someday engulfs the earth, it will flow from seeded clouds. That might even be a fitting end.” (NYT, 12/18/69, 46) December 19: Results of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface [see Aug. 18] were reported in Science by originator Dr. Johannes Geiss and Univ. of Berne, Switzerland, team. Helium-4 solar wind flux during Apollo 11 excursion was 5.1 million to 7.5 million atoms per sq cm per sec. Solar wind direction and energy were essentially not perturbed by moon. Evidence for solar wind albedo had been found. (Science, 12/19/69, 1502—3)
Washington Evening Star editorial said of success of Dec. 21—27, ,1968, Apollo 8 mission: “Modern science undercut man’s bland belief that he was the center of the universe, and modern philosophy reduced him to a trivial atom of matter in the larger cosmos. To be able to sail around at will in that vast cosmos may give man back some of the confidence he once had, not the arrogance of thinking that he understands the whole pattern, but the quiet sense that he will not flinch from what he may yet learn.” (W Star, 1/1/69, A15)
