msc announced award of $5.1-million NASA contract to Itek Corp. for six high-resolution cameras to be used for lunar photography on Apollo 16, 17, and 18 missions, (msc Release 70-11)
Display of Apollo 11 lunar rocks and Apollo 12 space helmet opened at New York State Museum in Albany, N.Y. Display had been lent by General Electric Co. and NASA. Exhibit would continue through April 26. (upi, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “The hang-the-cost generosity of Congress that marked the early years of the Apollo moon program seems not to have been rekindled by last summer’s landing on the Sea of Tranquility, for all the justified national pride that feat stimulated. And Mr. Nixon, judging from his last budget message, is disinclined to buck this trend. The President’s conviction seems to be that important and dramatic goals await the U.S. in space, but that the reality of competing demands on the national resources prohibits the setting of binding deadlines for their achievement. His caution is reasonable, even if it does not lend itself to flights of public imagination.” (KC Times, 3/11/70)
ossa Science Steering Committee’s Planetary Biology Subcommittee, concerned about validity of Lunar Receiving Laboratory tests on lunar samples and unexplained biological effect of lunar soil on some plants, had recommended continuation of quarantine procedures through Apollo 13 mission, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Subcommittee had strongly opposed Jan. 15 suggestion by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination that quarantine be abandoned and had prompted NASA to ask nas for reevaluation by a special committee. (WPost, 2/14/70, A5; NASA Exobiology Off)
MSC announced contract awards: NR Space Div. would receive $305 700 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee supplemental agreement ■ to Apollo spacecraft contract for four csm modules for Skylab program. Agreement definitized March 1969 letter contract and brought estimated cost of contract for both Apollo and Skylab to $3 618 006 813. NR Space Div. also would receive $250 000for preliminary planning study of reusable space tug with multipurpose applications. ILC Industries would receive $ 13-million extension to contract for Apollo space suits and support through 1971, bringing total contract value to $46 543 299. (msc Releases 70-61, 62, 63; NASA Release 7088)
Dept, of Agriculture would start project to determine properties in moon dust that led to growth of plants bigger than those fertilized by potassium, phosporus, or nitrogen, Washington Post reported, usda scientist Dr. Charles P. Walkinshaw had said moon dust “does something to plants that nothing else can duplicate.” He had observed uninterrupted growth of almost 40 different species in moon dust soil. Liverworts, tobacco plants, and ferns had grown larger and to deeper green in moon dust than in other soil. Corn cells buried in moon dust in 1969 were still alive and had grown tough, stringy roots. Dr. Walkinshaw believed moon dust might act as supercatalyst, causing soil nutrients to be absorbed quickly through walls of plants cells, usda Forestry Service and Chevron Chemical Co. planned to investigate how moon dust acted. (Brett, WPost, 12/17/70, G2)
msc released Surveyor III spacecraft parts, returned from moon to earth by Apollo 12 crew, from lrl quarantine for examination by principal investigators, (msc Release 70-10)
Seismic signals obtained from seismograph carried by Apollo 12 crew at epicentral distance of 76 km (47.2 mi) from lm impact differed from any seen on earth, CornellUniv.radiophysi-cists Dr. Thomas Gold and Dn Steven Soter reported in Science. Signal caused by Apollo 12 lm was interpreted in terms of propagation between source and receiver through layer of powder in which sound velocity increased with depth. Increase, due to compaction, extended over several kilometers and led to concentration of seismic waves toward surface. Computer simulations using ray acoustics and based on assumption of randomly undulating lunar surface approximated the observed signal. Seismic amplitudes were enhanced in this medium over solid rock, so that observed signal required less power to be transmitted than previously estimated. (Science, 9/11/70,1071-5)	t
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination suggested elimination of requirement for quarantine after lunar exploration because no evidence of back contamination had been found after Apollo 11 and 12 missions. Committee report released to press said, “There is no need to impose quarantine on the crews, the lunar samples or equipment on subsequent missions.” (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, A5)
MSC announced NR had been awarded $4785 130 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo cm and SM contract. Agreement formally incorporated 26 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification to ground support equipment, for test and checkout of CSM, modification of flight and ground test hardware, and additional test-and-effect-analysis changes and brought total value of contract to $3.5 billion. (MSC Release 70-73)
L/C Joe Klass and Maj. Joseph Gervais, both former usaf officers, said in New York that 10-yr investigation indicated Aviatrix Amelia Earhart, who had disappeared over Pacific in 1937, was alive and living in U.S. They believed woman called Mrs. Guy Bolam, who claimed to have flown with Earhart, was Earhart herself and that Earhart and navigator Fred Noonan had been intercepted in 1937 mission for U.S. Government by aircraft from Japanese carrier, held captive throughout World War II in Imperial Palace in Tokyo, and released when Emperor Hirohito bartered her life for his exemption from trial as war criminal. Col. Klass had written book Amelia Earhart Lives: A Trip Through Intrigue To Find America’s First Lady of Mystery, published by McGraw-Hill. Mrs. Bolam later held press conference to issue denial, calling book “poorly documented hoax” and “utter nonsense.” (AP, W Post, 11/10/70, D2: AP, WStar, 11/11/70, A2) November 10-22:	U.S.S.R. launched Luna XVII unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 7:44 pm local time (9:44 am EST).Tass said purpose of mission was to explore moon and near-moon space and check new systems and reported all systems were functioning normally. During flight to moon 36 communications sessions were held with spacecraft and data on parameters and systems were transmitted. Midcourse maneuvers were conducted Nov. 12 and 14 and on Nov. 15 Luna XVIIentered lunar orbit with 85-km (53-mi) altitude, 1-hr 56-min period, and 141° inclination. Luna XVII softlanded in moon’s Sea of Rains Nov . 17 at 8:47 am Baykonurtime (10:47 pm ESTNov. 16). Spacecraft released Lunokhod I, self-propelled vehicle placed on moon to conduct scientific investigations. According to drawing and models shown on Moscow TV, Lunokhod I looked like large silver pot-bellied tub about the size of small automobile with ei^ht spoked wheels apparently powered by solar energy and batteries. Tass said Lunokhod I carried flags and pennants with Soviet coat of arms and Lenin’s bas relief and was equipped with scientific apparatus, instruments and control systems, and radio and TV devices. Lunokhod I left Luna XVII descent stage at 11:28 am Baykonurtime (1:28 am EST) Nov. 17 by special gangway and traveled 20 m (66 ft) from spacecraft to begin experiments. Tass said vehicle’s movement could be controlled automatically or by ground controllers following televised information on position and character of surrounding lunar surface. Between Nov. 17 and Nov. 22, 10 radio and TV sessions were held and large amount of data was transmitted. Chemical composition of surface layer of lunar soil was analyzed with x-ray spectrometer and mechanical properties of lunar soil and transportability of vehicle were investigated. In addition, Tass said, “an instrument was used which has a punch for soil intrusion, and a system of sensors for measuring forces acting on the wheels.” Panoramic pictures of lunar landscape were taken, in which tracks made by Lunokhod I, details of lunar surface, and parts of vehicle were clearly visible. Tass said TV cameras, “designed for surveying and evaluating the route traveled, provided the necessary information for travel in the conditions of uneven, broken terrain. At some points. . .the incline reached 14 deg. Along the path, Lunokhod encountered. . .deep craters the detours to which were ensured byithe operators (on Earth).” On Nov. 22, after five days on lunar surface, Lunokhod I was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Tass said vehicle had competed “a complex of tests.. .and a wide program of tests of its mobility” and had traveled 197 m (646 ft). Vehicle was moved to an “assigned position” where it would remain stationary during lunar night and solar panels were closed. Luna XVII was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and deploy automatic lunar explorer. Last mission in series, unmanned Luna XVI(Sept. 12-24), had landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (Sov Rpt, 12/4/70; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; SBD, 11/20/70,81-2; Clarity, NYT, 11/18/70,1)	'
Apollo seismic experiment scientists, after comparing thousands of signals received by radio frpm sensitive seismometer left on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts,.determined that one or more moon quakes were occurring every 28.4 days, each time moon came closest to earth. Quakes were centered in Fra Mauro highland crater 80 km (50 mi) south of scheduled Apollo 14 landing site. Chief lunar seismologist Dr. Gary V. Latham later said quakes might be source of escaping gases that produced red or orange flashes often seen by astronomers. He intended to ask astronomers to concentrate on Fra Mauro area in future search for flashes. Dr. Latham reported in interview with Washington Post that “seismic record since November now produces strong evidence that the moon has at least some internal heat and seismic activity, (alsep Status Rpt; Cohn, W Post, 7/28/70, Al)
NASA’s alsep 1, placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 crew Nov. 19, 1969,	was functioning satisfactorily after more than 64 days of uninterrupted operation, msc announced. Some 1977 commands had been transmitted to and carried out by alsep 1 since deployment. Scientific and engineering data were being transmitted continuously and radioisotope power remained constant at 74 w. Passive seismic experiment had recorded episode of large tilts on long-period horizontal sensors that lasted one hour and coincided with third lunar sunrise Jan. 16. (msc Release 70-12)
New York Times editorial hailed decision by U.S. and U.S.S.R. to permit exchange of scientists between world’s largest nuclear accelerators at Serpukhov in U.S.S.R. and at Batavia, 111. [see July 2]: “This increased cooperation in particle physics contrasts sharply with the continued—and even rising—Soviet-American competition in space.” NASA’s Skylab project was case in point. “The semipermanent manned space station.. .is precisely the same goal toward which the Soviet Soyuz experiments are directed. The expensive and wasteful rivalry for priority in reaching the moon that preceded the Apollo II flight is being repeated in the effort to create manned orbiting vehicles for earth reconnaissance and scientific experiments in space.” (NYT, 7/3/70,24)
NR Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1006 080 and $643 200 under contracts for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), NASA announced. Awards, determined by NASA Performance Evaluation Board, covered management performance during 1969. (NASA Release 70-52)
MSC announced award of $875 000 contract to Hycon Manufacturing Co. for five lunar topographic camera systems. Cameras, each equipped with 457-mm (18-in) focal length lens and 61 m (200 ft) of film to take more than 400 photos without reloading, would be flown on Apollo 13, 14, and 15 missions to photograph future landing sites and other targets. (MSC Release 70-31)
Flight Crew Health Stabilization program to minimize possible exposure of Apollo flight crews to disease or illness would be introduced before Jan. 31, 1971, Apollo 14 mission, nasa announced. Program provided that crew health be stabilized through epidemiology, din-cial medicine, and immunology programs and limitation of outside contacts with flight crews; prime and backup crew members reside solely in K$c crew quarters for 21 days before launch; access to primary training areas used by crew members be controlled; access to areas during crew occupancy be limited; crew activities be limited to primary areas of Manned Space Operations Building and Flight Crew Training Building, flight line at Patrick afb, Fla., and launch pad white room during 21-day prelaunch period; and crew members use personal vehicles when traveling between primary areas. If crew members were required to go to msc for training, they would live in crew reception area of lrl or in their own residences, where they would be excluded from contact with everyone but their wives. During 60 days before launch, all illnesses in family members of prime, backup, and support crews and close contacts of these families would be reported to medical officials. (NASA Release 70-159)
NASA released preliminary time line for Apollo 14 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft would lift off from KSC at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31, 1971; land LM north of moon’s Fra Mauro crater at 4:14 am est Feb. 5 for 34-hr stay; and splash down in Pacific at 4:01 pm est Feb. 9. (NASA Release 70-166)
msc scientists reported three kinds of earth bacteria had died when exposed to lunar soil gathered by Apollo 11: staphylococcus aureus scraped from Apollo 11 astronauts when they returned to earth; azobacter vinlandii, solid bacterium; and pseuodomonas aeroginosa, used in laboratory studies, lrl chief of preventative medicine Dr. William Kemmerer said conjecture was that all were killed by poison in Apollo 11 core-tube material. Tube held lunar soil gathered from five to eight inches beneath lunar surface. There had been no ill effects in similar tests with Apollo 11 soil or Apollo 12 surface or underground samples. (Cohn, W Post, 3/12/70, Al)
Distribution of 13 kg (28.6 lbs) of Apollo 12 lunar material to 139 U.S. scientists and 54 scientists from 16 foreign countries had begun at msc, NASA announced. Domestic analysis would be performed in 139 university, industrial, and government laboratories in 25 states and District of Columbia. Foreign investigators represented Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Finland, West Germany, Japan, Korea, Spain, Switzerland, U.K., South Africa, Italy, France, Norway, and India. Preliminary investigation at lrl had revealed Apollo 12 samples were similar in characteristics to Apollo 11 samples. Principal investigators would report findings at MSC Lunar Science Conference in January 1971. (NASA Release 70-19)
SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator carried to moon on board Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) completed one year of operation on lunar surface. SNAP-27 weighed 19.5 kg (43 lbs) and was designed to provide 63.5 w electrical power for one year. Scientists now expected lifetime to be five or six years. (SBD, 11/18/70,68)
Name “tranquilite” had been given to new mineral discovered in Apollo 11 moon rock by scientists Paul Ramdohr and Josef Zaehringer of Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics at Heidelberg, West Germany, Baltimore Sun said. Tranquilite—named for moon’s Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 landing site—was compound of titanium, iron, and magnesium related to earth mineral titanifer-ous magnetite. International Nomenclature Commission would review designation of new mineral before name became permanent. German team also had confirmed theory that lunar rocks had lain on moon’s surface for 500 million yrs and had never penetrated deeper than 0.9 m (3 ft). (B Sun, 9/5/70, A10)
NASA announced modifications to 2nd stage (S-II-9) of Saturn V launch vehicle scheduled to boost Apollo 14 toward moon. Accumulator, compartment to suppress pogo-effect oscillations felt on previous Apollo flights, had been installed in liquid-oxygen line feeding the center engine and filled with helium gas to cushion pressures of fluid flowing through line. Three .acceleration-actuated modules would be installed on center cross-beam structure as backup to initiate cutoff of center engine if oscillations were excessive. J-2 engine propellant-utilization valve had been redesigned from motor driven to pneumatically actuated, to bypass much onboard stage electronic circuitry, simplify propellant utilization, and enhance stage’s reliability. (NASA Release 70-207)
MSC announced it had awarded Bendix Corp. $8-million, costplusfixed-fee contract modification for fabrication of fifth Apollo lunar surface experiments package (ALSEP) for deployment on moon during Apollo 16 mission. Modification brought total estimated value of contract to $76 million. (MSC Release 70-73)
Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin editorial commented on Apollo 13: “The ease with which Mr. Swigert fitted into the prime crew lineup would suggest that the real risks in the Apollo 13 mission are still the risks the public never sees or comprehends. These involve mechanical and electronic components beyond lay understanding. They are immediately interchangeable on Earth, but they lack the adaptability of Captain Lovell and his companions at the point of no return.” (P Bull, 4/12/70)
Pravda published year-end review of U.S.S.R. space activities by A. Dmitriyev. Soviet leadership was swinging full circle back to belief that Soviet approach was distinctly superior to that of U.S. Automatic spacecraft were cheaper than manned spacecraft but Soviet efforts were encompassing across-the-board capabilities—manned as well as unmanned. Main directions were systematic research in near-earth space using automatic vehicles and manned craft, moon and circumlunar space as testing ground for Soviet cosmonautics, and research of distant planets, primarily Venus, with aid of automatic devices. Recent Soviet accomplishments had paved way for significant breakthroughs in all of these directions. (AF Mag, 6/71, 54-9)
Accuracy of Apollo 12 LM lunar landing was described by Henry S. F. Cooper, Jr., in post-mission report from ksc published by the New Yorker. After successful completion of mission, Cooper had talked with Flight Dynamics Officer David Reed, who had been in charge of LM trajectory during lunar landing. Cooper reported that Reed and other flight engineers had been “too accurate in plotting their trajectory, for Commander (now Captain) Charles Conrad, Jr., who was at the controls, had to change the LM’s landing point at the last minute. ‘He was afraid he’d land right on top of the Surveyor if he kept on going according to plan, and later, when we fed the data from the lm into a computer, we found that if he’d gone on in the way he was, he would have hit it,’ Reed told me.” (New Yorker, 1/3/70, 46-56)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), scheduled to boost Apollo 17 toward moon in 1972, was successfully static-fired for 378 secs at mtf. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70)
Lightning and new-generation aircraft were discussed in Science by Rice Univ. space scientist A. A. Few: “It has been estimated that there are approximately 500 lightning strikes per year to commercial jet airplanes operating in the United States alone. Most.. .are triggered by the aircraft, as was very true of the lightning flashes that occurred during the launch of Apollo 12. Because of the larger size of the new-generation aircraft. . .this lightning hazard will increase. If the new aircraft are permitted to fly under the same meteorological conditions that are considered allowable for present aircraft, the probability of the aircraft’s being hit by lightning will be considerably increased.” New aircraft would not be as safe as conventional aircraft in lightning strikes “because of their extensive use of more sophisticated hardware, which is more susceptible to damage from lightning.” (Science, 5/22/70, 1011-2)
Science editorial by Dr. Preston E. Cloud, Jr., geologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, scored cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19: “The moon is the only other planet we can hope to study in sufficient detail for close comparison with our own. We have just begun that study. It is as if we were trying to understand North America by examining Plymouth Rock.” Billions had been spent to get within reach of primary scientific goals on moon. “Only a small fraction of the investment already made would see the job to a fruitful conclusion. To stop short for reasons within our control would, in retrospect, be seen as one of history’s most irresponsible follies. Nothing less than the early institution of a comprehensive automated program to get similar information and sample return could begin to ameliorate such a failure.” (Science, 9/18/70,1159)
alsep 1 had operated without interruption for over 1948 hrs since being deployed on lunar surface Nov. 19, 1969, by Apollo /2crew, msc announced. To date alsep 1 had received and implemented 2034 commands, (msc Release 70-19)
Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples were seen by 41 million persons in U.S. and abroad during year. Samples were shown at 128 events covering all 50 states, with total attendance of some 12 million. Outside U.S., samples were shown to almost 30 million persons in 110 countries, including almost 14 million visitors to Expo ’70 in Japan. NASA facilities across U.S. were inspected by 3 million persons, with heaviest influx at msc (over 1 million) and ksc (1.2 million). (nasa Release 71-8)
NASA’s congratulations on Luna XVI achievement were telegraphed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting Administrator, to Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “This impressive technical achievement promises to add significantly to man’s knowledge of the Moon. Along with scientists throughout the world, we look forward to the first reports on analyses of these samples.” (NASA Release 70-156)
NASA announced publication of The Moon as Viewed by Lunar Orbiter (nasa SP-200). Book by Leon K. Kosofsky of NASA Apollo Lunar Exploration Office and Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., contained stereoscopic and other photos of Aristarchus, Schroter’s Valley, Rimae Parry, and Tobias Mayer Dome—lunar craters and valleys. Photos were taken on five Orbiter missions preparatory to Apollo flights. (NASA Release 70-82)
dod announced usaf contract awards for operation and maintenance of Air Force Satellite Control Facility tracking stations: $4 300 000 initial increment to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. under $7 772 050 contract and $3 078 000 initial increment under $4 578 444 contract; and $4 500 000 initial increment to Philco-Ford Corp. under $8 424 250 fixed-price contract, (dod Release 241-70) During March: Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa Director of Physics and Astronomy Depts., discussed significance of lunar landings, in university lecture series: “The Apollo missions, to me, are straightforward though immensely difficult tasks. They do, however, yield relatively little in the way of fundamental understanding of nature. They are not scientific in that sense. There is a longstanding controversy as to whether a manned spacecraft is a better way to conduct science in space than an automated, commandable spacecraft. I’m sure there is no simple answer to that question. As the general romance and entertainment value of manned flight tend to wear off a little, I think this question will be attacked in a thoroughly pragmatic way.” Apollo 11 lunar landing “might properly be compared to the explorations of Amundsen and Perry and Byrd in the Arctic and Antarctic, or perhaps Lindbergh flying the Atlantic. These are great achievements, heroic achievements, but the general potential of the Moon in its relationship to human life on a large scale is by no means obvious to me. I don’t think any competent person has found a significant, economic, human use fortheMoon.” There was general feeling, mostly from aeronautics and allied industries, that development of space flight was important to U.S. future in same sense that aircraft development had been. “I think this is fundamentally a false analogy.” Space shuttle and space station were feasible. “Whether or not it is sensible to pursue them, I have a great difficulty in judging.” (Univ of Iowa Spectator, 3/70,6)
President Nixon spoke at Pioneer Day ceremonies in Salt Lake City, Utah: “Just a year ago. . .1 welcomed back from the moon three men who had been pioneers in landing on the moon. ... I can only say that the spirit that took those three men to the moon. . .has built the greatest country on earth.” (PD, 8/3/70,995)
MSC announced NASA had awarded United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. $5 461 203 contract supplement for changes in Apollo portable-life-support-system (plss) contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes permitting plss to accept an improved communications system supplied by NASA, (msc Release 70-6)
U.S.S.R. announced it had found Apollo experimental capsule (used for training and experiment) and would turn it over to uscg cutter Southwind at port of Murmansk. Cutter was on oceanographic expedition in area. U.S. Embassy sources in Moscow had said Soviet government had informed Embassy three weeks before that capsule had been found in Bay of Biscay, off France, by Murmansk fishermen. (NYT, 9/5/70, 5; NASA OMSF Pio)
NASA released Ecological Surveys from Space (NASA SP-230). Monograph listed feasible uses of spacecraft in 1970s an<l described scientific and technical studies of new images and concepts of earth acquired by venture into space. Publication contained photos taken from aircraft and from Gemini and Apollo spacecraft. (Text)
msc announced award of $57 264 989, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to General Electric Co. for spacecraft checkout, reliability and quality assurance engineering, and systems engineering in support of Apollo and Skylab programs. Contract, which definitized letter contract, covered work from October 1969 through December 1972. (msc Release 70-31)
Study of Apollo 12 lunar samples had confirmed earlier conclusion from Apollo 11 sample study that lunar soil contained 1.9% meteoric material of similar composition to carbonaeceous chondrites and that moon had formed in earth’s neighborhood, Enrico Fermi Institute and Univ. of Chicago chemists reported in Science. Four Apollo 12 core and soil samples were “enriched in a number of trace elements of meteoric origin to virtually the same degree as Apollo 11 soil.’’ Meteoritic average influx rate of 4 billionths g per sq cm (1.4 billionths oz per sq in) seemed valid for entire moon. (Ganapathy, Keays, Anders, Science, 10/30/70, 533-5)
U.S. exhibit including Apollo 10 spacecraft was most popular attraction at Poznan International Fair in Poland, AP quoted U.S. pavilion director Kendall Niglis as saying. He had estimated 6000 visitors an hour were filing past capsule. (WPost, 6/19/70, A8)
NASA announced award of $3 300 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Aerospace Systems Div. for engineering support of Apollo Lunar Exploration program. Contract covered engineering evaluation, flight readiness reviews, and mission evaluations Jan. 1 through Dec. 31. (NASA Release 70-25)
NASA announced designation of Apollo Applications program as “Skylab.” (NASA Release 70-30)
President Nixon honored visiting West German Chancellor and Mrs. Willy Brandt at White House dinner on eve of Apollo 13 launch. He said: “We are particularly happy that tomorrow you will go to see the takeoff of Apollo 13. We are very honored that tonight among our very honored guests is Wernher Von Braun, which reminds us of the debt we owe to those who have helped our space project and who are of German background.” President said he had telephoned Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Apollo 13 colleagues as they were having dinner together at msc. “I wished them well and told them that the Chancellor would be there to see the take off and they promised much better weather than when I saw it last year.” (PD, 4/13/70,508-10)
Science published report of Apollo 12 Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team. Samples from Ocean of Storms were about one billion years younger than Apollo 11 samples from Tranquility Base. While most conclusions reached on Apollo 11 rocks also applied to Apollo 12 rocks, Apollo 11 crystalline rocks displayed one texture (lath-shaped ilmenite and plagioclase with interstitial pyroxene) and similar modes (50% pyroxene, 30% plagioclase, 20% opaque, 0 to 5% olivine), while Apollo 12crystalline rocks showed wide range in texture and mode. Most Apollo 12 igneous rocks fitted fractional crystallization sequence, indicating that they represented either parts of single intrusive sequence or samples of number of similar sequences. Breccias were of lower abundance at Ocean of Storms site than at Tranquility Base, “presumably because the regolith at the Ocean of Storms is less mature and not as thick as at Tranquility Base.” Complex stratification existed in lunar regolith, “presumably due mainly to the superposition of ejecta blankets.” Apollo 12 sample 12033 indicated presence of layer of volcanic ash. Greater carbon content in Apollo 12 breccias and fines than in crystalline rocks was “presumably due largely to contributions of meteoritic material and solar wind.” Amount of indigenous organic material capable of volatilization or pyrolysis, or both, appeared extremely low in Apollo 12 samples. Content of noble gas of solar wind origin was less in fines and breccias of Apollo 12 rocks than in fines and breccias from Apollo IVs Tranquility Base site. Breccias contained less solar wind contribution than did fines, indicating that breccias were formed from fines lower in solar wind noble gases than were fines at surface. Presence of nuclides produced by cosmic rays showed Apollo 12 rocks had been within 1 m (3.3 ft) of surface for 10 million to 200 million yrs. Igneous rocks had crystalized 1.7 billion to 2.7 billion yrs ago. (Science, 3/6/70, 1325-39)
Group of msfc engineers successfully completed week-long testing of Skylab program hardware in simulated weightlessness aboard usaf KC-135 four-engine-jet research aircraft. Tests included operation of flight-configuration doors for film cassette compartments, retrieval and replacement of film cassettes, and evaluation of handrails and foot restraints. Lunar soil penetration experiment aboard aircraft studied load-bearing characteristics of lunar soil and how lrv wheels would perform on moon. KC-135 was flown in parabolas, with 30 secs of weightlessness achieved on each parabola in technique which most clearly duplicated zero g. (msfc Release 70-169; MSFC PIO)
Review of Apollo 13 accident was nearing completion and understanding of accident was good, LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, told press at MSC. Final report had been delayed pending completion of “critical tests being carried out which will help pin down some of the details of what took place.” One of the key tests at msc was related to special detanking and checkout procedures before launch. Tests had found faulty thermal switches and “demonstrated that if these thermal switches, had failed ... the temperatures ... in the heater tube assembly could have exceeded 1000 degrees F. [800 K] in some spots,” hot enough to bake teflon-coated wires and destroy insulation. Actual flight tank at Beech Aircraft Corp. would be “cycled back through the same series of detanking operations that took place on the 02 tank ... from Apollo 13.” Other tests were being conducted at msc, arc, and LeRC on “the ignition and combustion processes in the tank.” Preliminary data suggested explosion resulted from failure of switches before launch and overheating of heater tube during detanking which destroyed insulation and sparked fire in tank. (Transcript)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong was one of 10 persons named to receive National Civil Service League’s 15th annual career service awards. Each honoree would receive $1000, inscribed watch, and citation at banquet May 8. (W Star, 3/19/70, A2)
Apollo 12 moon rock was guarded by three men as firemen fought fire at Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev. Lunar sample lent by NASA for display at physics symposium in hotel was kept in place during fire for security reasons, (upi, WPost, 4/12/70, A3)
Apollo 12 lm in final moments of descent to lunar surface had caused dust shower that pocked Surveyor III and sand-blasted camera, NASA announced. Burton G. Cour-Palais, Chief of Meteoroid Sciences Branch at MSC, reported that Surveyor III TV camera experienced little meteoroid damage during 950 days of exposure to space environment, but had numerous shallow craters of recent origin— apparently caused by lm 183 m (600 ft) away. LM-caused craters were “shallow. . .mostly of recent origin, as indicated by their whiteness against the sandy brown color of the TV camera housing painted surface.” White craters were concentrated on arc of TV camera facing lm, 10 to 100 times as many as on side away from lm. Preliminary assessment of meteoroid impacts indicated more than five impacts on camera housing and four on polished tube. (NASA Release 70-23)
Apollo 14 lunar landing crew would conduct active seismic experiment during first eva period, NASA announced. Crew would set off 21 small explosions while on lunar surface and would arm mortar to rocket-launch 4 grenades by ground command after crew left moon. Explosions would create seismic waves for detection by geophones emplanted in surface to provide data on structure of moon. (NASA Release 70-150)
NASA announced issuance of Analysis of Apollo 8 Photography and Visual Observations (NASA SP-201). Book contained black-and-white photos taken on 1968 mission to furnish data on approach topography and landmarks for early Apollo landings, on scientific merit and roughness of areas for possible follow-on Apollo landings and on broad structure and characteristics of lunar surface. (NASA Special Release)
ESSA scientist Elmer Schuman was using computer to determine exact limits of safe flight through electrically charged clouds, in study to help avert lightning strikes such as occurred during Nov. 14, 1969, launch of Apollo 12, ESSA reported. (ESSa Release)
Baltimore Sun editorial on Apollo 13 launch: “If there is less national emotional interest in the moon flights now as they become almost routine, and as their goals are related to specific scientific quests, rather than to the romance of just making the flight and landing, there is still great interest and concern for a safe voyage. That America is not jaded by these brave and difficult ventures is shown in the large crowds that show up for launches in Florida and the attention televised coverage draws in the rest of the nation.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A12)
Chicago Daily News editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “Compared to the feverish reach for the moon in the Sixties, the plans. . .seem almost pedestrian. Not until men take off for Mars—at the earliest in 1983—will there be anything like the excitement of the first trip to the moon. Yet it is a practical timetable NASA has developed, one that promises the maximum in scientific research within a budget reflecting a lowered priority for space. Exploration of space is by no means being abandoned, but urgent needs on Earth clearly come first.” (CDaily News, 3/13/70)
Washington Evening Star editorial on SST: “Backers of the SST program say it is necessary for maintenance of technological primacy and a favorable world trade position, and that, besides, this bird is another of those inevitabilities. But certainly the nation that placed the first men on the moon isn’t hurting for technological status. As to the other arguments, the United States is capable of putting the kibosh on everybody’s SST ambitions, through denial of U.S. landing rights, if the environmental sacrifices appear too forbidding.”(W Star, 8/21/70)
Univ. of California physicist and lunar expert Dr. Harold C. Urey pleaded for reinstatement of Apollo missions canceled by NASA because of lack of funds in letter to Washington Post: “We scientific people in great numbers are working on many aspects of this problem. We wish that we could talk more about our conclusions. A bag of rocks requires much, study and much other evidence must be carefully considered. The remaining Apollo missions are needed to secure an understanding of the moon which may be the only planetary object with the very ancient history recorded in its surface rocks.” (WPost, 9/17/70, A23)
msfc announced award of $4 360 260 modification to Saturn V contract with Boeing Co. for installation of accumulators—small gas reservoirs in liquid-oxygen prevalves—in 1st stage (S-IC) to change frequency of oscillation in propulsion system. Installation had been made after second Saturn V had oscillated severely during unmanned Apollo 6flight April 4, 1968. (msfc Release 70-14)
Apollo 13 Review Board accident report was released by NASA at Hq. news conference. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Review Board, said accident “was not the result of a chance malfunction in a statistical sense but, rather, it was the result of an unusual combination of mistakes coupled with a somewhat deficient and unforgiving design.” After assembly and acceptance testing, oxygen tank No, 2 that flew on Apollo 13 had been shipped from Beech Aircraft Corp. to NR in apparently satisfactory condition. “It is now known, however, that the tank contained two protective thermostatic switches on the heater assembly which were inadequate and would subsequently fail during ground test operations. ... In addition, it is probable that the tank contained a loosely fitting fill tube assembly. . .which was loose when it left the plant. . .[and] was subsequently displaced during handling. . .[and] led to the use of improvised detanking procedures. . .which almost certainly set the stage for the accident.” Special detanking procedures at KSC subjected tank to extended heater operation. “These procedures had not been used before and the tank had not been qualified by test for the conditions experienced. However the procedures did not violate the specifications which governed the operation of the heaters. ... In reviewing these procedures before the flight, officials. . .did not recognize the possibility of damage due to overheating. “The thermostatic switch discrepancy was not detected. . . . Nor did tests identify the incompatibility of the switches with the ground support equipment at KSC. ... As shown by subsequent tests, failure of the thermostatic switches probably permitted the temperature of the heater tube assembly to reach as much as 1000 degrees Fahrenheit [810 K] in spots during the continuous eight-hour period of heater operation. From that time on the oxygen tank. . .was in a hazardous condition when filled with oxygen and electrically powered. “However it was not until nearly 56 hours into the mission that the fan motor wiring possibly moved by the fan stirring of the fluid contents of the tank short circuited and ignited the wiring insulation by means of an electric arc. The resulting combustion in the oxygen tank probably overheated and failed the wiring conduit where it enters the tank and possibly a portion of the tank itself. The rapid expulsion of high pressure oxygen which followed possibly augmented by combustion of insulation in the space surrounding the tank blew off the outer panel. . .of the service module, caused a leak in the high pressure system of Oxygen Tank Number 1, damaged the high gain antenna, caused other miscellaneous damage and aborted the mission.” Board recommended that cryogenic oxygen storage system be modified to minimize use of combustible materials and remove materials that might short-circuit from contact with potential ignition sources and that system be rigorously requalified; onboard warning systems be reviewed and modified; consumables and emergency equipment be reviewed to determine whether potential for use in “lifeboat” mode should be enhanced; msc continue special tests and analyses under way to understand better the accident details; standard procedures require “presentation of all prior anomalies” whenever significant anomalies occurred in critical subsystems during final preparations for launch; NASA thoroughly reexamine all spacecraft, launch vehicles, and ground systems to identify and evaluate potential combustion hazards and conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion in strong oxidizers at various g levels; and msc reassess all Apollo spacecraft subsystems and engineering organizations responsible for them to ensure adequate understanding of subsystems at subcontractor and vendor level. Cortright said thermostatic switch discrepancy and incompatibility of switches with ksc ground support equipment was “a serious oversight in which all parties [NASA, NR, and Beech] shared. . .. The accident is judged to have been nearly catastrophic. Only outstanding performance on the part of the crew, Mission Control and other members of the team which supported the operations successfully returned the crew to earth.” (Transcript; text)
Apollo 12 seismometer had detected moonquakes at least twice when moon was at apogee, 405 555 km (252 000 mi) from earth, Washington Post reported. Univ. of Hawaii seismologist Dr. Rolf Meissner had said quakes, which had occurred during seven months ending in August, might be caused by sudden venting of trapped gas when tidal stresses from earth’s pull were suddenly relaxed. Finding followed Aug. 10 finding by Dr. Gary V. Latham and NASA team at msc that moon quaked at perigee. Stress pattern was reversed during apogee, Dr. Meissner had said. “What might be happening is the lunar surface layer is pushing down, pulling the interior apart and unblocking gas chambers at some depths in the moon.” While apogee quakes did not appear to emanate from same place producing perigee quakes, they did emanate from same general location—in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 astronauts were scheduled to land. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/27/70, A3)
Vial containing 2.3 g (0.07 oz) of Apollo 11 lunar material disappeared from display at charity dinner in Los Angeles, Calif. Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, later said sample, one of 100 issued to scientists in U.S., had been lent to Cal Tech scientist for research. Use of sample at fund-raising affair was violation of NASA regulations. (Rosenbaum, NYT, 3/2/70,26)
Largest solar-cell-array system ever devised to power spacecraft had been designed by msfc engineers, NASA announced. Each of arrays, to turn sunlight into electric power for Saturn Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount, would provide 10 500 w at 328 K (55°C) during 58-to 69-min sunlight portion of each orbit. Skylab power-generation systems would produce 21 000 w at peak operation. Number of solar cells in workshop array had not been decided; 164 160 cells would be used in atm array, (msfc Release 70-121)
Boeing Co. announced completion of lunar roving vehicle (LRV) qualification unit, last in series of test units leading to manufacture of first LRV flight model. Fabrication of major components for three flight-model lrvs would begin soon, with first LRV delivered to nasa April 1,1971, and carried to moon on Apollo 15 in July 1971. (Boeing Release)
Moon had been formed as separate planet outside earth orbit and was later captured by earth according to calculations published by Interior Dept, scientist S. Fred Singer and Univ. of Hawaii astronomer L. W. Bandermannin Science. Depletion of volatile substances, which were of lower abundance in lunar surface rocks than in terrestrial rocks, had been explained by late accretion of volatile materials from solar nebula with falling temperature. Scientists had concluded moon had accumulated not in earth orbit but as separate planet. (Science, 10/23/70,438-9)
msc issued rfps for preliminary study of reusable space tug that could be economically operated around earth, near moon, and in support of interplanetary missions. Preliminary study of highly versatile, four-module system would lead to award of nine-month, $250 000 fixed-price contract to investigate space tug missions and operations and determine if single-design vehicle could accomplish all tasks proposed. Space tug was one of new flight hardware items identified in Space Task Group report to President in September 1969. (MSC Release 70-38)
Map of portion of Venus larger than Asiatic continent made by using 64.0-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station was described in Science by jpl astronomers Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and H. Rumsey, Jr.: Map covered planet from 90° west longitude to 30° east longitude and from 45° south latitude to 35° north latitude. Area extended 13 700 km (8500 mi) at Venus equator and was up to 7400 km (4600 mi) wide. Resolution was “about two times as good as the moon can be seen with the naked eye” and was “best definition of Venus yet obtained.” (Science, 9/4/70, 975-7; jpl Release 561)
Analytical results for lunar material in Sinus Medii derived from alpha-scattering experiment on Surveyor VI (launched by NASA Nov. 7, 1967; softlanded on moon Nov. 9, 1967) were reported in Science by jpl, Argonne National Laboratory, and Univ of Chicago chemists. Amounts of principal constituents at Sinus Medii mare were approximately same as those at Sea of Tranquility. Sodium contents of both maria were lower than those of terrestrial basalts. Titanium content at Sinus Medii was lower than at Sea of Tranquility. Results suggested important differences in detailed chemical composition at different mare areas on moon. (Science, 1/23/70, 376-9)
Apollo 13 launch would open “decade in which space will have a new shape. . .leaner shape, with spending well below the hell-bent-to-the-moon space budgets of the 1960s,” Victor Cohn said in Washington Post. It would also be “subdued shape, lowered and Nixonian. Political and popular enthusiasm for expensive space travel is down several percentage points.” New shape “might turn out to be a more sensible one for many seasons.” It might place “more stress on using space flight to learn the facts of the universe and ways these facts can be applied to improve life on earth.” NASA was still undergoing “wrenching change, with many controversies that are far from ended. There is still a deep split between many space scientists and many aerospace leaders and technologists over the best ways to use America’s new capability.” (WPost, 4/5/70, Bl)
Smithsonian Institution’s Museum of Natural History opened exhibition of photographic enlargements of moon particles, including Apollo 11 nickel-iron pellet with 4-mm (0.15-in) diameter discovered by Smithsonian scientists while sifting through moon rock samples. Pellet, called “mini-moon” because of its resemblance to miniature moon in enlarged photo, was magnetic and was believed by Smithsonian scientist Dr. Brian H. Mason to have been formed eons earlier when meteoric fragment crashed on lunar surface. (Schaden, W Star, 8/20/70, B4)
U.S. Ambassador to Guyana Spencer King said in Guyana that Apollo moon rocks would go on exhibition there during February observance of Guyana’s becoming a republic. (NYT, 1/27/70)
Medical experience in Apollo 7 through 11 was summarized by Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, in Aerospace Medicine: “The 3105 hours of exposing man to spaceflight during the Apollo program have added greatly to knowledge of man’s response to space travel.” Spacecraft cabin environment had been “suitably maintained”; radiation environment had been “benign,” with no solar flares occurring; crews had adapted well to weightlessness; and improvements had been made in inflight food. Body-weight losses which continued to occur were not entirely due to body fluid loss. Supplying potable water had been effective and “great strides have been made in removing gas bubbles in the water. Work-sleep cycles had been improved and bioinstrumentation had continued to function well. “Although a preflight preventative medicine program has been difficult to conduct, it has been effective in the later Apollo missions in reducing pre-, in-, and postflight illnesses, which had occurred in all flight phases and were usually viral upper respiratory and gastrointestinal infections.” Although crews had adapted to motion environment, “this area will require continuing attention.” Cardiovascular deconditioning had been identified after flight, along with “significant decrement in work capacity in immediate postflight period.” Postflight neutrophilia had been observed after crew recovery. Loss of red cell mass observed in Gemini program had reoccurred only during Apollo 9, indicating that hyperoxia was responsible. Even small amount of nitrogen in atmosphere might protect red cells from lytic action of oxygen. Microbiological studies had shown that organisms transferred between crewmembers and that organism’s growth was favored by shifts, eva on lunar surface during Apollo 11 was conducted within expected energy costs, at average of 1200 btu per hour. It appeared lunar surface time could be extended safely. (Aero Med, 5/70, 500-18)
Apollo 14 flight crew completed mock flight to 60 900-m (200 000-ft) simulated altitude in altitude chamber at MSC, in preparation for Jan. 31, 1971, launch to moon. (AP, NYT, 9/2/70, 9)
NASA published Apollo 12 Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235): Nov. 14-24, 1969, mission had accomplished “wide variety of preplanned tasks and paved the way for planning future missions to smaller, more selected landing areas with the possibility of significant scientific returns.” By changing csm orbital plane twice, crew had demonstrated capability to explore new lunar areas during orbital operations. “Future flights will take advantage of this capability to photograph additional potential landing sites and to make scientific observations of the surface, both visually and photographically.” Apollo 12 success in lunar orbit had allowed increase in planned orbital activities for Apollo 13. Large quantity of lunar soil and rocks from Apollo 12 mission would add to scientific information obtained from Apollo 11 samples. (Text)
usn announced support aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet would be inactivated by June 30. Ship, which had served as recovery vessel in Apollo missions, would be mothballed after 26 yrs of service, (dod Release 38-70)
Apollo 10 and 11 photos of lunar far side had revealed number of probable igneous intrusions, including three probable dikes that crosscut wall and floor of 75-km (46.6-mi) crater, Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., reported in Science. Intrusions were distinguished by their settings, textures, structures, and brightness. Recognition of probable igneous intrusions in lunar highlands supported indications of heterogeneity of lunar materials and plausibility of intrusive igneous activity on moon, in addition to extrusive volcanism. (Science, 1/2/70,49-50)
msc announced award of $4.5-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp. for three-inch-focal-length mapping camera, stellar reference camera, and timing device for precision mapping of moon on future Apollo missions. Mapping camera would provide 114-mm-sq (4.5-in-sq) photos with precise geometric controls. Stellar reference camera, used with timing device and laser altimeter—being produced under separate NASA contract with rca—would provide spacecraft attitude, time, and altitude at which each photo was taken, (msc Release 70-40)
Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, on behalf of all Soviet cosmonauts, sent message to Apollo 13 crew: “We Soviet cosmonauts are following your flight with great attention and anxiety. We wish wholeheartedly your safe return to our mother earth.” (AP, B Sun, 4/17/ 70, A9)
Officials of Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., said 22 000 persons had filed past hotel’s exhibit of Apollo 12 lunar sample in six days. About 10 000 viewed most successful Strip “show” in one week. (AP, NYT, 4/16/70)	_
lrl scientist Frederick J. Mitchell reported microorganism—Streptococcus mitis—thought to have been accidentally deposited in Surveyor III camera before April 17, 1967, lunar launch had been recovered from inside camera after it was returned to earth by Apollo 12 crew in November 1969. Streptococcus mitis was common respiratory organism and had produced no disease on animal inno-culation. Mitchell said microorganism was probably deposited on camera when camera’s shroud was removed for repairs and then replaced. Procedures and high vacuum of space were thought to have been responsible for preservation of organism in lyophilized (freeze-dried) state during launch, 3-day moon journey, and 950-day stay in hostile lunar environment. Organism had been found after laboratory testing of camera parts at MSC. Investigators had predicted possibility of organisms surviving under such circumstances. (NASA Release 70-76)	.
Loss of 0.56-g (0.02-oz) fragment of 0.45-kg (1-lb) Apollo 11 lunar rock from gsfc was reported by NASA. Sample, one of several used by gsfc scientists to study effect of shock waves in lunar material, had been reported missing by gsfc scientist Dr. Nicholas M. Short. NASA was investigating. (NASA Release 70-113)
msc announced NASA contract awards: Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $3 248 000 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated 18 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification of vehicle readiness review procedures, vibrational testing, rendezvous radar, quality assurance and reliability procedures, and descent engine updating. Agreement brought total estimated value of contract to $1 673 119 200. Federal Electric Corp. received 10-mo, $3.29-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for support services at msc. Extension brought total value of contract to $7,394 million since June 1, 1969. (msc Releases 70-75,70-76)
Apollo 11 spacecraft, first manned vehicle to land on moon, would start year-long tour of state capitals April 17, NASA announced. (AP, P Bull, 2111110)
Experiment to interpret seismic record produced by impact of Apollo 12 lm on lunar surface was described in Science by Univ. of Dayton, MIT, and USAF Institute of Technology scientists. In laboratory simulation, plastic pellets were fired into sand targets at 4° launch angle and 1.68-km-per-sec (1.04-mps) velocity. Shallow elliptical craters were formed, similar to certain lunar craters. Analysis of ejecta suggested lm debris skipped and, with some crater ejecta, reimpacted far downrange but ballistic rain did not account for unusual seismic signal. Experimenters had concluded that deliberate low-angle impact of spacecraft on lunar surface might create serious hazard to men and instruments on and near lunar surface in down-range direction. (Swift, Preonas, et aI., Science, 8/28/70,851-4)
Laser ranging retroreflector (lrrr) similar to one placed on lunar surface by Apollo 11 crew had been added to alsep package for Apollo 14, NASA announced, lrrr would be placed in Fra Mauro region of moon to make laser distance measurements from earth to moon with 15-cm (6-in) accuracy, (msc Release 70-71)
Lunar roving vehicle training model, 1-G trainer, was delivered by Boeing Co. to msfc representatives at Santa Barbara, Calif., marking major milestone in manned lrv program. Two-man trainer was 3.2 m (10 ft 7 in) long and 1.8 m (6 ft) wide with 2.3-m (7.5-ft) wheelbase. It looked like flight version scheduled for use on Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions, but weighed twice as much and was equipped with both automobile-type and wire mesh tires. Extra weight came from additional strength in frame, wheels, drive motors, and suspension system, which permitted it to carry 362.9 kg (800 lbs), including two men, equipment, and samples. Battery-operated trainer was driven with an aircraft-like stick hand controller and could stop, turn, move forward, and reverse at variable speeds. Top speed was 14.5 km per hr (9 mph) on smooth surface. Trainer would be shipped to MSC in about one week. (NASA Release 70-201)
Crippled flight of Apollo 13 had been chosen top story of 1970 by AP member editors, AP announced. (WStar, 12/28/70)
Four particles of moon rock no bigger than tea leaf went on display at Science Museum in London. (Reuters, WPost, 3/27/70, C5)
Apollo launch operations contractors at KSC were reducing work forces from 17 500 to between 16 500 and 17 000 by July 1, NASA announced. NASA and contractors would continue to review future manpower requirements and final determination on civilian work force would be made by Sept. 1. Factors influencing final determination included consolidation of manned launch operations at Launch Complex 39; changes in 1970, 1971, and 1972 Apollo and Skylab schedules; and internal cost-reduction effort of Government and contractors. Apollo 13 Review Board results might also affect planned work schedule. (NASA Release 70-84)
Manufacture of 15th and final Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC-15) had been completed by Boeing Co., prime contractor, and stage was being shipped to mtf, msfc announced. Stage, scheduled to boost Apollo 19 toward moon in 1974, would be static-fired in late September. S-IC program had begun in December 1961. Eight of 15 S-IC stages had flown on Apollo missions, 6 manned and 2 unmanned, (msfc Release 70-162)
No harmful effects had been found in lower animals exposed to lunar material, LRL Lower Animal Test Team of 14 investigators reported in Science. Selected species of fish and invertebrates had been exposed to Apollo //lunar samples for 38 days in tests to detect extraterrestrial replicating agents possibly harmful to life on earth. No pathological effects or evidence of replicating organisms were detected. (Science, 7/31/70,470-2)
Bruce Biossat discussed Apollo 13 in Washington Daily News: “Our greatest hangup is the dreams we cling to on earth. And no one is more guilty of fostering and perpetuating these than the men who today are assailing our space undertaking as costly distraction.... What we have long needed, as historian Dr. Daniel Boorstin suggests, is to forget about fixing and fulfilling some great national purpose. We will do better in small human clusters, working with dedication and fuller knowledge, in assaults on an ever-changing roster of important but quite specialized goals. Far from adding to crippling illusion, our men in space have shown us—in a very cruel laboratory—that such hard goals can be attained.” (W News, 4/22/70, 19)
Special detanking procedure applied to Apollo 13 SM No. 2 oxygen tank before launch “probably resulted in major damage to the wiring insulation in the tank,” Edgar M. Cortright, Apollo 13 Review Board Chairman, said in Status Report. It appeared that two thermal switches designed to protect tank’s heaters from overheating might have failed. Tests had shown heater tube could have reached 800 K (1000°F) and that temperature would seriously damage insulation around heater wires. Cortright said damage could have resulted in arcing short circuits that were believed to have initiated combustion of insulation inside tank during flight. Burning, in turn, raised pressure of supercritical oxygen and caused tank to rupture. (Status Rpt No 14)
First measurements of spectral reflectivity (0.30 to 1.10/x) of several asteroids using double-beam photometer on 152-cm (60-in) telescope of Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile, and 152cm and 254-cm (100-in) telescopes of Mount Wilson Observatory, were described in Science by mit astronomers Thomas B. McCord and Torrence V. Johnson and astronomer John B. Adams of Caribbean Research Institute College of the Virgin Islands. Asteroid Vesta’s reflection spectrum contained strong absorption band centered near 0.9ju, and weaker absorption feature between 0.5 and 0.6fi. Reflectivity decreased strongly in uv. Reflection spectrum for Pallas and probably for Ceres asteroids did not contain 0.9fi band. Vesta showed “strongest and best defined” absorption bands yet seen in reflection spectrum for solid surface of object in solar system. Comparisons with measurements of meteorites and Apollo 11 samples indicated that Vesta surface had composition similar to that of certain basaltic achondrites. (Science, 6/19/70, 1445-7)
Apollo csms would be modified to enhance potential use in emergency mode, NASA announced. Modifications included addition of 400-amp-hour battery in SM as alternative power source, provision of storage space for additional 9 kg (20 lbs) of potable water, and addition of third oxygen tank for SM. (NASA Release 70-144)
NASA announced publication of Apollo 12: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235), 227-page book containing extensive black-and-white photos, charts, and initial scientific findings of Apollo 12 mission. (nasa Special Release)
Two photographs taken from Apollo 9 spacecraft in March 1969 had been used as backdrop for experimental topographic map of Phoenix, Ariz., area, New York Times reported. U.S. Geological Survey scientist Dr. A.P. Colvocoresses had said that “on ordinary maps the lines and symbols used to represent geographic features in such terrain leave many areas essentially blank. On this map, however, there are no blank areas. .. . The map is easy to ‘read’ because the photo shows the actual land surface, enhanced by superposition of cartographic details.” (NYT, 3/26/70)
Dr. Max Born, nuclear physicist and corecipient of 1954 Nobel Prize in physics, died at age 87. (NYT, 1/6/70, 1) Most common minerals found were pyroxene, plagioclase, ilmen-ite, olivine, and cristobalite. Three new minerals occurring in igneous rocks were pyroxmanganite, ferropseudobrookite, and chromium-titanium spinel. Free metallic iron and troilite, rare on earth, were common accessory minerals in igneous rocks. Silicate minerals were unusually transparent because of complete absence of hydrothermal alteration. Tests had shown that, at time of crystallization, observed phases could have coexisted only in very dry, highly reducing system in which oxygen pressure was estimated to be 10-13 atmospheres—more than five orders of magnitude lower than for typical terrestrial basaltic magmas. Melting experiments indicated 98% of primary igneous liquid crystallized in 1483-1333 K (1210-1060°C) temperature range with minor interstitial liquids continuing to crystallize down to 1223 K (950°C). Microscopic and microprobe examinations had produced evidence for existence of interstitial liquid rich in potassium and aluminum, which probably was immiscible with main liquid. Viscosity of lunar magmas was calculated an order of magnitude below that of terrestrial basaltic magmas. This characteristic might be significant in explaining textural features, differentiation mechanisms that produced chemical composition, and morphological features of lunar seas. Chemical compositions of all igneous rocks were similar except for concentration of potassium, rubidium, cesium, uranium, thorium, and barium. These elements distinguished two groups of igneous rocks, with fine-grained rocks containing more than coarsegrained rocks. All rocks had high concentrations of titanium, scandium, zirconium, hafnium, yttrium, and trivalent rare earth elements, and low concentrations of sodium. Low abundance of europium was striking feature of igneous rocks. Composition of soils and breccias was similar to but distinguishable from igneous rocks. Igneous rocks contained at least one other “rock” component distinctfrom lunar basalts sampled. Soil was rich in nickel and volatile elements—cadmium, zinc, silver, gold, copper, and thallium—that occurred in carbonaceous chondrites. Enrichment was consistent with observed occurrence of meteorite material in soil. Many elements that occurred in low abundance in lunar igneous rocks were strongly enriched in terrestrial crustal rocks that were product of igneous differentiation. It had been suggested that low abundance of these elements derived from residual lunar liquids was indication that whole moon was depleted in number of volatile elements. If inference was correct, it could be inferred that lunar material separated from high-temperature, dispersed nebula at 1273 K (1000°C) or higher. Coincidence of high abundance of titanium, separation of europium from other rare earth elements, and separation of barium and strontium suggested igneous liquids were end product of fractional crystallization process or, less likely, that they were produced by partial melting and subsequent segregation of liquid in lunar interior. High-pressure and temperature experiments had shown that materials with chemical composition of Tranquility Base basalts would, at conditions inferred for lunar interior, have densities exceeding moon’s average density. Therefore, basalts could not represent moon’s bulk composition. Age of basaltic crystalline rock was determined at 3.7 billion yrs. Igneous rocks were melted and crystallized about 10 billion yrs after moon’s formation. Single exotic rock fragment had yielded age of 4.4 billion yrs and indicated variability in age between different areas on lunar surface. Relatively young basalts showed moon had not been completely dead planet from its formation, but that it had undergone significant differentiation, at least locally, in thin lunar crust. Period before 3.7-billion-yr event recorded in older Highland areas was interval in which earth’s record had been obliterated. Therefore much of lunar surface was important in understanding early evolution and differentiation of planets. Observations showed lunar materials were product of considerable geochemical and petrological evolution. Optical properties of soil measured in laboratories agreed with those inferred from telescopic studies and indicated thin layer of soil must have covered most of moon. Correlation of spectral features determined in laboratory with telescopic studies suggested that iron content of lunar surface might vary. Measured dielectric constant of soil agreed with known radar reflectivity of moon. Penetration depth suggested upper layers were electrically transparent. Measured thermal conductivity suggested that diurnal variations in temperature should extend to less than one meter in soil regions. Thermoluminescence studies on core samples showed substantial diurnal variation in temperature 12 cm (4.7 in) below surface. Seismic study showed that attenuation of lunar sound waves decreased with pressure. High-pressure velocities were consistent with those observed in Apollo 12 seismic experiments, suggesting possibility of seismic wave guide at shallow depths on moon. Natural remanent magnetization found in crystalline rocks and breccias suggested ancient moon might have had magnetic field with strength of few percent of earth’s field. Field existing 3.7 billion yrs ago might have been result of fluid motions in lunar interior—effect of earth’s field when moon and earth were closer together or result of processes not yet understood. Lunar samples were valuable for study of low-energy, weakly penetrating radiations and had provided sample of gases blown off sun in solar wind, making it possible to determine isotopic composition and abundance of elements in sun by direct measurement. Results would lead to better understanding of sun’s evolution. Studies of stored nuclear tracks and induced radioactivities had shown effect of bombardment by solar flare particles and suggested activity had persisted for long periods. Abundance of cosmic-ray-produced nuclides in samples showed some rocks had been on or within several centimeters of lunar surface for at least 10 million yrs and within one or two meters (three to six and a half feet) for at least 500 million yrs. In search for life origins on moon, micropaleontological examination of sample by optical microscopy and by electron and scanning electron microscopy had produced uniformly negative results. Intensive search for viable organisms using many environmental and media combinations had produced negative results, as had the one quarantine study. Reports given at conference were published in Jan. 30 issue of Science under NASA contract. (Science, 1/30/70) Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle was principal speaker at banquet given by National Space Hall of Fame and City of Houston during conference. He said it was significant that in year when men first set foot on another world, desire to save their own planet had suddenly blossomed. “Quite suddenly everyone worldwide has become seriously interested in protecting the environment. Something new has happened to create this feeling of awareness about our planet.” He warned that man had to face probability that he could no longer discover important physical laws solely by observation in earth laboratories. “We are in a transition period, and in the future we must rely more on outside laboratories than astronomers did in the past.” (Burgess, CSM, 1/8/70)
Advertisement offering “genuine” moon rock fragments at $1 per carat had been denounced as fraud by West German police in Frankfurt. Check with U.S. authorities had revealed fragments could not possibly have come from Apollo 11 samples, AP reported. (WPost, 1/16/70, A12)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong held press conference on his reactions to first anniversary of manned lunar landing July 20, 1969: “I really had hoped, I think, that the impact [of lunar landing] would be more far-reaching than it has [been], I had hoped that it might take our minds away from some of the more mundane and temporal problems that we as a society face. ... I think if we could. . .direct our attention a little farther into the future, to try to foresee problems that are going to occur in the next years and decades, then perhaps we could be attacking these solutions from the front side when it’s. . .more easy to provide a viable solution and a meaningful one.” While scientific discoveries resulting from Apollo II had been numerous and were still continuing, Armstrong felt “actual discovery, or revelation, was that man could in fact live on the moon in a rather normal fashion.” This was “necessary key to all future plans for the use of our natural satellite, whatever they may be and however they might develop.” Armstrong described his feelings in looking at moon from earth: “I see the moon from the back yard as a friendly place. And I see a lot of landmarks. I can no longer look at it just as a spot in the sky; but, rather, I actually pick out, of course, the Sea of Tranquility, Clavius, Aristarchus, and places I know and have flown by.” Asked if he expected to fly in space again, Armstrong said, “I’d be surprised if I don’t have the option of buying a ticket.” (Transcript)
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination notified NASA that Apollo 12 lunar samples and Surveyor parts could be released from lrl quarantine to principal investigators, (msc Release 70-7)
Apollo 13 manned lunar landing mission (April 11-17), aborted after 56 hrs of flight, was officially adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
Apollo 12 lunar samples were presented in Bonn to Science and Education Ministry’s Parliamentary State Secretary Klaus von Dohnan-yi by U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Kenneth Rush. Samples would be investigated at Max-Planck Institute in Heidelberg. (Ley-endecker, Bonner Rundschau, 3/12/70)
NASA announced appointment of Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Project Integration for Apollo Applications Program, as NASA Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, omsf. (nasa Release 70-6)
U.S., Japanese Government, and U.S.S.R. pavilions attracted largest crowds on opening day of Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan. Apollo 12 moon rock was primary interest of 8000 visitors per hour who passed through U.S. exhibit. (Shabecoff, NYT, 3/16/70)
Apollo 14 crew, following splashdown in Pacific Feb. 9, 1971, would be flown to MSC from Samoa instead of from Hawaii, reducing return time to msc by five or six days, nasa announced. Crew would arrive in Houston in mqf about Feb. 12 and would remain under lrl quarantine until Feb. 26. (NASA Release 70-221)
