msc announced contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $4 364 849 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated procedural changes previously authorized by NASA and brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 788 034 399. Boeing Co. was awarded $4.3-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for reliability, quality assurance, and flight safety engineering at msc. (msc Releases 71-67, 71-68)
Small “quasi-moon” 1.6 to 3.2 km (1 to 2 mi) in diameter was gravitationally linked to earth and moon in three-body team of celestial objects orbiting sun, Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven of Univ. of California at San Diego said in telephone interview with New York Times. Although little asteroid, named Toro, was discovered in 1964, computer calculations showing it was locked with earth and moon had not been reported until September at Nobel Conference in Stockholm, Toro came within 15 million km (9.3 million mi) of earth every eight years. Discovery was first indication that another celestial object was part of earth-moon system. (Rensberger, NYT, 10/8/71, 24)
Element variation and possible material source of Apollo 12 crystalline rocks was discussed in Science by Univ. of Tokyo geologists Ikuo Kushiro and Hiroshi Haramura. Chemical analysis of nine rocks had shown five rocks contained normative quartz; others had normative olivine and hypersthene. Rocks showed wide range in ratio of iron to magnesium. Findings led investigators to suggest rocks, with one exception, represented different parts of differentiated magmatic body, in which magmatic differentiation by crystallization and settling of olivine was most effective. Source material of original magma might be peridotite with or without plagioclase or spinel or garnet, depending on depth of magma generation. (Science, 3/26/71, 1235-7)
Skylab flight hardware manufacturing was nearing completion, MSFC announced. Post-manufacturing checkout would soon begin at industrial and Government installations. Major Skylab spacecraft components include Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), and multiple docking adapter (mda). (msfc Release 71-212)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 14: “With 8400 million of taxpayers’ money behind it and the dubious future of manned spaceflight depending on it, the Apollo 14 mission to the moon ... is grimly earnest business.” If mission was successful there would be “another Apollo shot in midsummer, two more next year.” If it was not, there would be “a whale of a battle in Congress and elsewhere about appropriations and the wisdom of the whole idea.” {P Inq, 1/26/71)
Two new clean rooms for checkout of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in Skylab program were being constructed at KSC. Control of temperature, humidity, and air in rooms would help prevent contamination of delicate lenses and other critical components of ATM experiments. (ksc Release 279-71)
NASA announced selection of Descartes as lunar landing site for Apollo 16, scheduled for launch in March 1972. Descartes, in central lunar highlands, provided opportunity to sample volcanic-like highlands basin fill and uplands volcanic terrain, (nasa Release 71—106)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments planned for ninth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains and was preparing for lunar night, Tass announced. Experiments included stereoscopic photography of crater bed and slopes, chemical analysis of rock, studies of crater 190 m (208 yds) in diameter, and measurements of cosmic radiation. Vehicle had traveled 10.2 km (6.3 mi) over lunar surface since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis-Sov—138-3, 7/20/71, LI)
Assistant chief designer for U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 moon rover said in Tass interview that all goals of mission had been attained. Lunokhod 1 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 and had exceeded expected three-month operating time and provided valuable information. Mission had resulted in acquisition of new skills and development of new techniques and control methods. Principles of remote control, reliability, and durability, as well as power supply, might find application on earth. (fbis-Sov—71—223-3, 11/18/71, L2-3)
Article by Paul Dickson in The Progressive discussed “Empire of Think Tanks.” r&d in U.S. had become “vast, powerful, and well financed empire . . . replete with its own priorities, powers, and pecking order. Atop this empire is a diverse group of institutions called think tanks, which as agents of applied research and policy study have a fateful impact on the nation. The most famous of these ... is the RAND Corporation ... a prime mover in military research.” r&d was “particularly critical element in the battle over national priorities because it not only reflects our current priorities but largely determines what will be technologically feasible in the future.” Lunar landings had shown “how much is possible if a great deal of thought, resources, and dedication are channeled into any stated goal. The vast majority of Project Apollo money had been pumped into space R&D during the decade prior to the first landing. There is, however, a catch in invoking the Apollo/NASA example, because such a new knowledge as is developed in such a program must be applied and directed in order to get anywhere. If not conscientiously applied, well-performed research can lead to a range of ends from a simple nonuse to a more insidious ruse—a way of dodging action under the guise of studying the problem.” Independent think tanks needed to be scrutinized along with Federally sponsored ones. “Many of them receive the bulk of their funds from the Government, and, though not officially ‘sponsored’ like rand, they bring up the same questions of power, unchecked and unanswerable, evoked by the officially sponsored outfits.” (CR, 11/3/71, S1752-5)
Micrometer-sized silicate grains from all depths in Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar core samples showed unusually high density of nuclear tracks, Univ. of California physicists reported in Science. Densities exceeding 100 billion per sq cm in several percent of grains indicated possibility that grains had been irradiated in space as extralunar dust orbiting sun before being caught by moon to build lunar soil—a possible extralunar origin of part of lunar soil. (Barber, Hutcheon, Price, Science, 1/29/71, 372-4)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments and was powered down for 11th lunar night on moon. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis—Sov—71—137—3, 8/13/71, LI)
LRL scientists opened first box of lunar samples returned by Apollo 14. Samples included one rock almost pure white with some grey flecks and one with 10 times more potassium, thorium, and uranium than was found in Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Dr. Paul Gast, Director of Planetary and Earth Sciences at msc, said preliminary studies of samples were “not inconsistent” with idea that lunar highlands might represent lunar crust. “If this additional evidence that the (highlands) materials on the moon contain abundant rocks with high potassium and high uranium and high thorium ... it means the highlands are almost as old as the moon itself. What we’re saying is that there is a layer of unknown thickness . . . on the surface of the moon which is of very different composition than the average moon.” (AP, W Star, 2/13/71, Al)
Former New Mexico Governor David F. Cargo presented Apollo 11 moon fragments to Museum of New Mexico at ceremony in Santa Fe. Later, AP said incumbent Governor Bruce King had claimed lunar samples for people of New Mexico, while Cargo said they had been presented to him, personally, by President Nixon. AP said White House records showed plaque presented with moon fragments was inscribed “to the people of the State of New Mexico.” (AP, W Post, 2/11/71)
Texas a&m Univ. scientists had irradiated five grams of lunar soil to determine whether its elements, apparently soluble in water, were absorbed in growing lettuce plants, AP reported. Laboratory plants growing in moon soil mixture had grown better than those in ordinary soil. Dr. Paul Baur, Jr., botanist working at Msc, had said if plants took up activated elements from lunar soil they could be detected on x-ray plates. “This may give us new clues to the fertilizer requirements of plants.” (W Star, 4/25/71, A16)
Final communications session of 10th lunar day was held by Soviet ground controllers with Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon, Tass announced. Vehicle had traveled 215 m (235 yds) during 10th lunar day, bringing total distance covered since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 to 10 452 m (11430 yds), (fbis—Sov—159—3, 8/17/71, LI)
MSFC announced it had modified existing contract with Martin Marietta Corp. for work in Skylab Program to incorporate earth resources experiment package (erep) into flight version of multiple docking adapter, device to permit Apollo spacecraft to dock with Skylab cluster. Total cost of modification was $6 070 500. erep would contain photographic experiments to study earth from orbit, (msfc Release 71-111)
Apollo program’s contribution to lunar science was praised in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Apollo has taken lunar exploration out of the hands of tree-full-of-owls theorists and put it into the care of the lunar explorers, who will eventually provide sufficient data to unravel some of the major mysteries of the moon and our universe.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/19/71, 7)
Analysis of low-frequency sound from Apollo 14 spacecraft passing 188 km (117 mi) over Bermuda, obtained from infrasonic sensors in Bermuda, was presented in Science by Columbia Univ. geologists. Signals^ reminiscent of N-waves from sonic booms, were horizontally coherent, had nearly identical appearances and frequencies, and had supersonic trace velocities across tripartite sensor arrays. They had identical arrival times after spacecraft launch from ICSC and were only coherent signals recorded over many hours. Observations “seem to establish that the recorded sound comes from the rockets at high elevation” but values of surface pressure appeared explainable by combination of “kinetic theory approach to shock formation in rarefied atmospheres with established gas-dynamics shock theory.” (Cotten, Donn, Science, 2/12/71, 565-7)1
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover began sixth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains, traveling 301 m (988 ft) across lunaT surface and completing two communications sessions with ground. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 4/9/71, 205)
Second flight model of lrv Rover was delivered by Boeing Co. to ksc for Apollo 16. (msfc Release 71-144; ksc pio) .
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had confirmed results of June 21-25 Joint Working Group meetings at msc, nasa announced. Groups had considered technical requirements for compatible systems for space rendezvous and docking, radio and optical reference, communications, life support, crew transfer, and docking assemblies. They had agreed to study experiments to test technical solutions. Experiments might include docking spacecraft of Apollo type with orbital scientific station of Salyut type and docking spacecraft like Soyuz with station like Skylab. Mission models would test suitability of technical requirements and solutions. Next working group meeting was scheduled for late November in Moscow, to complete agreement on technical requirements for compatible systems. Working Groups had been established under Oct. 28, 1970, agreement, (nasa Release 71164)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated on moon’s Sea of Rains after surviving fourth lunar night since landing on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17,1970. (SBD, 3/10/71,55)
Third attempt to test manned Apollo 15 LM in simulated environment was completed at KSC. Two attempts during previous week had been unsuccessful because technician failed to open oxygen valve and because two oxygen regulators failed. (SBD, 4/7/71, 192)
First simulated altitude test of manned Apollo 15 CM in ksc vacuum chamber was postponed after oil was found leaking from light fixture. Problem did not affect spacecraft. (SBD, 4/6/71, 183)
Chicago Tribune editorial commented on Apollo 15 crew: “Out of all they saw, collected and recorded by camera they hope to make a significant contribution to science and the understanding of the universe, and they hope from this to apply what they learned to the betterment of life on earth. If there is one regret, it is, as Scott said, that after the vista from this peak of experience, what comparable mountain remains to be searched?” (C Trib, 8/14/71)
Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoly A. Rlagonravov said in broadcast that Soviet lunar vehicle Lunokhod’s safety margin and “perfect design” had “surpassed all expectations.” He said at this stage of space technology man could not have stayed on moon for as long a time as Lunokhod had. In future it would be possible to assign to automatic devices such tasks as studying meteorites, exploring volcanoes, and studying radiation in near-moon space. What was more important “is that we now have an almost ideal means of conveyance on the moon, a means independent of super-rigorous conditions of vacuum and sharp changes of temperature. We can load such a selenomobile with different scientific apparatus.” (AF Mag, 6/71, 59-9)
ksc announced award of $99 189, 24-mo contract to Univ. of Florida for research and preparation of narrative history of icsc Apollo launch facilities and operations. Contract included option to extend for six months, (ksc Release 245—71)
Feasibility study at msc had ruled out use of small TV camera on lrv Rover while in motion during Apollo 16 mission, Los Angeles Times reported. Cost would exceed usefulness and pictures might be hazy and induce nausea in viewers because of up-and-down motion of Rover over lunar surface. Necessary adjustments to provide TV from Rover would cost almost $5 million. {LA Times, 9/27/71)
Denver mint held preview showing of nickel alloy Eisenhower dollar which would be released in October. Back of coin depicted Apollo 11 lunar landing, (upi, W Post, 9/2/11)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had said settlements with U.S. Government on military contracts and other problems had resulted in net loss of $86.3 million in 1970 and $96.6 million in fourth quarter of 1970, Wall Street Journal reported. {WSJ, 3/21/1\, 3) May 27—June 6: Twenty-ninth Paris International Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport. More than one million visitors to world’s largest air show viewed Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport in its first appearance in West; Anglo-French supersonic airliners, Concorde 001 and 002; Soviet Mi-12, world’s largest helicopter; Lockheed C—5A Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft; Lockheed 1011 TriStar; and more than 200 private aircraft in total exhibition of 600 aircraft. U.S. Pavilion exhibited Apollo moon rocks. Canadian Pavilion contained mockup of integrated stol system envisaging 10-min air hops between suburban shopping areas and city centers. (B Sun, 5/26/71, 5/31/71; Hess, NYT, 5/26/71)
frc and MSC scientists and engineers would begin research in adapting Apollo hardware to “fly-by-wire” electronic control system for future aircraft, nasa announced. System substituted lightweight wires for push-rods and added redundant wire paths at different locations in aircraft, to make overall system less vulnerable to damage. Electronic system could soften bumps, sways, and lurches of aircraft in rough weather and ease pilot’s load, (nasa Release 71-36)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, energized by solar cells after surviving second lunar night on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed third exploration operation, moving about 128 m (140 yds) during 4%-hr period. Vehicle had been inoperative since beginning of lunar night Dec. 23, 1970, and had been opened to receive solar energy Jan. 8. It had been released on surface by Luna 17, which had soft-landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 1/11/71, 28; 1/12/71, 35)
Finalization of order for 175 F-^l jet fighter aircraft by Federal Republic of Germany was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird at DOD press conference. Order amounted to more than $750 million. (Transcript) Luna 18 reached moon’s surface Sept. 11 near Sea of Fertility, 3° 34' north latitude and 56° 30' east longitude. Tass announced landing was “unlucky” and communications stopped at 10:48 am Moscow time (3:48 am edt). Luna 18 was assumed to have crashlanded. Previous mission in series, Luna 17, landed successfully on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and released Lunokhod 1, self-propelled lunar rover designed to carry out scientific investigations. (fbis-Sov-172-3, 9/3/71, LI; 174-3, 9/8/71, LI; 173-3, 9/12/71, LI; SF, 11/71, 401)
S-IC-511 1st stage for Saturn V launch vehicle that would launch Apollo 16 toward moon in 1972 was shipped by barge from Michoud Assembly Facility, to arrive at Kse Sept. 17. (msfc Release 71-152)
Portable magnetometer carried during Apollo 14 eva had detected unexpected bulge in moon’s magnetic profile, arc announced. Data indicated lunar magnetic field at point 297 m (325 yds) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site was about 100 gammas—three times higher than measurements at Apollo 12 site. Another reading, 457 m (500 yds) away near edge of Cone crater, measured about 40 gammas. (arc Release, 71-4)
Apollo 16 spacecraft was rolled out from ksc Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, in preparation for manned lunar landing mission scheduled for launch March 17, 1972. Rollout was watched by about 10 000 persons at ksc. (upi, NYT, 12/14/71, 12; ksc Release 263-71)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 unmanned lunar rover explored 457-m (500-yd) crater on moon, made chemical analysis of soil, photographed area around crater, and “engaged in Cosmo-physical measurements,” Tass announced, (upi, W Star, 3/14/71, A15)
NASA announced flight schedule for 1972. Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission would be launched in March and Apollo 17 in December. Pioneer-F would be launched in February on two-year mission to Jupiter, and erts would be launched into polar orbit during the first half of 1972 to obtain earth surface imagery. Other launches would include Intelsat-IV F—4, F-5, and F-6 comsats for ComSat-Corp; heos-a2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite for esro; mts Meteoroid Technology Satellite; TD-1 scientific satellite for esro ; itos-c, -d, and —e Improved Tiros Operational meteorological satellites for noaa; oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory; imp-h Interplanetary Monitoring Platform; esro-A scientific satellite for esro; Aeros scientific satellite in cooperation with West Germany; sas-b Small Astronomy Satellite; Telesat-A comsat for Canada; Nimbus-E r&d satellite; and sms-a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite. In addition, NASA schedule would include broad range of aeronautical research and cooperative exploration with other countries. Aircraft noise abatement would be high-priority goal, with development of QUESTOL aircraft, construction of noise-reduction laboratory at LaRC, and mating of acoustically treated nacelle to quieter jet engine. Supercritical wing test aircraft would be fitted with side fairings to increase flight efficiency and wing would be fitted to modified F—111 aircraft for tests in 1973. X-24A lifting body would be modified and redesignated X-24B and would begin flight tests in fall 1972. (nasa Feature Release)	............
Training mockups of two Skylab spacecraft components— Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—arrived at msc aboard NASA barge Orion from msfc. Shipment also included multiple docking adapter exterior shell and portion of airlock module mockup. Trainers and hardware would be used by msc for training prospective Skylab crewmen for missions scheduled to begin in early 1973. (nasa Release 71-187; msc pio)
Apollo 14 backup pilot Eugene A. Cernan narrowly escaped death when helicopter in which he was practicing lunar landing maneuvers crashed and burned in Indian River near ksc. After leaping from helicopter and swimming toward shore Cernan was rescued and taken to Patrick afb for treatment of minor cuts and bruises and singed eyelids and eyebrows, (upi, W Post, 1/24/71, A5)
Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar rock groups differed in potassiumuranium abundance systematics, jpl scientists Dr. Fraser P. Fanale and Douglas B. Nash reported in Science. Difference indicated “that relatively little exchange of regolith material has occurred between Mare Tranquillitatis [Sea of Tranquility] and Oceanus Procellarum [Ocean of Storms]. Two suites appear to have been derived from materials of identical potassium and uranium content.” It appeared unlikely “that bulk lunar material has the ratio of potassium to uranium found in chondrites. However, systematic differences in the potassium-uranium ratio between Apollo samples and crustal rocks of the earth do not preclude a common potassium-uranium ratio for bulk earth and lunar material.” (Science, 1/22/71, 282-4)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant said in message to President Nixon that Apollo 15 was “another brilliant chapter in man’s peaceful exploration of outer space.” (Reuters, NYT, 8/8/71)
National Endowment for Humanities sponsored Thomas Harriot Symposium at Univ. of Delaware, honoring Elizabethan mathematician, astronomer, geographer, navigator, and philosopher sent to New World in 1585 by his patron, Sir Walter Raleigh. Harriot had written first English account of wealth of America, A Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia. After 350 yrs of obscurity, Harriot was being revived by scholars who were mentioning his name with Kepler and Galileo, New York Times reported. Harriot had independently begun telescopic observation of heavens in July of 1609, at about time Galileo did in Italy, and had drawn what was believed to be earliest map of moon in which vast seas and craters were recognizable. He had observed and counted sun spots through telescope using London fog as filter and had calculated period of solar rotation and traced moons of Jupiter. In 1601 he had discovered law governing refraction of light. (Reinhold, NYT, 4/8/71, 39)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I lunar rover had successfully completed 11th lunar day of work on moon since it was landed by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, Tass announced. During 11th lunar day rover had made “a detailed survey of the structure of the moon surface in the area” and “panoramic route survey of the surrounding locality,” traveling 100 m (328 ft) before being powered down for 11th lunar night, (fbis—Sov— 180-3, 9/16/71, LI)
Long-term commitment and definition of policy for storage and curatorial handling of lunar materials had been urged by Cal Tech scientist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, AP reported. A principal investigator of lunar material, Dr. Wasserburg had said lack of planning and handling could deny future generations use of moon rocks now being studied. (P Bull, 8/19/71)
Acid hydrolysis, vacuum crushing, and vacuum pyrolysis experiments to investigate amount, nature, and isotopic composition of carbon in Apollo 12 sample 12023 were described in Science by arc exobiologists Sherwood Chang, Keith A. Kvenvolden, James G. Lawless, and Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and ucla geologist I. R. Kaplan. Results indicated that sample contained indigenous carbide and methane in amounts comparable to those found in Apollo 11 fines. Hydrolyzable carbide in Apollo 12 sample was heavier, isotopically, than any known carbide phase in meteorites. Large difference between isotope values for lunar and meteorite carbide suggested “that the former was either native to the moon or deposited by meteorites and subsequently subjected to isotope fractionation processes on the lunar surface.” If meteorites were not source of lunar carbide, “then we are left with the possibilities that the carbides represent primordial indigenous lunar carbon, however formed, or the product of interaction between solar wind carbon and metals or metal oxides or minerals on the lunar surface.” Evidence existed for presence of carbides in Apollo 11 rocks but amounts were too low for isotopic measurements. “If the carbon was indeed indigenous to the lunar rocks, the observed range of isotopic composition would be more representative of primordial lunar carbon.” (Science, 2/5/71, 474-6)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed experiments for eighth lunar day and was put in stationary position for lunar night. Experiments had included examinations of lunar rocks, stereoscopic panoramic photography, and measurements of chemical composition and physico-mechanical properties of crater 150 m (164 yds) in diameter. Vehicle had traveled more than 10 km (6 mi) since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and was still functioning normally. (Sov Rpt, 7/8/71, 12)
ksc announced award of $33 157 979 addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with Bendix Corp. for support services for Apollo spacecraft and Skylab programs from Oct. 1, 1971, to Dec. 31, 1972. Addition brought total amount of contract to $210 081 335. (ksc Release 227—71)
Number of accredited newsmen covering Apollo 15 mission had dwindled to 402 from high of 1200 for Apollo 11, UPi noted. ApoUo 12 had been covered by 700 newsmen and Apollo 14, by 600. (W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Preliminary results of studies of nuclear tracks in glass lens cover of TV camera landed on moon by Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, and retrieved by Apollo 12 mission were reported in Science by Washington Univ. physicists G. Crozaz and R. M. Walker. Studies gave information about low-energy nuclear particles from sun and provided basic calibration for nuclear tracks in lunar rock surfaces—erosion rate of nearly 10 millionths cm per year. Results also suggested “small-scale erosion process in lunar rocks.” Use of Surveyor 3 TV camera glass filter had enabled General Electric Co. scientists R. L. Fleischer, H. R. Hart, Jr., and G. M. Comstock to determine, for first time, energy spectrum of solar cosmic-ray particles of iron group over energy range from 1 to 100 million ev per nucleon. Difference between observed spectrum and limiting spectrum derived previously from lunar rock tracks gave erosion rate of 0 to 2 A per year. “High-energy fission of lead, induced by galactic cosmic ray protons and alpha particles, has also been observed.” {Science, 3/26/71, 1237-41)
Special Apollo Awards Ceremony was held at MSC to recognize individuals and support groups for their contributions to Apollo 13 and Apollo 14 missions. Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Walter J. Kapryan, ksc Launch Operations Director; Eugene F. Kranz, Apollo 14 Flight Director; Glynn S. Lunney, Apollo 13 Flight Director; former astronaut James A. McDivitt, Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Apollo 13 Flight Operations Director. nasa Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to James J. Gavin, Jr., of Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s LM team and Public Service Medal to Donald E. Eyles of mit. nasa Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 23 employees of MSC and ICSC. Group Achievement Awards were presented to DOD Recovery Forces and Manned Spaceflight Support Network, (nasa Special Ann, 2/26/71; nasa Release 71—28)
Soviet engineer 0. Sashin described in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya activities of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17, Nov. 17, 1970: At time of launch “it was supposed that the whole . . . program could be fulfilled in 3 lunar work days. . . . Over these three days Lunokhod-1 . . . visited a multitude of craters, repeatedly surmounting rock fields. ... In all, during the 3 working days envisaged by the initial program, 42 radio communications sessions were held with Lunokhod-1, during which 8,924 radio commands were issued and fulfilled. . . . the route covered by the apparatus amounted to 3,551 meters [3883 yards], the television cameras transmitted to earth more than 80 high-quality panoramas of the surrounding locality and the scientists obtained vast information about the moon. The fourth working day passed, then a fifth, and a sixth. . . . Each was succeeded by a 2-week lunar night with all its ‘charms’ including an outside temperature which drops to below minus 150 degrees. But the next morning came and Lunokhod-1, roused by a radio command from earth, obediently set about its work. “The work of the self-propelled lunar scout . . . continues. . . . 132 radio communications sessions have been held ... in which 22,792 radio commands have been given. A route 10,226 meters [11 183 yards] . . . over the lunar surface has been covered. The 10th working day on the moon has arrived. And again the indefatigable scout [is] continuing its search.” (fbis-Sov-158-3, 8/16/71, LI—3)
Age and composition efEects on alteration of lunar optical properties were described in Science. Evidence from Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 samples and telescopic spectral reflectivity measurements indicated that lunar seas “are similar in mineralogy on a regional scale and that the highlands are consistent with ah anorthositic-gabbro composition. Bright craters and rays in both regions expose materials that are relatively crystalline compared with their backgrounds, which are richer in dark glass. With age, bright craters and rays in the maria darken in place by meteorite impact-induced vitrification and mixing with the surrounding material. Highland bright craters and rays may, however, darken primarily through regional contamination by iron and titanium rich mare material.” (Adams, McCord, Science, 2/12/71, 567-71)
More than 20 hrs of live TV coverage from Apollo 15 spacecraft and lunar surface would be carried via orbiting Intelsat comsats, ComSat-Corp announced. Coverage would include liftoff, transposition and docking, intravehicular transfer, landing site approach, lunar surface exploration, first color broadcast of lunar liftoff, rendezvous and docking, film transfer in space, lunar eclipse, press conference from space, and splashdown. (ComSatCorp Release 71-39)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, had safely endured 10th lunar night and was functioning satisfactorily, Tass announced. (fbis—Sov—172-3)
msc announced signing of $11577 561 supplemental agreement with Grumman Aerospace Corp. for changes in Apollo LM contract. Agreement brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 617 510 000 (msc Release 71—18)
LeRC announced it was accurately producing and measuring surface contamination to spacecraft by harsh elements in outer space under simulated space vacuum conditions in liquid-helium-cooled space tank linked to computer. Facility could achieve and maintain very high vacuum. LeRC Aerospace Environment Branch also would study effect of exhaust from small reactor control thruster—like those used for Apollo attitude control—on optical properties of nearby surfaces in space, such as Skylab surface. (LeRC Release 71-6)
lm similar to those used on Apollo 11, 12, and 14 was placed on permanent display at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. (W Post, 5/7/71, Bl; Smithsonian pio)
Dr. Georgy N. Babakin, prominent Soviet space scientist who had designed equipment for unmanned Soviet spacecraft, died at age 56. Izvestia obituary said Dr. Babakin had been recipient of Hero of Socialist Labor, highest Soviet civilian title, and corresponding member of Soviet Academy of Sciences and had made “a great contribution to the development of Soviet space technology and the study of the moon and Venus.” (NYT, 8/5/71, 34)
Baltimore Sun editorial praised progress of NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences plans for compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system: “For all the impediments, actual and potential, to genuine collaboration in an almost illimitable project which no single nation can ever claim for its own alone, America and Russia have managed, it seems, to come to terms on some major technical points.” Consultations that produced agreement “indicate the growth of sensible, humane realism in both Washington and Moscow in looking to the future,” (B 5»re, 9/4/71) Mitchell W. Sharp, Canadian External Affairs Minister, said at news conference following opening session that it was time for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to negotiate underground nuclear test ban. Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Conference Chairman and former AEC chairman, said in paper that plutonium 244, heaviest element, could assist in determination of earth’s age. In newspaper interview, Dr. Seaborg said leading nuclear scientists agreed that nuclear-generated power was “clean, safe and necessary,” but that people of world needed to be convinced. He felt that responsibility for ensuring safety in use of nuclear energy should eventually be transferred from aec to some other agency but move would be “premature” at present. Milton Klein, manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems Div., reported on nasa plans to send nuclear-powered space probes to outer planets in next five years, followed by manned missions using atomic engines in the 1980s. First mission using nuclear reactor to provide onboard electricity [Pioneer F Jupiter flyby] would be launched in 1972. U.S.S.R. withdrew from conference program paper it had intended to read entitled: “Development of nuclear power systems for space in the U.S.S.R.” and substituted paper on operation of small Topaz reactor. Washington Post quoted observers as attributing substitution to U.S.S.R. lag in space nuclear power field. One observer had said only other explanation might be that they were embarrassed by failure of Lima 18 “to perform on the moon.” (aec Releases 0-151, 153; Reuters, W Post, 9/10/71, A13; NYT, 9/12/71, 20; Sullivan, NYT, 9/16/71, 14; O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/71, A21)
Senate passed S.J.R. 101, to “authorize and request the President of the United States to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 6/21/71, S9476)
European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that it would provide live TV coverage of Apollo 14 for 21 countries in Western Europe and North Africa and coverage for TV stations in U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe. Fourteen multilateral broadcasts would be transmitted via Intelsat-III F-6 to earth station at Raisting, West Germany. (NYT, 1/31/71)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover (landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) was powered up to begin experiments for 10th lunar day. (upi, W Post, 8/4/71, A6)
NASA continued to receive proposals for using surplus Apollo hardware for “Apollo 18” lunar mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, had suggested mission be flown in April 1974 to map moon from polar orbit. During mission, which would cost about $190 million, lm would be converted into “massive scientific experiments bay.” (Av Wk, 11/1/71, 15)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated following eighth lunar night since vehicle was landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970.	Temperature in instrumentation compartment was 295 K (72°F), pressure was 100 375 newtons per sq m (753 mm mercury), and all systems were functioning satisfactorily. (Tass, fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI)
nasa announced it had begun distribution of more than 2200 samples and polished thin sections of Apollo 15 lunar material to U.S. and foreign scientists. Total weight of largest and most varied sample collection was about three kilograms (six and a half pounds). Material would be analyzed by 700 investigators in U.S., Virgin Islands, 15 foreign countries, and ESRO. (nasa Release 71-223)
Apollo missions plus Surveyor, Orbiter, and Soviet missions had permitted first detailed study of formative stages of planetary body, UCLA scientist Dr. George W. Wetherill said in Science article. “Future work will require sampling distinctly different regions of the moon in order to provide data concerning other important lunar events, such as the time of formation of the highland regions and of the mare basins, and of the extent to which lunar volcanism has persisted subsequent to the first third of lunar history. This work will require a sufficient number of Apollo landings, and any further cancellation of Apollo missions will jeopardize this unique opportunity to study the development of a planetary body from its beginning. Such a study is fundamental to our understanding of the earth and other planets.” (Science, 7/30/71, 383-92)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 15. Washington Daily News: “The record harvest of rocks and other data brought back by Apollo 15 may turn out to be one of the biggest steps ever toward understanding the solar system, the dominant influence on earthly existence. This has been the most remarkable decade of research and development in history, and the space program has been the core of it.” (W News, 8/9/71) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The pictures taken by Endeavour and the data being supplied by the tiny satellite the astronauts left orbiting the moon are providing the most exact and comprehensive intelligence yet about minerals on the moon.” It was “becoming obvious that what we spend in space we are investing in the future of mankind.” (P Bull, 8/9/71)
No viable organism and no evidence of fossil material had been found in Apollo 14 lunar samples, Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team reported in Science. Major findings had been: only 2 of 33 rocks had basaltic textures; samples differed from earlier lunar rocks and from their closest meteorite and terrestrial analogs in chemical content; chemical composition of soil resembled that of rocks; rocks displayed characteristic surface features and shock effects similar to those of Apollo 11 and 12 samples; concentration of solar-wind-implanted material in soil was large, as in Apollo 11 and 12 material, but solar wind contents of rocks ranged from that of soil “to essentially zero”; carbon content of Apollo 14 rocks was within range of that for Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; four fragmental rocks showed surface exposure time about an order of magnitude less than typical exposure times of Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; broader range of soil mechanics properties had been found at Apollo 14 site than at Apollo 11 or 12 sites and Surveyor landing sites; and no evidence of biological material had been found in Apollo 14 samples to date. (Science, 8/20/71, 681-93)
nsf published statistics that showed Federal R&D funding was on upward trend. Figures were taken from soon to be published report Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Vol. XX. Estimated 9% increase in overall Federal funding for r&d from 1970 to 1972 indicated upward trend after decline that began in 1968. Total of $15.3 billion in actual obligations for 1970 established low for recent years. Although 1971 Federal r&d total was expected to be same—$15.4 billion—total $16.7 billion requested in President Nixon’s 1972 budget marked new high. nasa had risen from 5% share of Federal r&d in 1960 to high of 34% in 1965 but was expected to fall back to 19% in 1972. Final phase-out of Apollo and reduced nerva engine development were expected to be nearly offset by increase in other NASA programs so that 1972 would be almost a leveling off. (nsf Highlights, 9/7/71)
Selected fire departments across U.S. would be testing new fire-resistant outfits developed by msc for use by NASA rescue crews, NASA announced. Prototype outfit had been displayed at symposium of International Assn, of Fire Fighters. Clothing included thermal underwear, coverall, chaps, two kinds of trousers, two jackets, and two proximity suits that permitted fire fighters to move close to fire or even enter flames. Nonflammable materials in garments had been developed to ensure maximum safety of Apollo crews in oxygen-rich atmosphere. (NASA Release 71—12)
Historical value of Apollo 14 was appraised by Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post article. Mission “may well be remembered as a turning point in the sense that it taught man what his role could be in the exploration of space.” Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 landings had been “feats of technology that showed the world what its richest nation could do when it set its mind to something. Apollo 14 went a giant step further, to a place where man might appreciate what he had done and what he could do in the future on the surface of the moon or another planet.” (W Post, 2/14/71, Cl)
LRV had run into development difficulties that had boosted estimated cost more than 60%, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. Cost was now estimated at $41 million, $12 million more than $19 million stipulated in October 1969 contract let to Roeing Co. and General Motors Corp. Overrun was due “almost entirely to overtime paid to the two companies to make sure the Rover will be ready to fly with Apollo 15 when it takes off for the moon July 25.” Trouble with electronic controls and independent harmonic drive and other problems had delayed testing of lrv until Dec. 14, 1970, almost three months late. (W Post, 1/30/71, A3)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations and good wishes to ground and flight crews of Apollo 15 following moon landing. (PD, 8/2/71, 1099)
NASA released Apollo 11 Mission Report (nasa SP-238), summarizing events and results of July 16-24, 1969, Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. Report was for sale by National Technical Information Service in Springfield, Va. (Text)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Division of Library of Congress, commented in interview after Sept. 28 launch of unmanned lunar probe Luna 19 that Moscow still had plans to land men on the moon, perhaps about 1973 or 1975. Dr. Sheldon said five previous Soviet Zond circumlunar flights had been capable of carrying men and several other earth orbital flights had simulated manned lunar landing maneuvers. Dr. Sheldon also recalled that Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said in 1969 that manned missions to moon were not ruled out. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/29/71, A5)
Lunokhod 1—which landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17— was declared officially dead at end of lunar night because resources of its isotope heating system had been exhausted. (SBD, 11/3/71, 18)
NASA announced selection of Apollo 17 prime and backup crews. Prime crewmen were Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (cm pilot), and scientist-astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B.	Irwin. Apollo 17 would be launched in December 1972 on 12-day lunar-landing mission with 68-hr lunar surface stay time, (nasa Release 71-149)
Synthesis, without using water, of six amino acids that formed building blocks of life by exposing combination of formaldehyde, ammonia, methanol vapor, and formic acid vapor to uv light for 25 days, was reported in Nature by Columbia Univ. scientists Goesta Wollin and David B. Ericson. Because chemicals in combination had been identified in interstellar space, findings suggested life might arise on moon or waterless planet. (Nature, 10/29/71, 615-6)
New York Times editorial said scientists were pressing nasa to “take another look at the cancelled Apollo 18 and 19 flights—flights for which much equipment is available. The Soviet contribution to the new picture of the moon is still miniscule, despite the feats of the Luna space vehicles. But it would make good sense for the United States and the Soviet Union to get together and plan joint manned moon flights, perhaps by making Apollo 18 and 19 the first truly international ventures to earth’s companion in the skies.” (NYT, 9/3/71,26)	_ s International Institute for Strategic Studies published The Military Balance 1971-1972. Annual report of London-based independent research group said Communist China had entered nuclear missile race, U.S.S.R. had moved further ahead of U.S. in icbm deployment, and U.S.S.R. was challenging supremacy of U.S. underwater nuclear strike force. (Reuters, B Sun, 9/3/71, 1)
Completion of tests to determine cause of Apollo 15 parachute failure was announced by NASA. Possible causes were fuel dump, which expelled six pounds of monomethyl hydrazine (mmh) from CM reaction control system, and flaws in links connecting suspension lines to risers. Officials doubted exact cause could be determined. Dump through hot engine could cause tongues of flame that might reach parachute lines. Flaws were detected in links on one recovered chute, but the failed chute had not been recovered. Corrective action would be taken on both possible causes for Apollo 16. Dump would be eliminated and material for links changed. (NASA Release 71—188)
Space officials feared budget pressures could prompt either President Nixon or Congress to cancel final two Apollo missions in 1972, Wall Street Journal said. In event of cancellation, NASA would propose to use Apollo equipment for “lengthy orbital flights due to start in 1973” in the Skylab program. (WSJ, 6/11/71,1)
Despite basic differences, lunar samples were not completely different from terrestrial rocks, Northern Illinois Univ. geologist S. S. Goldich wrote in Science. Basalt hornfels from Keweenawan Duluth complex in Minnesota, containing 7% by weight of titanium, were similar in many respects to Apollo 11 lunar samples. Hornfels’ texture, as well as primary textures in lunar rocks, resembled those in Keweenawan rocks. {Science, 3/26/71, 1245-6)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented: “Apollo 14 . . . demonstrated that man still has much to learn about the moon. Even with the ability to land in relatively rough areas and to extend useful working time on the moon, the experience of the Apollo 14 duo in the Fra Mauro area indicates that better new equipment is needed to extend the range and accuracy of their explorations. And once the various typical areas of the lunar surface are reached it is obvious that vehicles with payloads much larger than Apollo will be required to haul the equipment needed to establish permanent scientific working stations on the lunar surface. For not until that is accomplished will man really begin to reap the full harvest of knowledge from his lunar capabilities.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 2/15/71, 9)
nasa Performance Evaluation Board had given NR Space Div. incentive award fees of $234 600 and $307 350 for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II), NASA announced. Awards covered management performance under contracts during 1970. (nasa Release 71-97)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on selection of scientistastronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for Apollo 17 crew: “The argument for the scientist-astronaut has come. So far as we are concerned, it always made sense. Therefore, any congratulations to [nasa] for finally putting one of the flying geologists to work might be accompanied by a raise of eyebrows over the obvious tokenism of the assignment and a reproachful question as to why they waited so long to put a scientist into the richest geological treasure house that man has yet discovered.” (W Star, 8/19/71)
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) prototype was flown to msc from MSFC for extensive thermal-vacuum-chamber testing. Tests would continue through early December, (msfc Release 71-146; msfc pio; msc Hist Off)
NASA released two publications for sale by Superintendent of Documents, gpo. Apollo 14 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—272), prepared by msc, described Apollo 14: mission and summarized scientific results. On the Moon With Apollo 15, guidebook to Hadley Rifle and Apen-nine Mountains, had been prepared by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, msc Chief Scientist. Publication would aid in following progress of Apollo 15 mission by giving timeline for mission, describing and illustrating lunar surface scientific experiments, and defining terms. (Texts)
George W. Cherry, Director of Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. in NASA oart, received aiaa Mechanics and Control of Flight Award in ceremonies at Hempstead, N.Y. Award was for “pioneering the development of the digital control system for space vehicles and the application of these techniques to the Apollo Command and Service Modules and the Lunar Modules.” (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
Battery and companion unit in Apollo 15 lm failed during tests at ksc and were replaced. Investigation revealed battery had been contaminated with magnesium chips. Problem did not delay countdown, which continued on schedule toward 9:34 am edt liftoff July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/24/71, 29)
Soviet scientist Boris Nepoklonov said in Tass interview that data from Lunokhod 1 (placed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) would help define age of moon more precisely. Information showed that Sea of Rains was one of oldest lunar formations. Analysis of phototelevision panoramas had shown that large craters over 100 m (328 ft) in diameter had emerged several billion years ago, while small craters up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in diameter were millions of years younger. Study of lunar terrain showed many layers. Outer layer, from 0.2 to 0.5 mm (0.008 to 0.02 in), was loosest and had poor heat conductivity, which resulted in sharp temperature fluctuations on lunar surface within half hour. Denser layer beneath was strong enough to sustain weight of Lunokhod 1. Nepoklonov, scientific leader of Lunokhod 1 control team, said that information received from vehicle would be published in multivolume monograph. First book had already appeared. (fbis-Sov— 71-212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn), Apollo Mission Director, discussed Apollo 14’s docking problems with press at MSC and assured press mission would continue toward moon as planned:	. . first of all we did have a successful docking and every indication is that it was a normal docking.” Engineers “have been making extensive analysis here and we can find nothing wrong with the probe. So far as we’re concerned it’s all operating. We do not fully understand why it did not operate or why the first attempts at docking were not successful. However, we are confident that the drogue ... is good. As to the cause, it could have been a foreign particle. ... we did ask the crew to look diligently for any foreign particles and they didn’t find any. . . . We did ask them to inspect the probe head very carefully ... to see if there were any foreign particles. We found none. If that were the problem, it apparently dislodged and is no longer there and is no longer causing a problem . . . and the probe certainly works now.” (Transcript)
President Nixon issued statement on successful Apollo 15 launch; “The flight of Apollo 15 is the most ambitious exploration yet undertaken in space. Even as it reflects man’s restless quest for his own future, so it also reenacts another of the ‘deeper rituals of his bones’— not only the compulsion of the human spirit to know where we are going, but the primal need in man’s blood to know from what we have come. We hope, by this journey, to know better the origins of Earth, the moon, and their other planets. We hope to understand something more of the mysteries of God’s great work. And ... we hope to understand more of man himself.” {PD, 8/2/71, 1088)
nasa signed $195 400 000 supplemental agreement to Apollo lm contract with Grumman Corp. for changes to increase lunar staytime, activity support, and other features of lm. (NASA Activities, li/15/71, 187)
