National Science Foundation issued Manpower and Financial Resources Allocated to Academic Science and Engineering Activities, 1965-71 (nsf 72-302). Universities and colleges employed 273 800 full- and part-time scientists and engineers in January 1971, 6% per year increase from January 1969. Annual increase rate had been 8% 19651969. Current and capital expenditures for science and engineering totaled $7.9 billion in 1970, 6% increase per year over 1968. Annual increase rate had been 15% 1964-1968. In constant dollar terms based on Gross National Product, 1968-1970 increase averaged only 1% per year, while 1964-1968 rate of growth averaged 12% per year. Annual growth rate of 6% in expenditures for scientific and engineering activities in current dollars during 1968—1970 was considerably lower than the 16% “nonscientific” activities in universities and colleges 1968-1970. (nsf Highlights, 3/20/72, 1) March 20-23:	New uses of electrical energy developed from NASA research were exhibited at Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers convention in New York. Exhibit included patient-assist devices for human rehabilitation, “life signs” monitoring systems for hospitals and nursing homes, powered prosthetic hand replacement, portable light indicator for blind persons, sight-switch-operated wheelchair, system for recording school attendance, private alarm systems, gas analysis system for checking room or container atmospheres, system of easily concealed circuitry for controlling lights and appliances, bacteria detection equipment, and long-range laser surveying system. (nasa Release 72—57) March 21:	President Nixon sent letter to Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director: “As we approach the final countdown for Apollo 16, I want you and all the men and women of Apollo to know how much this nation values your splendid efforts. The moon flight program has captured the imagination of our times as has no other human endeavor. You and your team have, in fact, written the first chapter in the history of man’s exploration of space, and all future achievements must credit all of you for having blazed the path. Countless people throughout the world will soon be sharing with you the excitement of Apollo 16’s voyage, and I know I speak for all of them in conveying to you my warmest best wishes for a safe and successful flight. Good luck!” Dr. Petrone later sent copy of President’s letter to Apollo team. (Petrone letter)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 lunar probe completed 1810 orbits of moon and was operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft had conducted 516 radio communications sessions since launch Sept. 28, 1971, and had collected data on moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, LI)
Meteorite crashed into moon near Apollo 14 Fra Mauro landing site with force estimated to be equivalent to 8900 kilonewtons (1000 tons of tnt)—100 times larger than impact of Saturn V S—IVB stage, larger than any previous seismic event recorded on moon, and large enough to record reflections from lunar core if it existed. Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo passive seismic experiirients, said meteorite must have heen about 3 m (10 ft) in diameter and probably created new crater as large as a football field. Signal recorded by four Apollo seismometers on moon was so strong that Apollo 14 seismometers were knocked completely off-scale for 16 min. Total signal lasted more than three hours and signals that might correspond to rain of debris thrown out by impact were recorded for about one minute, (msc Release 72-105)
Navy’s Manned Spacecraft Recovery Forces in Pacific and Atlantic would again cachet and cancel philatelic mail for Apollo 17 mission scheduled for Dec. 6 launch, Washington Sunday Star and Daily News reported. Covers would be processed in Norfolk, Va., and Honolulu; Pacific covers would be postmarked on board prime recovery ship on splashdown date. Atlantic covers would be canceled at Norfolk. (W Star & News, 9/10/72, G19)
Vice Chairman Kuo Mo-jo of Standing Committee of National People’s Congress of People’s Republic of China told visiting French delegation to Peking that U.S.S.R. had begun underground tests of explosive devices in 250- to 300-megaton range Nov. 25. Tests, southeast of Ural Mountains, would continue to Dec. 30. He noted concomitance of European security talks in Helsinki, Finland, and of Dec. 6 Apollo 17 launch. Kuo said both Apollo 17 and Soviet nuclear tests showed technological supremacy with equal military potentialities. (Comparet, Agence France-Presse, Atlanta JC, 12/10/72, Bl)
National Science Foundation released Scientists, Engineers, and Physicians from Abroad: Trends Through Fiscal Year 1970. Immigrant scientists and engineers admitted to U.S. in FY 1970 totaled 13 300— one third more than in 1969 and two and one half times 1965 number. Increases over 1965 level had occurred under October 1965 amendments to immigration law. More than 50% of immigrant scientists and engineers in 1970 had last lived in Asia. In 1965, only 10% of smaller total had been from Asia. Total of 2900 Indian scientists and engineers in 1970 had been largest number admitted from any one country over last 20 yrs. (Text) January 7:	Launch of Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission, scheduled for March 17, was postponed by NASA because of problems with suit fitting, lunar module (lm) battery, and command module (cm) docking-ring jettison device. Apollo 16 would be launched April 16— with lm landing on moon April 20 and lifting off moon April 23— and would return to earth April 28. (nasa Release 72-8; AP, B Sun, 1/8/72, A5)	_
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 16 mission now in progress: “It will take many months and even years before the full harvest of Apollo 16’s scientific contribution is in. But even now there is much material for scientists to analyze. It is information made available by the superb television pictures received here on earth, by the verbal descriptions of the astronauts and by the data radioed back to this planet from the various automatic sensors ... on the lunar surface.” Preliminary conclusion was “that in some important ways the moon is now even more mysterious, even harder to understand, than it was before Apollo 16 took off. The additional knowledge of lunar conditions available from last weekend’s exploration indicates that the reality of the moon’s origin and history is even more complex than previous theories had assumed.” (NYT, 4/24/72, 34)
House Committee on Government Operations in 10th report, Aircraft Collision Avoidance Systems, criticized Federal Aviation Administration’s failure to develop “vigorous and meaningful program for preventing mid-air collisions.” Committee recommended faa research and development program to provide “unified, coordinated approach encompassing all elements of air traffic control, including ground-based air traffic control, airborne collision avoidance, the structure of the Nation’s airspace.” Committee gave faa Administrator until June 30 to report development by FAA, NASA, and aviation community of program to provide U.S. with “acceptable level of collision avoidance capability at the earliest possible date.” (Text) March 15—21:	NASA launched 29 sounding rockets from Wallops Station in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Project was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation. Objective was to compare data for better understanding of upper-air temperature and wind measurements and to encourage international cooperation in exchanging data obtained from meteorological rockets. Rockets—which carried radiosonde payloads ejected at apogee and descending on parachutes—included 12 U.S. Loki-Datasondes carrying NASA payloads, 10 Japanese MT-135s carrying Japan Meteorological Agency payloads, and 7 U.S. Super Areas rockets carrying French National Meteorological Agency payloads. Twenty-four flights were successful, three were failures, and two were partially successful. Second series of launches was planned for late 1973 with U.S., U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, Brazil, France, and India. (WS Release 72-3; WS pao) March 16:	President Nixon praised ability of Americans to “harness the discoveries of science in the service of man” in message to Congress on science and technology: “They have found a way of preventing polio, placed men on the moon, and sent television pictures across the oceans.” But, “when other countries are rapidly moving upward on the scientific and technological ladder, challenging us both in intellectual and in economic terms,” U.S. position in aircraft, steel, automobile, and shipbuilding industries “is not as strong as it once was. A better performance is essential to both the health of our domestic economy and our leadership position abroad.” U.S. should “combine the genius of invention with the skills of entrepreneurship, management, marketing and finance;” ensure favorable environment for technological innovation; realize “that mere development of a new idea does not necessarily mean that it can or should be put into immediate use;” encourage young people to become “dedicated scientists and engineers;” continue priority assigned to basic research and to “exploratory experiments which provide the new ideas on which our edifice of technological accomplishment rests;” and “appreciate that the progress we seek requires a new partnership in science and technology—one which brings together the Federal Government, private enterprise, State and local governments, and our universities and research centers in a coordinated, cooperative effort to serve the national interest.” President had increased FY 1973 Dept, of Defense budget to “ensure our strategic deterrent capability, continue the modernization of our Armed Forces, and strengthen the overall technological base that underlies future military systems.” To “apply our scientific resources in meeting civilian needs,” President had developed “overall strategic approach in the allocation of Federal scientific and technological resources.” He urged Congress to support new strategy that included reorientation of space program “to focus on domestic needs—such as communications, weather forecasting and natural resource exploration. One important way ... is by designing and developing a reusable space shuttle, a step which would allow us to seize new opportunities in space with higher reliability at lower costs.” President also advocated “providing new sources of energy without pollution;” developing “fast, safe, pollution-free transportation;” reducing losses from natural disasters; improving programs to curb drug abuse; increasing biomedical research; providing better health care; and drawing more directly on “capabilities of our high technology agencies”—NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, and National Bureau of Standards—in applying r&d to domestic problems. To improve “climate for innovation” President had proposed National Science Foundation support of “assessments and studies focused ... on barriers to technological innovation and on the consequences of adopting alternative Federal policies which would reduce or eliminate these barriers.” Additionally he would “submit legislation to encourage the development of the small, high technology firms” and “provide additional means for the Small Business Investment Companies (sbics) to improve the availability of venture capital to such firms.” Among “cooperative international efforts” in science and technology President cited exchange of lunar samples with U.S.S.R. and exploration of “prospects for closer cooperation in satellite meteorology, in remote sensing of the environment, and in space medicine. Beyond this, joint working groups have verified the technical feasibility of a docking mission between a salyut Station and an Apollo spacecraft.” {PD, 3/20/72, 581-90)
Llewellen J. Evans, President of Grumman Corp., died at age 49. Evans had joined Grumman in 1951 after four years in Navy Office of General Counsel and had played important role in development of Apollo lunar module. (W Post, 7/17/72, C4; NASA Hist Off)
Apollo program accomplishments were praised by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in New York Times article: “Two developments stand out in my view: (1) The remarkable advance in sophistication of flight techniques and capabilities of the crews, and (2) . . . the eye opening increase in both the extent and results of the scientific activities of manned lunar exploration.” After completion of Apollo 17 mission would come realization “that we have only begun the exploration of the moon. As the analysis of Apollo lunar data and specimens proceeds, it will dawn on us what an enormous treasure trove awaits mankind just offshore from our planet. It will also occur to the scientific community that a base on the moon is just as important as a base in the Antarctic.” (NYT, 12/3/72, 68)
Legal Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began four-week session in Geneva to study Soviet draft treaty for cooperation in exploration and use of moon. Draft treaty had been submitted to U.N. in June 1971. At opening session U.S. representative Herbert K. Reis proposed that nations planning manned or unmanned lunar missions be required to notify U.N. in advance and that Soviet draft treaty be amended to permit use of military personnel or facilities on moon for peaceful purposes. (NYT, 4/11/72, 10)	_
Appointment of Owen G. Morris as Manager, Apollo Spacecraft Program, was announced by Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director. Morris, former manager for lunar module in program office, succeeded b/g James A. McDivitt (usaf), who became Special Assistant to the Center Director for Organizational Affairs. Appointments were effective immediately, (msc Release 72-85)
l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.), Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director since November 1969, retired. Gen. Bogart had joined NASA in 1964 and had received numerous high awards and honors, including 1969 NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to Apollo lunar landing program, (msc Release 72-18)
NASA published Apollo 15 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—289) containing mission description, summary of scientific results, photographic summary, crew observations, findings from geologic investigation of landing site, findings from lunar sample examination, and results of specific experiments on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. (Text)
Tass said Soviet test of lunar iron samples from Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had shown lunar iron resisted rust better than iron found on earth. (Reuters, C Trib, 1/26/72)
NASA announced that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be designated Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp) . (pao memo)
United Nations Legal Subcommittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space ended four-week session in Geneva with agreement on some articles in Soviet draft treaty to ensure free access to moon. Subcommittee had agreed to uphold right to explore and use moon and right of lunar explorers to use facilities placed on moon by another country in distress situations. U.S.S.R. had refused to accept U.S. proposals that treaty apply to other celestial bodies and that every country give 60-day notice before launching space mission. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had expressed reservations on draft convention introduced by France and Canada that would compel publication of launch information. (NYT, 5/6/72, 3:9)	_
NASA had invited 63 ambassadors to Apollo 16 launch but had canceled flight scheduled to carry them to Cape Kennedy because only 10 had accepted, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 4/16/72)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial adapted from paper by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, presented views on future trends in space: Decade of 1970s would see emphasis on “beneficial returns from our investments in the first decade of the space age. It will also be a decade in which we will consciously seek to avoid the large funding peaks that characterized the Apollo era.” Number of achievements possible within limited budgeting would be limited. “In the science arena, and in particular in the exploration of the solar system, this will mean some effort on extending our exploration of earth-like planets. And that will be about it, unless some circumstances again change our emphasis on space science.” In 1980s NASA would “be getting to those very special, very important missions to the smaller bodies of the solar system . . . which will give us probably our best look at the very earliest days of the solar system. Then, in addition, we should during the 1970s look to the best husbanding and application of our space sciences resources to see if we can’t get in one or two early missions of this type.” At any progress rate, “the nation, and indeed the world, is not going to run out of important and exciting and inspiring things to do in exploring and seeking to understand this wonderful universe.” (Av Wk, 5/8/72, 7)
Poll of 123 persons in 6 Moroccan villages had shown 63% thought U.S. lunar landings were hoax or had doubts about them, Washington Post reported. Of those polled, 88% said they had heard of manned lunar missions since 1969. Of 20 persons between ages of 14 and 25, 55% believed reports of moon landings; only 25% of 20 persons between ages of 61 and 90 thought reports were true. Of villagers who believed men had gone to moon, 20% thought landings had been made by Russians. (Aubin, W Post, 7/24/72, A14)
Soviet scientists had suggested system of time registration for moon in lunar stellar days, hours, minutes, and seconds, Tass announced. They had also calculated positions of 72 stars and of Jupiter for every 10 days of lunar year. Work was outlined in book Formulas and Ephemerides for Field Observations on the Moon. (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, LI)	_
New York Times editorial commented on results of Third Lunar Science Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center [see Jan. 10-13]: “Science fiction writers predicted long ago that the moon would be colonized; some even projected a future ‘revolution’ by lunar settlers against domination from the earth. Though such writers could skip over the many difficulties and high costs required by any genuine settlement attempt, there is now increasing evidence that the moon may not be quite so inhospitable as scientists once believed. The possibility that on this, too, the science fiction writers may have been prophets no longer seems as fantastic as it did before the first men walked on the moon.” (NYT, 1/21/72, 46)
NASA released Physics of the Solar System (NASA SP—300), edited by Dr. S.	Ichtiaque Rasool of Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Book was based on lectures given at Fourth Summer Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics at Stony Brook, N.Y., June 17-July 15, 1970. It covered broad range of topics in solar physics, planetary structure and atmospheres, and origin and evolution of solar system. (Text) July 1:	Proposal to produce rare bloodclot-dissolving enzyme urokinase aboard Apollo spacecraft during 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be made to NASA by university-industry scientific team, Washington Post reported. Scientists from Abbott Laboratories, General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., and Univ. of California at Los Angeles had suggested use of device developed by UCLA biophysicist Alexander Kolin that separated the one kidney cell out of every 19 that made urokinase. Device had been used successfully on earth, but team believed urokinase-producing cells could be isolated more effectively in space, where gravity did not hinder separation. Cells would be separated aboard spacecraft, ampuled, frozen, and brought back to earth, where enzyme would be produced by pharmaceutical plant. If successful, method could reduce high cost of urokinase to $50 per dose. National Heart and Lung Institute had treated 236 victims of pulmonary embolism with enzyme at more than $1000 per patient. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/1/72, A3)
Chicago Daily News editorial on Pioneer 10 said: “After several moon landings and all the fuss over spending on space ventures, the public is probably a bit jaded by now with outbound rockets. Yet there is something special, and more than a little bit eerie, about this one.” Only “scientists whose minds can absorb the concept of infinity can really appreciate the possibilities wrapped up in the voyage of Pioneer 10. But the rest of us can share a sense of awe as the spacecraft plunges into eternity, and think a bit about the specks called Man, lost in the vastness of the Universe.” (C Daily News, 3/6/72)
Two proposed flight plans, both with nighttime launch, for December Apollo 17 mission were being studied by Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston Post reported. Proposed launch times—selected for optimum sun angle during lunar landing and surface activities—were 8:39 pm Est Dec. 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 am est Dec. 11, and 8:48 pm est Dec 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 pm est Dec. 11. Nighttime liftoff would he first in U.S. manned program. (Maloney, H Post, 5/15/72)	_
Tass announced Apollo 16 launch 22 min after U.S. news agencies reported blastoff and issued brief report when spacecraft entered orbit. UPl said coverage was quick by Soviet standards and was part of “gradual expanding coverage the Russians have been giving to U.S. space shots which were all but ignored ten years ago.” (W Star, 4/17/72, A6)
Reporting on Jan. 10-13 Third Lunar Science Conference results, Science said “far more comprehensive picture of the moon but far fewer claims to understand how the moon evolved were evident.” Conflict in geochemical evidence suggested “an initially cold moon in which partial melting of its outer layers took place and magnetic evidence that suggests an initially hot moon with a molten core during the early part of its history.” Other puzzles were indication that radioactive materials on moon’s surface were concentrated in one area and evidence of unexpectedly high heat flux from moon’s interior at Apollo 15 site. Seismic evidence that moon had layered crust 65 km (40 mi) thick had been unexpected. More details on lunar chronology had been determined, “such as the date of formation of the Imbrium basin about 4.0 billion years ago and of the Copernicus Crater only 900 million years ago.” It also appeared that, “because of the initially high rate of meteoroid impacts on the moon, very little if any of the original crustal rocks have survived.” Lunar-sample chemistry was “proving far from easy—the possibility that volatile elements have migrated on the lunar surface ... is complicating the analysis of trace constituents.” Despite complications, “scientific understanding of the moon is much further advanced than . . . even a year ago. The systematic coverage of the moon’s surface provided by the orbital experiments on Apollo 15, in combination with the lunar samples, laboratory work, and the experiments on the lunar surface have provided new data to replace what sometimes proved to be unfounded speculations.” (Hammond, Science, 2/25/72, 868-70)
Saturday Review editorial appraised Apollo program’s final significance: Militarily “little strategic value beyond increased sophistication in rocketry and global surveillance seems to have been realized.” Scientific benefits were difficult to determine until data were analyzed. Program “signals the end—for the time being—of what must be regarded as a kind of dream . . . wherein human captains ply their ships through the reaches of the heavens. In a way we are all vicarious captains of space ships, and with the end of Apollo it will be infinitely more difficult to imagine ourselves aboard craft that are guided only by the circuitry of electronic crews. As machinery for exploration, the human captain has been superannuated, at least for the foreseeable future. The inescapable corollary is that we are earthbound once again, tightly contained in the atmosphere of our single spinning island by insurmountably vast distances and the laws of physics.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap for mankind” had been, perhaps, “that the Apollo program, for all its costs and whatever the legitimacy of its birth, created a cosmic event—earth-rise played on the retinas of terrestrially evolved organisms.” (Meyer, Saturday Review, 12/23/72, 22)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 489 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1004-km (623.9-mi.) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.7-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; SBD, 5/9/72, 48) May 7:	Tank cart defueling recovered Apollo 16 command module for storage at San Diego Naval Air Station exploded because of overpressurization. Forty-six persons were hospitalized. All were suspected of having inhaled toxic fumes, but examination revealed no symptoms of inhalation. One suffered broken kneecap and two broken toes. Six were treated for lacerations and bruises, (upi, W Post, 5/8/72, A2; AP, B Sun, 5/8/72, Al; msc pao)
Explosion and flash fire at Newhall, Calif., plant of Space Ordnance Systems, Inc.—manufacturers of Apollo spacecraft components—injured six workers. Facility made explosive bolts used to separate Apollo lunar module ascent stage from descent stage on liftoff from moon. Explosive substance causing fire was identified only as “commercial product.” (W Post, 7/22/72, A4; NASA proj off)
On the Moon with Apollo 16 by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, former Manned Spacecraft Center Chief Scientist, was available for sale from Government Printing Office, NASA announced. Book described landing site and scientific aspects of mission scheduled for launch to moon’s Descartes region April 16. (nasa Special Release)
Jan. 25 fuel leak in Apollo 16 spacecraft had added extra $200 000 to cost of mission, Washington Post reported. Most of money went to pay overtime to technicians who had worked two weekends bringing vehicle with csm/lm from launch pad to Vehicle Assembly Building (vab), where command module had been partly disassembled, and returning spacecraft to pad after repair work on launch vehicle and command module had been completed. (W Post, 4/16/72, A3)
Fact that all spacecraft orbiting earth or moon traveled “oval shaped path called Keplerian elipse” testified to “durability” of Johannes Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, New York Times said. In article on 1971 celebration of 400th anniversary of mathematician-astronomer’s birth, Dec. 27, 1571, Times noted, “Whether it is the space program or a new fashion in historical research, the life and works of the sickly son of a mercenary soldier who rose to be Imperial Mathematician of the Holy Roman Empire are undergoing a kind of rehabilitation at the hands of scholars.” (Reinhold, NYT, 2/18/72)
NASA released color photo of Shorty Crater area of Apollo 17 TaurusLittrow lunar landing site. Photo, taken Dec. 12 during second extravehicular activity of Dec. 7-19 mission, confirmed existence of orange soil discovered by astronaut-geologist Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, (nasa photo 72-HC-933)
Soviet President Nicolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo 17 mission, Moscow radio reported. Message had conveyed best wishes to brave crew, their flight, and explorations that “have contributed greatly to the study of space.” (fbis-Sov, 12/21/72, Gl)
Washington Post editorial commented on Apollo 16:	. . what has struck us about the moon flights is that so little has gone wrong and how much of what has gone wrong has been correctable. It is a sad commentary about the quality of life on earth when it takes days to fix a television set or a refrigerator while it takes only hours to analyze and overcome an electronic flaw in a craft that is circling the moon.” (W Post, 4/29/72, A18) April 30:	Apollo 16 discoveries were described in New York Times article. Mission had been “longest, most ambitious and, in many respects, most productive” in Apollo series. Discoveries included fact that Descartes region of lunar highlands contained almost no specimens of unaltered volcanic rock despite region’s age, “older than the seas and the more prominent craters.” Region had been found to contain breccia rock that had been “fragmented, jumbled, and cemented together again.” High magnetism observed at sites visited by Apollo 16 astronauts might provide clue to moon’s early history, since analysis of lava rocks on earth had indicated earth’s magnetic field flipped over at intervals of thousands or millions of years, with shift requiring centuries. Reverse polarity discovered in rocks near Apollo 16 landing site might mean moon had done magnetic flip at some time in its early history. Among experiments whose outcome was still uncertain was attempt to photograph and analyze ultraviolet light from hydrogen clouds thought by some scientists to exist and to be “missing mass” that would explain gravity assumed to be keeping clusters of galaxies from flying apart. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/72, 3)
Question of whether moon was hot or cold was discussed in Science by California Institute of Technology scientists Dr. Don L. Anderson and Dr. Thomas C. Hanks. High surface concentrations of uranium, thorium, and potassium found on moon and Apollo 15 heat-flow value of 33 ergs per sq cm per sec had indicated high present-day temperatures in lunar interior. But recent interpretations of lunar conductivity profile—“non-hydrostatic shape of the moon, the existence of mascons, the remarkable aseismicity of the moon, and the absence of present-day volcanism”—had suggested lunar interior had always been cold. “We find that the basic observations do not demand a presently cold moon and are, in fact, consistent with a hot moon. We find that an iron-deficient, highly resistive, hot lunar interior, capped by a cool rigid lunar lithosphere with a thickness of several hundred kilometers [100 kilometers = 62 miles] can explain the relevant observations and is a reasonable model of the moon today.” (Science, 12/22/72, 1245-9)
Columbia Univ. sociologist Dr. Amitai W. Etzioni suggested “most hopeful epitaph for Project Apollo” in New York Times article: “This was the last gasp of a technologically addicted, public-relations-minded society, the last escapade engineered by an industrial-military coalition seeking conquests in outer space, while avoiding swelling needs on earth.” {NYT, 12/3/72, 64)
New York Times editorial praised accomplishments of Atomic Energy Commission’s new nuclear accelerator at Batavia, 111. [see March 1]: It was at accelerator “that some of the most illuminating experiments of the next decade are likely to be carried out. For this powerful instrument may have the resources—the penetrating power of its incredible proton beam—to answer some of the ultimate questions about the structure of nuclear particles. If so, man’s understanding of the material universe and his powers over it may well be revolutionalized in the years immediately ahead.” (NYT, 3/5/72, 4:12) March 6:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to nasa staff that Pioneer 10 (launched March 2) if successful would be “technological and scientific achievement of the first magnitude.” During launch it had set spacecraft speed record of some 51 500 km per hr (32 000 mph). “One small detail that impressed me was . . . Pioneer 10 passed the Moon only 11 hours after launch. It makes the Moon seem very close at hand. So we have a new measure for the nearness of what we used to call ‘outer space.’ It brings home, even as we begin the great adventure of exploring the outer planets, the primary importance of moving forward with our preparations for the routine exploitation of inner space.” (NASA Activities, 3/15/72, 44)
In interview published in Time magazine President Nixon discussed impact of his impending visit to People’s Republic of China: “. . . what really matters here is not the fact that the trip to China is announced” but results of trip. “Our people have become accustomed to the spectaculars. It is exciting. A trip to China is like going to the moon.” {Time, 1/3/72, 14—5)
Soviet scientists who had examined lunar samples brought to earth by Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had reported findings on lunar iron, Tass announced. Lunar iron was almost completely void of impurities and had not been affected by corrosion, in spite of its long presence on earth. Scientists maintained “that lunar vacuum and high temperature during the supposed eruptions of volcanoes themselves served as reducers of pure iron out of compounds.” (fbis-Sov, 8/15/72, L2)
There was “much reason to suspect that sooner than most Americans realize there will be Soviet cosmonauts striding and riding on the moon’s surface,” New York Times article said. But U.S.S.R. was “no more capable of fully exploring the moon and achieving monopoly control of, the lunar surface than the United States.” It would take “resources of all nations to finance, equip and staff the permanent manned bases on the moon which will be needed if the moon’s scientific, economic and other potentials are to be fully exploited.” (Schwartz, NYT, 12/11/72, 39)
Romanian President Nicolay Ceausescu had sent telegram to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo, 17 mission, Romanian news agency Agerpres announced in Bucharest. Telegram had said: “We express our conviction that the remarkable successes in outerspace exploration scored during the Apollo programme that concluded with this brilliant mission will serve the general progress of science and technique and will be put in the service of humanity, peace and understanding among people.” (FBis-Romania, 12/22/72, HI)
Montana State Low Income Organization, activist group, had sent box of rocks to President Nixon to protest Apollo 16 mission, upi reported. Group had said purpose of mission appeared to be merely collection of rocks; Montana rocks were free and represented areas in state where social problems needed Government attention. (NYT, 4/23/72, 60)
NASA released specifications of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv) to be carried to moon on final Apollo mission Dec. 6. Following scheduled Dec. 11 lunar landing, lrv would travel about 37 km (23 mi), about 10 km (6 mi) farther than previous lrvs, and would have loaded earth weight of 725 kg (1600 lbs), increase of about 27 kg (60 lbs) over lrvs used during Apollo 14 and 15. Apollo 17 lrv would carry traverse gravimeter to measure variations in subsurface structure and provide data on whether Taurus mountains had deep roots or were deposits on uniform subsurface. Surface electrical properties experiment would measure physical properties of lunar interior to 1-km (0.6-mi) depth. Experiment, connected to LRV navigational system by cable, also would indicate subsurface electrical and mechanical properties, extent of subsurface layering, and degree of energy scattering at landing site, and possible existence of underground water. First direct LRV linking with experiment would enable scientists on earth to correlate its specific location with experiment data, (nasa Special Release)
Director Glynn S. Lunney of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) briefed press at Manned Spacecraft Center on plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975 to be finalized at meetings to begin July 6 at MSC. Delegation of 25 Soviet engineers would discuss with NASA “precisely how we are going to do the mission, when we are going to do things and who is going to be doing things.” Groups would exchange documents proposing specific details of mission, including launch time, docking schedule, launch sequence, and communications. Spacecraft would be docked about 48 hrs and crews would make several exchange visits. Docking module would be used to transfer crews and as prebreathing chamber to protect crews from bends while changing from lower-pressured Apollo to higher-pressured Soyuz. Lunney said he expected U.S. crew or pool of crew candidates to be selected “within a year or so.” (AP, B Sun, 1/6/12)
National Book Committee included Norman Mailer’s Of a Fire on the Moon, account of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission, among 102 books it announced as nominees for National Book Awards. Final choice of 10 winners for $1000-prizes would be announced April 11. (Raymont, NYT, 3/27/72, 42)
Lunar Samples Analysis Planning Team, using information imparted at Third Lunar Science Conference [see Jan. 10-13], reported in Science on advances made and problems still outstanding in lunar science. Most important gain had been that “we now know there is a lunar crust.” Primal igneous activity in outer layers of moon had generated feldspathic crust 40 km (25 mi) thick. Apollo 15 core samples had shown that material at all levels had resided within few centimeters (one inch or so) of lunar surface at some time, but gradient in some cosmic ray product allowed tentative conclusion that soil in lower half of core had been stratified for 0.5 hillion yrs. Apollo 15 mission and Third Lunar Science Conference had answered many fundamental questions, but each answer raised new questions. “What are the nature and chronology of rock types in the lunar highlands? Answers to date have been indirect or broadbrush. The most interesting epoch of lunar history, the first half-billion years, is recorded in highland rocks if it is preserved anywhere. Why is the occurrence of lunar norite or kreep so sharply restricted to the northwest quadrant of the moon’s nearside? Is an exceptionally mighty impact . . . required to raise noritic rock to the surface? This would be inconsistent with the supposedly shallow depth of origin of the Fra Mauro Formation cratering debris.” Last two Apollo missions were targeted to regions that offered prospect of answering these questions. Most “profound question of all” was origin of earth-moon system. Apollo science had eliminated once-popular hypothesis that moon had Been captured 1 to 2 billion yrs ago, “but beyond this the question remains unanswered. If the nature of compositional heterogeneities in the moon at the time of its accretion can be inferred correctly from chemical and petrologic studies . . . this information will go far toward answering the question.” Goal of understanding moon would be furthered by international cooperation. Third Lunar Science Conference had been “minor landmark” because of participation of Soviet scientists and exchange of samples between U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Science, 6/2/11, 975-81)
