The anti-environmental backlash was in full swing, the Wall Street Journal said. Environmentalists were being blamed for the energy crisis, lingering unemployment, high prices, high taxes, food shortages, and the falling birth rate. Several state legislatures had killed ecology-oriented bills they would have passed a session or two before, “and a few others have voted actually to relax environmental-protection laws enacted in the heyday of concern.” Environmental groups were encountering serious fund-raising problems. “Inevitably, businessmen, union officials and others who have felt the lash of environmental power in recent years will now be tempted to hit back hard.” This could be a risky, “almost fatal” calculation. While the environmentalists might no longer win all the battles, “chances are, too, that sooner or later a fresh disaster—a new oil spill, a heavy smog—will rebuild environmentalists’ strength.” (Otten, WSJ, 8/2/73) August 3:	A New York Times editorial commented on the Aug. 2 discovery of an oxidizer leak that threatened the safety of the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14): “Even though it finally proved unnecessary to order three men back to earth immediately, two points did emerge with special clarity from this short-lived scare situation. First, not all difficulties that can arise in manned space missions can be repaired by men on a troubled vehicle.” Second, “and more fundamental, this latest incident again brings into sharp focus the need for standby rescue rockets for manned space ventures. The lack of rescue vehicles in the past has come in for justified and severe criticism. This time NASA has demonstrated that it has learned the lessons of history.” An Apollo spacecraft was being readied as a rescue vehicle for the Skylab 3 crew if a new emergency arose. “Men in space are no longer forced to be so self-sufficient and independent of help from earth as was the case not long ago, especially during the Apollo voyages to the moon.” (NYT, 8/3/73, 30)
U.S.S.R. ground control, during a communications session with Lunokhod 2 to check onboard systems, found a temperature of 90 K (— 297°F) at the end of a rod containing magnetometer sensors. It was the lowest temperature recorded near the lunar surface. Lunokhod 2, inactivated Jan. 23 for the lunar night after it had explored the lunar surface for seven days, had been launched aboard Luna 21 Jan. 8 and landed on the moon Jan. 16. It would begin its second lunar day of exploration Feb. 9. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/13/73, LI)
Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39—site of the July 16, 1969, launch of Apollo 11, the first manned spacecraft to land on the moon— was entered in the National Register of Historic Places of the Dept, of the Interior’s National Park Service. The complex, built between November 1962 and October 1968, was first used for the Nov. 9, 1967, launch of the unmanned Apollo 4, the first Apollo launch, and was still in use for Skylab launches, (icsc Hist Off)
The last lunar sample containment bag from Apollo 17, the last Apollo mission to the moon (Dec. 7-19, 1972), was logged into the processing cabinets at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Johnson Spacecraft Center. (Apollo Sample Analysis Planning Team, Science, 8/17/73, 615)
Petrographic and chemical description of Apollo 16 lunar samples was given in a Science article by the Apollo 16 Preliminary Examination Team. Preliminary characterization of samples had “substantiated the inference that the luna terra are commonly underlain by plagioclase-rich or anorthositic rocks. No evidence has been found for volcanic rocks underlying the regolith in the Apollo 16 region. In their place, we have found anorthositic rocks that are thoroughly modified by crushing and partial melting.” Anorthositic rocks varied texturally and chemically, Occurrence of deep-seated or plutonic rocks in place of volcanic or pyroclastic materials suggested that “the inference from physiographic evidence that the latter materials are widespread in terra regions may be incorrect.” Other conclusions of the preliminary examination were: (1) Combination of data from the Descartes region and data from the orbital x-ray fluorescence experiment indicated that “some backside, highland regions are underlain by materials that consist of more than 80 percent plagioclase.” (2) Soil or upper regolith between North Ray and South Ray had not been completely homogenized since formation of the craters. (3) Chemistry of the soil indicated that rocks rich in potassium, uranium, and thorium—similar to those at the Fra Mauro site—were relatively abundant in the Descartes region. (4) Potassium-uranium ratio of the lunar crust was similar to that of icreep basalts. (5) The carbon content of the premare lunar crust was “even lower than that of the mare volcanic rock.” (Science, 1/5/73, 23-24)
The U.S.S.R. iunar vehicle Lunokhod 2 had completed its mission, Tass announced. The New York Times later said there were indications that Lunokhod 2 had had an accident shortly after the start of its fifth lunar day, while heading toward the uplands east of Le Monnier Crater and that the vehicle’s operation had been terminated unexpectedly. Lunokhod 2 (landed on the lunar surface Jan. 16 by Luna 21, launched Jan. 8) had covered 37 km (23 mi) of complex terrain and withstood sharp temperature changes. It had taken the first measurements from the lunar surface of the luminosity of the lunar sky and had established that the moon was surrounded by a layer of dust particles in which the visible solar light and the reflected earth light were dispersed. Lunokhod 2 had taken 86 relief panoramas and 80 000 TV photos of the lunar surface during 60 communications sessions. It had also measured physical, mechanical, and chemical properties of the upper layer of lunar rock and had studied the characteristics of the corpuscular emission of solar and galactic origin. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/6/73, L5; NYT, 6/5/73, 18)
NASA released a list of personal mementoes carried by Apollo 17 crew Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt on the Dec. 7-9, 1972, lunar mission. The crew had been permitted to carry 12 items each. Cernan had carried two Apollo 17 pins, a lunar module tie pin, wedding ring, moon flag pin, personal jewelry piece, $20 gold piece, religious memento, three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals, and memento from Gemini 9 and Apollo 10. Evans had carried a wrist watch, wedding ring set, gold brooch set, ring, three wedding diamonds, a moonstone gem, identification bracelet, and three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals. Schmitt had carried eight moon pins, turquoise beads, a family memento set, and two Apollo 17 silver commemorative medals. (NASA pao; W Post, 1/20/73, A7)
Establishment of the impact origin of Lonar Crater in Maharashtra, India, at less than 50 000 yrs ago was reported in Science by a team of U.S. and Indian geologists. Fission-track dating of shock-melted glass had also shown the preservation state to be in accord with such comparative youthfulness. As the only known terrestrial impact crater in basalt, Lonar Crater provided unique opportunities for comparison with lunar craters. Microbreccias and glass spherules from Lonar Crater had close analogs among Apollo lunar specimens. (Frederiksson et al., Science, 5/25/73, 862-4)
The exhibit “The Image of the Moon—Galileo to Apollo XI,” from the art collection of Anthony Michaelis, opened at the Univ. of Houston in Clear Lake City, Tex., in cooperation with the Univ. of Houston Libraries. (Invitation)
A Los Angeles Herald-Examiner editoral commented on NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “A decade and a half ago, the Congress charged NASA to explore outer space and to adapt space-related advances for immediate general use. Both mandates have been fulfilled, and NASA officers predict hundredfold advances over the next 10 years. We salute NASA on its 15th anniversary. When the question is asked ‘If we can go to the moon, why can’t we . . . ?’—chances are, the answer is ‘We can!’” (LA Her-Exam, 10/23/73)
A lunar sample brought hack from the moon by Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972, lunar mission) was presented to President Henryk Jablonski of the Polish Council of State by U.S. Ambassador to Poland Richard T. Davies in Warsaw. Ambassador Davies invited Poland to participate in the U.S. Bicentennial celebration in 1976. (Warsaw pap, FBIS-Poland, 7/17/73, Gl)
Science articles presented geological data from the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission. The Apollo 17 Preliminary Examination Team described characteristics of lunar samples in one article. Petrographically, the samples were “the most variable returned by any mission. Some have the cataclastic, highly crushed textures common in Apollo 16 [April 16-27, 1972] return. Many are crystalline breccias whose petrographic characteristics indicate varying degrees of recrystallization or partial melting. Others are friable and dark gray like the many regolith breccias of previous missions. Others display features typical of the lavas returned from the Apollo 11 [July 16-24, 1969], 12 [Nov. 14-24, 1969] and 15 [July 26-Aug. 7, 1971] mare sites and a few have the coarse-grained igneous textures typically developed during the slow crystallization from basaltic melts.” Chemically, nearly all the characteristics of the Apollo 17 rocks could also be found in samples from previous Apollo missions. “However, unusually high zinc concentrations in the orange soil and the exceptionally low Ni content of the basalts suggest different source materials than for previously returned igneous rocks. The trace element contents of the anorthositic rocks are significantly different from nearly all those previously returned, again suggesting variations in the source regions.” ' The Apollo Field Geology Investigation Team reported on the ApoUo 17 Taurus-Littrow landing site. Impact-generated breccias underlay the massifs adjacent to the valley “and basalt has flooded and leveled the valley floor. The dark mantle inferred from orbital photographs was not recognized as a discrete unit; the unusually thick regolith of the valley floor contains a unique high concentration of dark glass beads that may cause the low albedo of much of the surface.” Apollo 17 scientist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt described the geological investigation of the Taurus-Littrow valley as reported in “the last major report of observations by the crews during the Apollo explorations of the earth’s moon.” He was confident “that the future holds many other such reports as man continues his exploration of the earth’s frontier and his use of the space environment.” He believed that “man’s abilities and spirit will continue to be the foundation of his evolution into the universe. Full satisfaction from this evolution only comes with being there.” (Science, 10/16/73, 659-90)
Lunokhod 2, the U.S.S.R. automatic vehicle landed on the moon Jan. 16 by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), began its fifth lunar day. The panel of the solar battery was opened and the onboard systems checked. The vehicle left the large tectonic fracture explored the previous lunar day and started northeastward toward the shore cusp of the Taurus Massif to continue exploration of the Le Monnier Crater. Lunokhod’s Rifma radiation analyzer was sending data on the solar x-ray spectra and making comprehensive readings of a broad band of solar radiation. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 5/11/73, LI; Av Wk, 5/21/73, 20)
President Nixon praised U.S. space technology in a commencement address at Florida Technological Univ. in Orlando: “The genius that could send men to the moon, the genius that could produce the Skylab, the genius that built America into the strongest and most productive nation in the world, the science, scientists, the technicians, all the engineers, all of those who could do that, certainly they can find the way to clean the air, and clean the water, and do the other things that will build a better environment in America.” (PD, 6/11/73, 747)
Analysis of Apollo 15 and 16 data had shown that certain lunar craters, including Aristarchus, emitted gas puffs, the New York Times reported. Data from alpha particle experiments had indicated the events occurred in dark-floored or rimmed craters. Most events recorded had occurred when the moon was nearest earth orbit—the same time at which moon-quakes occurred. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/22/73)
Neutron-activation analysis of 27 Apollo 16 lunar samples for 17 trace elements was reported in Science by Enrico Fermi Institute chemists. Several breccias had been found to be strikingly rich in volatile elements. Similar enrichments had been found in smaller quantities in all lunar highland soils. “It appears that volcanic processes took place in the lunar highlands, involving the release of volatiles, including water.” Measurements suggested that the moon’s original water content could not have exceeded the equivalent of a layer 22 m (72 ft) deep. “The cataclastic anorthosites at the Apollo 16 site may represent deep ejecta from the Nectaris basin.” (Krahenbuhl et al., Science, 5/25/73, 858-61)
A Kansas City Times editorial commented on the proximity of Soviet Salyut 2 and U.S. Skylab launch dates: “A minor fuss has been made over the timing of Salyut’s launch [April 3], which was seen by some as an attempt by the Soviets, after several misfortunes and embarrassments, to steal a bit of the luster from a U.S. manned flight. The point is irrelevant. These are not merely showpiece, national prestige projects. They are bricks-and-mortar foundation-laying for both countries’ futures in space. In the race for the moon, being first counted for something. In . . . learning to function usefully in a long-term space environment, the test is not how soon you get up but what’s accomplished after you’re there.” (KC Times, 4/11/73)
Telecare, an 18-kg (40-lb) medical unit equipped to diagnose and treat victims at a scene of emergency, had been developed by SCI Systems, Inc., from space technology, NASA announced. The ambulance-stored unit with two-way voice and telemetry communications permitted medical technicians to administer prompt professional care with special equipment under radio supervision of a doctor miles away. (NASA Release 73-209) October 18:	NASA announced plans to study Comet Kohoutek with an extensive array of electronic eyes. The comet, now some 400 million km (250 million mi) from the sun, was expected to be visible in the Northern Hemisphere around Christmas time. It was expected to be as bright as a full moon and to be larger than Halley’s Comet, which had appeared last in 1910. NASA scientists would use optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar to study Kohoutek in visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light from the ground and a high-altitude C—141 aircraft, as well as satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4 telescopes and cameras—to learn more about whether planets were remnants of the formation of the solar system or interstellar matter captured by the sun. Scientists would try to determine possible existence of a solid comet nucleus. Kohoutek was believed to have a 20- to 30-km (12- to 19-mi) nucleus with a probable head diameter of 96 000 km (60 000 mi). (NASA Release 73—207)
Miami chemist Harry Bennett received U.S. Patent No. 3 738 374 for a tobaccoless cigarette filled with graphitized carbons developed by NASA for space use. The carbon, which would emit normal combustion gases and produce an ash without nicotine or tar, had been used by NASA to resist heat and strengthen lightweight structural components in spacecraft. (Pat Off pio; B Sun, July 9:	NASA announced it had invited U.S. and foreign scientists to propose experiments to be carried on the Apollo spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission to rendezvous and dock U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in space. The U.S. would carry 180 kg (400 lbs) of scientific and applications experiments and NASA also would conduct experiments from the earth orbit in space science, applications, medicine, and technology. Proposals for experiments were due July 23. (NASA Release 73127)
The Astronomy Survey Committee of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council issued Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 1970’s, Vol. 2, Report of the Panels. The report confirmed the Committee’s 1972 observation that the opening of the radio sky had suggested the presence of undiscovered physical laws and requirements for new observations and explanations. The observation had been made in Vol. 1, released June 1, 1972. The Panel on Radio Astronomy report said: “The processes taking place in the radiation-emitting region of pulsars are the most extreme we know of in the galaxy and far surpass in energy production any power source yet invented.” The understanding of the generating mechanism through further detailed study would improve the understanding of physics and could lead to “major developments in energy generation here on earth.” Suspicion was growing that the molecules already discovered in space were part of “a large group of molecules of ever-increasing complexity that may exist in space.” Belief was growing “that interstellar clouds . . . and fast particles may form large organic molecules. Such molecules, which may be as complex as the amino acids and may be of equal importance in our understanding of life, may be discovered by observations made at radio frequencies.” The Panel on Optical Astronomy noted that new technology for basing detectors in the upper atmosphere and in space had begun to make infrared astronomy “realistic.” The Panel on Space Astronomy said, “It appears that much of the energy emitted from astronomical objects and from the universe itself probably resides in the infrared, and hence some of the most important astronomical discoveries will be made in this region.” The Panel on Astrophysics and Relativity said that violent activity in the nuclei of galaxies was “probably commonplace” and not due to thermonuclear processes. The report concluded: “Man has landed on his first planet—the moon. But his mind and eye have traveled billions of light years into the past and in the next decade will penetrate unimagined new worlds.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 4/73, 1; nas pxo)
Fourth anniversary of Apollo IPs first manned lunar landing July 20, 1969. Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), entered tributes in the Congressional Record. Fuqua said: “Since July of 1969 when Neil Armstrong first set foot on the lunar surface our national space program has had an ever-increasing wealth of technology and new knowledge and practical information of direct benefit to the people of the Nation and of the world.” In remembering the first lunar landing, “we need to be reminded of the need for strong support for our national space program today and in the years ahead.” Frey said: “The people of our space program are not resting on the laurels of this great achievement but are pressing on with the Skylab and the space shuttle to make space an ever-increasing contributor to the well-being of our Nation and the world.” (CR, 7/20/73, E4957, 4961)
