A proposal to tap energy from tiny black holes, superdense objects in space, was presented by Dr. Lowell Wood, member of a three-man team from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories, at a conference of international physicists organized by the New York Academy of Sciences. Some black holes within the orbit of the moon might be so tiny that their effects would not be evident beyond a few hundred meters. A tiny power plant could be placed in orbit to accompany the moving hole but remain at a discreet distance. Fusion fuel would then be fired from the power plant to the hole, and the hole’s extremely powerful gravity would squeeze the fuel toward the vanishing point. The fuel would fuse, releasing vast amounts of energy, which could be collected and beamed to the earth by microwave frequencies. (Sullivan, NYT, 9 March 74, 12)
Sen. James G. Abourezk (D—S.D.) asked the Government Accounting Office to investigate the “evidence of solar energy feasibility” contained in a report by Atomic Energy Commission scientists. He said evidence that solar energy could be developed more quickly and cheaply than previously believed had been ignored when the aec recommended, in a report to the President, that only $200 million out of a total of $10 billion for energy research should be spent on solar energy for a five-year period beginning in 1975. Sen. Abourezk wanted to know “why the A.E.C. has been sitting on scientific data pointing the way toward solar energy while major oil companies are quietly moving to take control of the means to produce solar power.” (upi, NYT, 1 April 74, 34) During March: Apollo 17: Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP-330), dated 1973, was issued. The Taurus-Littrow landing site for the 7-19 Dec. 1972 final mission of the lunar landing program had been the most diverse in both geologic features and samples brought back. Seismic traverse experiments had indicated basaltic flows extended to a depth of 1.2 km. The traverse gravimeter experiment had provided limits to the density of underlying material and permitted development of models to help interpret mascons. Analysis of mare basalts from the Apollo 11,12,15, and 17 missions and from the U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 indicated that the filling of the mare basins took place mostly between 3.2 billion and 3.8 billion yrs ago. Formation of more than 90% of the cratering was believed to be 4 billion yrs earlier. Highland material collected on Apollo 14,16, and 17 missions showed a widespread occurrence of breccias with an apparent age of 3,8 billion to 4.1 billion yrs, with strong evidence that rocks as old as 4.5 billion to 4.6 billion yrs existed on the moon. Dark mare regions were thought to be underlain by lava, but craters had been mostly caused by impacting projectiles. The moon was once active volcanically but was now quiet, with any activity since 3 billion yrs ago highly restricted or nonexistent. It had a crust more than 60 km thick and a negligible overall magnetic field. Two theories of lunar evolution had come from mission data. The first was that the planet was chemically layered during its formation, with a low interior temperature gradually increasing, perhaps reaching the melting point in the last billion years, while the initial heat of the exterior gradually decreased. The second theory assumed that the moon, chemically homogeneous and molten during formation, underwent extensive chemical differentiation resulting in surface concentration of radioactivity very shortly after formation. None of the three theories of origin of the moon—separation from the earth, capture from a solar orbit, or formation from a dust cloud—could be absolutely eliminated by data collected to date, but chemical differences made it unlikely that the moon was torn from the earth. (Text)
The first map of gravity forces on the moon’s far side indicated that the strong gravitational tug of mascons (mass concentrations) on the lunar face was caused by lava flooding rather than by buried meteorites as previously thought, California Institute of Technology planetary scientist Dr. Alfred J. Ferrari reported in a press release based on a paper to be published in Science. The map was developed from measurements of the orbits of two small subsatellites left orbiting the moon by Apollo 15 and 16 in July 1971 and April 1972 and of Lunar Orbiter 5 (launched 1 Aug. 1967). Basins on the moon’s far side, not lava-filled, exerted only weak gravitational forces on orbiting spacecraft, while lava-flooded basins on the front side exerted a strong pull. (Miles, LA Times, 17 Dec 74; Ferrari interview, 20 Nov 75; Ferrari, Science, 27 June 75, 1927-1300)
The British government announced that it was seeking new talks with France on the Concorde supersonic airliner after heavy losses were predicted for each airliner built. Official estimates had indicated that Britain would lose $450 million to $517 million in producing 16 aircraft and, even with a selling price of $40.25 million to $47.5 million, losses would rise until sales reached 70 or more. (Reuters, B Sun, 19 March 74, C9) Dr. A. Albee, California Institute of Technology scientist, said that analysis of an Apollo 17 lunar rock sample indicated that the sample was 4.6 billion yrs old and an example of a very early differentiate. The study suggested that the lunar crust formed very early in the evolution of the moon by extensive melting associated with differential, gravitational separation of various other rock types. The conference showed the trend among lunar scientists had been shifting away from the initial dating and chemical analysis of rock to cross-discipline studies of possible implications of the lunar samples to understanding of solar system chronology. (JSC Release, 7 March 74; JSC Roundup, 29 March 74,1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 16, carrying cosmonauts Col. Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, from Bay-konur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 2:40 pm local time (4:40 am est) in preparation for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The spacecraft, identical to the one that would fly during the ASTP mission, entered orbit with a 280-km apogee, 194-km perigee, 89.3min period, and 51.8° inclination. Tass reported the purpose of the mission was to test the spacecraft’s onboard systems, which had been “modernized to meet the demands of the joint flight”; make scientific and technical investigations; and observe and photograph sections of the earth’s surface for the solution of economic problems. In a prelaunch Tass interview, Filipchenko said that the mission was to last several days. “This would be enough for us to test carefully all the ship’s systems, above all its docking gear.” Using a passive simulator docking ring, Soyuz 16 would make docking and separation maneuvers in almost all the ASTP modes. In addition, U.S.S.R. astp Technical Director Konstanin D. Bushuyev said in a launch-day Tass interview, the crew would check out the Soyuz life support system, which had been redesigned for better compatibility with Apollo. Soyuz normally had a cabin pressure of 10 newtons per sq cm (14.7 psi) and an atmosphere similar in oxygen content to terrestrial atmosphere. Apollo maintained its pure oxygen atmosphere at 3.5 newtons per sq cm (5 psi). To reduce the acclimation period for the crews’ transition between the two atmospheres, the U.S.S.R. had agreed to reduce the pressure and increase the percentage of oxygen in the Soyuz atmosphere. The system’s capacity also had been increased to accommodate four persons. On 3 Dec. NASA, which had been tracking Soyuz 16 since shortly after launch, began a 15-day joint tracking rehearsal with the U.S.S.R. After the mission, information gathered by nine U.S. tracking stations would be compared with data from Soviet tracking stations. Meanwhile the crew reduced the spacecraft’s cabin pressure to 7.2 newtons per sq cm (10.4 psi) and doubled the oxygen content, from 20% to 40%, with no adverse effect. Color TV broadcasts from the spacecraft showed all was well. A trajectory correction 4 Dec. placed Soyuz 16 in a circular orbit with a 225-km altitude, 88.9-min period, and 51.8° inclination, an orbit similar to astp requirements. Simulated docking and separation maneuvers “passed off without a hitch” 5—7 Dec., Tass reported. Medical, biological, earth resources, and astronomy experiments also were carried out during the six-day mission. At 1:04 pm Baykonur time (3:04 am est) 8 Dec., Soyuz 16 softlanded in the U.S.S.R. 300 km north of Dzhezkazgan in Kazakstan. Tass reported the cosmonauts were in good health. Following the successful landing, U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney conveyed his congratulations “for the brilliant rehearsal before the Soviet-U.S. flight.” In a Tass interview Bushuyev said, “We have succeeded in checking in real space flight the whole package of the new system and units responsible for the success of the future linkup of the Soviet and U.S. spaceships.” Soyuz 16 was the third manned U.S.S.R. launch in 1974, following Soyuz 14 (launched 3 July) and Soyuz 15 (26 Aug.). (gsfc SSR, 31 Dec. 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 2-11 Dec 74; Wren, NYT, 3 Dec 74, 16; 4 Dec 74, 26; jsc Release 74-272) 2, 12 December: American astronauts and technicians, although denied access to Soviet spacecraft factories, would be permitted to inspect the Soyuz spacecraft for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the Bay-konur Cosmodrome launch site in May 1975, NASA officials said at a Johnson Space Center news conference. U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the arrangement would satisfy U.S. technical needs. In a 12 Dec. press conference at Star City, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. chief of cosmonaut training, said American crews would be permitted to view only facilities directly connected with the flight itself. “Everything that American astronauts need to be acquainted with on the Soyuz that will fly will be shown them beforehand.” In the meantime astronauts would train with mockups and simulators, (jsc Pio, interview, 15 Sept 75; Keefer, Today, 5 Dec 74; Chriss, LA Times, 3 Dec 74; Toth, LA Times, 13 Dec 74; fbis-Sov, 13 Dec 74, Ul)
