Although more than 26 million Americans watched the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project handshake in space, TV coverage was “adequate without being particularly outstanding,” TV critic Lee Winfrey said in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Two obstacles were insurmountable. NASA “is doggedly efficient, it got us to the moon first and it did the job again this time. But it is as colorless as a pane of glass and invariably capable of making the highest excitement look like the dullest routine.” NASA had an unshakable air of the 1950s about it: till white, all male, crewcut, and straight-shouldered. The second obstacle was that the mission was “another goodie that Richard Nixon dreamed up for us. Which means it was all show and no substance.” The U.S. paid $250 million for an aerial handshake. “Nixon made us buddies with Brezhnev and so, through shadow shows like Apollo-Soyuz, we are supposed to remain.” (Winfrey, P Inq, 22 July 75)
Pope Paul VI told a crowd of 5000 at the papal palace near Rome that he was enchanted by the unique encounter of the Apollo and Soyuz crews in space [see i5—24 July]. He said, “We too, our eyes dazzled by sky light or wide open toward the depths of nighttime space, will shout out, long live the heroic men of such a fantastic feat. Man has won and we cannot refrain from foretelling more wonderful advances in the dominance of nature beyond the heavenly sphere. Man will win.” (ASTP air-to-ground transcripts, 20 July 75)
The Los Angeles Times discussed the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission in an editorial: At the instant the Apollo and Soyuz docked, “the two ships ceased to be two and became one. And at that moment, the common fate of the five adventurers was indissolubly linked for the next 44 hours, symbolic of the shared destiny of the 4 billion passengers on the mother spaceship 140 miles below.” That the passengers were from two different countries was of no significance. “They communicated in each other’s language, and they saw the lovely blue earth across the vistas of space through the same eyes, with the same perception. It is a vision that is desperately needed by earthbound statesmen.” (LA Times, 18 July 75)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reflected the “progress made in the relations between our two nations and . . . the successes of the policy of peaceful coexistence, and promotes a further improvement of the international situation, and the strengthening of mutually rewarding contacts,” Acting President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Vladimir Kotelnikov said at a press briefing. General Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, told the newsmen, “While placing great emphasis on the importance of this joint flight, the Soviet Union also attaches great importance to its national space program, which at present centers on the establishment of long term manned orbital stations of the Salyut type.” He said that the success of ASTP along with that of Salyut 4 “testifies to the maturity of the Soviet space program, to the fact that it is able to man and launch several spacecraft at the same time and control their flight.” ASTP cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, who had been promoted from Soviet Air Force colonel to major general, said he had thought language would be the biggest problem during the joint session but “we understood each other very well.” He added, “we didn’t have problems during our joint operation.” When asked about future joint projects, Willis Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, said, “For the future I see accomplishments in two directions. . . . On one hand we must jointly plan and execute further joint technical projects. At the same time we must further develop the areas of political understanding and cooperation between our two countries. . . . Preliminary discussions are already underway between specialists... from both sides.” (Soyuz crew press conf. transcript, Apollo news center, Houston, 24 July 75)
NASA announced early findings of the 3 Dec. 1974Pioneer II flyby of Jupiter. Data returned by Pioneer II (launched 5 April 1973, and renamed Pioneer Saturn following the flyby) suggested that Jupiter’s magnetic field might be created by a large ring current and many eddies deep within the planet. Earlier measurements from Pioneer 10, launched toward Jupiter on 2 March 1972, had indicated only a simple magnetic envelope with a single “ring current” much like earth’s. The more complex magnetic field could explain the Jovian field’s high-energy particle pattern as well as the bursts of intense radio energy observed emanating from the planet. Jupiter’s magnetic field stretched across 14 million km in some places and shrank in volume by three-fourths or more in others; inside this pulsating field were belts of intense radiation with trapped electrons 10 000 times more intense than those in earth’s Van Allen belts. Pioneer had experienced peak intensities of high-energy electrons that were moderately higher than those found by Pioneer 10, encountering 10 times as many electrons as predicted by earth-based studies. Peak intensities of very high-energy protons were 100 times stronger than predicted but concentrated in small shallow regions. Other early findings of Pioneer 11 included the observation that Jupiter’s cloud tops were substantially lower at the poles than at the equator and were covered by a thicker transparent atmosphere. Also, the clouds at the planet’s south pole were lower than those at the north pole. Although Pioneer 11 found much less evidence of rapid circulation at the poles than at the equator, the polar areas showed many small convective cells dwarfing similar earth disturbances such as thunderstorms. “Blue sky”—attributed to multiple moleculescattering of light by gases of the transparent atmosphere—was visible at the poles. Pioneer 11 accurately determined, for the first time, that the mass of Jupiter’s moon Callisto was 15 times that of earth’s moon. Seen for the first time was an extensive white south polar cap on Callisto. (NASA Release 75— 49)
