The U.S. should orbit solar-power stations Emd mine the moon for raw materials, science fiction writer Isaac Asimov told President Csirter in an open letter printed in the Chicago Tribune. Citing the benefits of orbitsd stations capable of transmitting solar energy in microwaves to earth stations, Asimov stressed the need for international cooperation in using space and in preventing the extinction of humanity. (C Trib, Mar 26/77, 1-7)
KSC announced it had awarded a $480 193 fixed-price contract to Reynolds, Smith and Hills of Jacksonville, Fla., for modifications to Complex 39B to adapt it for Shuttle launch operations as had been done to Complex 39A. KSC had used 39B to launch Apollo 10; Skylabs 2, 3, and 4; and the U.S. spacecraft of the Apollo-Soyuz mission. (KSC Release 125-77)
NASA announced that preparations at KSC for launching the Space Shuttle had required only two new major constructions: an orbiter-landing facility, one of the largest runways in the world (roughly twice as long and twice as wide as an average commercial landing strip), with a microwave scanning-beam landing system to assist the orbiter to an automatic landing; and a large hangar called the “orbiter processing facility” with two high bays for checking out and servicing the orbiters immediately after landing. Existing facilities modified for Shuttle use were the Vehicle Assembly Building, 2 of its 4 high bays being altered for Shuttle assembly, and the launch-control center being equipped with an automated launchprocessing system developed for Shuttle checkout and launch, using a tenth of the manpower for Shuttle that had been used for Apollo: 45 persons, compared to more than 450. Final countdown for Shuttle launches would take only 2.5hr compared to the 28hr needed in countdown for an Apollo/Saturn V. Much of the work had been completed, NASA reported, and the eventual cost of the modifications would be about $240 million, less than a fourth of the 1960s cost of building the Spaceport for Apollo. (NASA Release 77-124)
