JSC reported on its new water-immersion facility (WIF) for Shuttle crew training. MSFC would furnish some payload training mock-ups; JSC would build others including a full-sized Shuttle bay. The new pool, measuring 33 x 78 x 25 feet and located in a building formerly housing an Apollo manned centrifuge, would hold half a million gallons—as much water as 25 average backyard swimming pools—heated to a constant 85 °F for diver comfort over long periods of time. It would replace a 25-foot-diameter tank built in the mid-1960s for Gemini and Apollo emergency training. Filter and chemical systems would reduce bacteria and provide a clear medium needed for underwater photography. Six submersible television cameras, two operated by divers and four mounted under water, would follow the training operations, with pan, tilt, and zoom operated from a console at the pool edge. The facility would include a 5-ton air-powered overhead crane to lift trainers and mock-ups out of the water (and eliminate electrical shock), as well as air compressors to fill scuba tanks. (JSC Roundup, Aug 22/80, 1)
The British Interplanetary Society’s publication Spaceflight carried an article by one of its fellows (barrister Cyril Horsford, also a director of the International Institute of Space Law), on the agreement covering the activities of states on the Moon and other celestial bodies, opened for signature at the United Nations (U.N.) December 18, 1979. The “moon treaty,” 10 years in the making, was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly as a resolution; some of its principles were already in the first outer space treaty in 1967, but several nations, “notably the USSR,” had expressed the need for a separate agreement specially directed at exploration of the Moon. The treaty now awaiting signature would apply to all bodies in the solar system and their orbits, as well as the Moon; the text (reproduced as appendix to Horsford’s article) was already the subject of controversy among international lawyers and others in two particular areas. First, Article IV said use of the Moon was “the province of all mankind”; Article XI said the Moon and its resources were “the common heritage of mankind .’’ The difference had raised questions whether the meaning was the same. Article I of the 1967 space treaty had used the words “province of all mankind,” whereas the words “common heritage” first appeared during a Law of the Sea conference, when a moratorium on exploration preceded a General Assembly resolution affirming the common-heritage principle. International law had not defined the limits of the principle; the new “moon treaty” would reserve privileges under it to States Parties to it (although “all mankind” would be beneficiaries). Also, the concept of “common heritage of mankind” was apparendy limited to the terms of Article XI. 1. Second, the third paragraph of Article XI would apparently prohibit any appropriation of resources found on the surface or subsurface of the Moon; in its literal meaning, this wording would preclude any mining or exploitation of valuable minerals found there in future. Some felt the language was “merely legal,” reaffirming the existing principle that no legal property in lunar resources in place could accrue to an exploring state. The U.S. delegate to the United Nation’s legal subcommittee was confident that the wording did not place any moratorium on exploration, pending the international “regime of management” required under Article XI.5. Horsford noted that opposition to Article XI had already led the U.S. Senate to postpone ratification of the treaty this year. Although the 1967 space treaty “clearly enshrined” the principle of nonsovereignty over celestial bodies, “some quarters” feared that such a clause would inhibit space powers (particularly the United States) from embarking on “the costly adventure of lunar exploitation” while such a restraint existed or where an international regime of shared resources would result in little or no profit. “This danger is already apparent in. . .deep sea mining, when an international regime is involved,” said Horsford. (SF, July-Aug 80, 273)
NASA announced development of a new lightweight flame-resistant material subject only to charring even at 800°F (426°C): polyimide resilient foam, a product of International Harvester’s solar division at San Diego, under contract to JSC. Use of the new foam, available next year, would reduce hazards for buses, trains, and automobiles as well as planes. Between 1965 and 1978, fires occurred in 20% of all passenger air-carrier accidents and caused 2,727 deaths, 469 of them (17%) attributed to effects of fire or smoke. Airlines and builders of commercial planes had sought improved materials since the 1960s; in the late 1960s, materials developed by NASA for Apollo and Skylab were made available to the industry, which chose not to use them because of cost, scarcity, and lack of durability. (NASA Release 80-185)
Only a day away from its closest encounter with Saturn, Voyager 1 had surprised scientists again with images of a huge hill on the moon Tethys and some distorted “ringlets” inside Saturn’s concentric ring system. The head of the imaging team, Dr. Bradford Smith, said Saturn’s rings were a complex system with dozens of small ringlets forming perfect circles within circles; traditional theories did not explain even the series of concentric ringlets. Of one ringlet offset in a ring gap, Smith said that it was not circular and not of uniform width, varying from 15 to 50 miles wide; this and another found elsewhere might be caused by small moonlets not yet visible on either side, distorting the ring particles with their gravity. (W Star, Nov 12/80, A-5)
