Lunar Prospector settled into its orbit after three flawless engine burns. The five scientific instruments (magnetometer, electron reflectometer, gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron spectrometer, alpha particle spectrometer, and Doppler gravity experiment using an S-band antenna) began transmitting streams of data. The neutron spectrometer scanned the lunar surface for evidence of hydrogen; the gamma-ray spectrometer determined concentrations of elements such as uranium and iron; and the alpha-particle spectrometer searched for indications of volcanic and tectonic activity.(Reuters, “Corrected—U.S. Space Probe Begins Hunt for Water on the Moon,” 14 January 1998; NASA, “Solar System Exploration: Lunar Prospector,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=LunarPr&Dis play=ReadMore (accessed 30 July 2007).)
NASA released “unusually detailed” images of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede taken by the Galileo probe in June 1996 and June 1997. Although the images did not indicate the existence of any form of life, they showed that life had been possible in Ganymede’s oceans billions of years ago. At that time, the moon had water, heat, and organic material, brought by comets from outer space. The images also revealed geological formations, including mountain-like ridges and a valley system of volcanoes. Early in the moon’s history, the volcanoes had supplied water for Ganymede’s oceans, which are now frozen.(Paul Hoversten, “Photos Suggest Life Could Have Existed on Jupiter’s Moon,” USA Today, 16 July 1998; New York Times, “Hints of an Ocean on Jupiter’s Moon Yield Questions About Life,” 16 July 1998.)
Scientists published a study in the journal Science, using images from the Galileo probe as evidence that an ocean beneath the surface of Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons, was once warm and salty. James K. Crowley of the U.S. Geological Survey stated that Galileo data showed that “salt absorption patterns on Europa were similar to those on Earth.” Gary B. Hansen, a University of Hawaii geophysicist, added the observation that “the size of the salt bands on Europa’s surface are continuous and stretch across much of the moon,” evidence of a salty ocean beneath the moon’s icy surface. Jeffrey S. Kargel, also of the U.S. Geological Survey, commented on his colleague’s study in Science, saying that salt is an important “piece in the puzzle,” but in the absence of other evidence, does not prove that a salty ocean lies beneath Europa’s surface. Scientists seek other evidence, such as shifting ice plates, cracks in the frozen surface, and a magnetic field.(Michael Kahn for Reuters, “Jupiter Moon Might Have Salt Ocean—U.S. Study,” 22 May 1998; T. B. McCord et al., “Salts on Europa’s Surface Detected by Galileo near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer,” Science 280, no. 5367 (22 May 1998): 1242.)
NASA announced that Lunar Prospector’s gamma-ray spectrometer had returned data about the Moon’s elemental composition. Scientists had used the data to develop the first global maps delineating compositional variations of thorium, potassium, and iron ore over the lunar surface. The maps provided insights into how the Moon’s crust had developed. Prospector’s magnetometer and electron-reflectometer data indicated that the Moon contained magnetized rocks on its upper surface, which had created the two smallest known magnetospheres in the solar system. The craft’s Doppler gravity experiment had enabled scientists to develop the “first precise gravity map of the entire lunar surface,” showing seven previously unknown lava-filled craters, which cause gravitational anomalies. NASA also announced that Lunar Prospector had supplied additional evidence of water-ice deposits on both poles of the Moon.(NASA, “Latest Lunar Prospector Findings Indicate Larger Amounts of Polar Water Ice,” news release 98-158, 3 September 1998.)
The journal Science published data gathered from NASA’s Lunar Prospector, indicating the presence of hydrogen, often bundled as water molecules, on the north and south poles of the Moon. Alan B. Binder, Chief Scientist for the Lunar Prospector mission, explained that the spacecraft had detected an abundance of hydrogen, and that the science team had interpreted the data to mean that the Moon has 1–10 billion tons (910–9,100 kilograms or 0.9–9.1 billion tonnes) of water. In a previous mission to the Moon to collect data, the spacecraft Clementine had found radar indications of water on the Moon’s south pole. Paul D. Spudis, a member of the Clementine science team, remarked that Prospector’s discovery was significant because “the presence of lunar water has been confirmed by two different research methods.”(D. J. Lawrence et al., “Global Elemental Maps and the Moon: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer,” Science 281, no. 5382 (4 September 1998): 1484–1489; Reuters, “Prospector Finds Water on Moon: NASA Spacecraft Locates Ice at the North and South Poles,” Washington Times, 4 September 1998; Associated Press, “Man in the Moon May Have Plenty To Drink: Abundance of Water Likely; Scientists Foresee Colonization,” Chicago Tribune, 4 September 1998.)
Scientists studying Galileo data published findings in the journal Nature describing the likely presence of a subsurface, liquid, salty ocean on Callisto, Jupiter’s second largest moon. Margaret G. Kivelson, space physics professor at the University of California at Los Angeles and NASA’s Principal Investigator for Galileo’s magnetometer instrument, explained that data showed variability in Callisto’s magnetic field similar to that of another Jupiter moon, Europa. However, neither Callisto’s atmosphere, which lacks charged particles, nor Callisto’s icy crust, is a good conductor for generating a magnetic field. Kivelson explained that a layer of salty melted ice could carry “sufficient electrical currents to produce the magnetic field.” In addition, she noted that Galileo data indicated electrical currents flowing in opposite directions at different times, a “key signature consistent with the idea of a salty ocean.” However, scientists had concluded that, unlike Europa, Callisto was unlikely ever to support life, even if it had an ocean, because of its insufficient energy sources. Callisto’s only apparent source of heat is radioactive elements, whereas Europa’s closer position to Jupiter means it possesses tidal energy.(NASA, “Jupiter’s Moon Callisto May Hide Salty Ocean,” news release 98-192, 21 October 1998; K. K. Khurana et al., “Induced Magnetic Fields as Evidence for Subsurface Oceans in Europa and Callisto,” Nature 395, no. 6704 (22 October 1998): 777–780.)
