At the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences, research group leaders from the University of Texas at Austin announced that scientists had sifted through the data from Earth-based observatories and from spacecraft such as the HST, obtained from the controlled crash of NASA’s Lunar Prospector into a crater near the south pole of the Moon on 31 July. The researchers reported that they had identified “no observable signature of water” in the Moon’s crater. The announcement confirmed the conclusion reached at the time of the crash. The Lunar Prospector spacecraft had launched on 6 January 1998. In March 1998, mission scientists had announced the first tentative findings of the presence of water ice on both of the Moon’s poles. The controlled crash, proposed by engineers and astronomers at the University of Texas, was “a low-budget attempt to wring one last bit of productivity from the low-cost” mission. NASA had accepted the proposal because of the successful peer review of the idea, and because the craft’s useful life was nearing its end.(NASA, “No Water Ice Detected from Lunar Prospector Impact,” news release 99-119, 13 October 1999; Associated Press, “Craft’s Crash into Moon Finds No Water,” Los Angeles Times, 13 October 1999.)
NASA’s Galileo probe survived intense radiation emanating from Jupiter during a “do-or-die effort,” when the spacecraft came within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io. The craft experienced computer problems when passing through the densest part of Jupiter’s radiation belt, but 1 hour after Galileo’s closest encounter with Io, all of its systems had resumed normal functioning. Duane Bindschadler, Manager of Science Operations for the Galileo Program, explained that close-up study of Io could help scientists learn about the behavior of volcanoes, thereby helping them predict the behavior of volcanoes on Earth. However, because Jupiter’s radiation field could damage or destroy the spacecraft, NASA had planned the close flyby for the end of the two-year extended mission, following Galileo’s original two-year mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Succeeds in Historic Flyby of Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon,” news release, 11 October 1999; Reuters, “Galileo Probe Risks Ruin for a Closer Look at Io,” Washington Post, 12 October 1999.)
NASA’s Lunar Prospector crashed into a frozen crater on the Moon, but detected no water upon impact. Scientists, believing that the crater held frozen water, had hoped that the “fire and violence of the collision would vaporize ice,” sending a “wet plume, detectable by special instruments, spiraling into the lunar sky.” Telescopes equipped with ultraviolet detectors recorded hours of data after the impact, searching for the “chemical signature” of water. The Prospector mission, which had lasted 18 months following its 6 January 1998 launch, had used five instruments to “map the magnetic, chemical and gravitational character of the [M]oon.”(Associated Press, “Spacecraft Smashes into Moon: Scientists Hoping for Evidence of Ice Vapor in Lunar Sky,” Washington Post, 1 August 1999.)
