Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower in speech at Case Institute of Technology in Cleveland, said: “I for one do not fully understand why, in the midst of a plethora of necessary and costly activities, our Nation should be required, urgently, to develop a capacity to put men on the Moon and challenge our principal opponent in doing so. * * *”
NASA invited 12 companies to submit prime contractor proposals for the manned lunar Apollo spacecraft by October 9.
The Carnegie Institution issued annual report containing several findings from its space scientists: Philip Abelson contended that it was a waste of time and money to sterilize vehicles going to the Moon or planets because any life there would be so unlike terrestrial life that it could not be contaminated by Earth organisms; Horace Babcock offered a theory on alternating spiral magnetic fields of the Sun that might explain sunspots, flares, and the 22-year magnetic cycle; other scientists noted growing evidence of major differences in chemical composition of distant stars, indicating a need to revise methods of computing distances to those stars.
NASA Goddard scientists reported that Explorer X had encountered magnetic fields considerably stronger than expected in its elongated orbit which carried it 112,500 miles from Earth (almost halfway to the Moon), although it would take several weeks to analyze acquired data.
NASA announced that Douglas Aircraft had been selected for negotiation of a contract to modify the Saturn S-IV stage by installing a single 200,000-pound-tlirust, Rocketdyne J-2 liquid-liydrogen/liquid-oxygen engine instead of six 15,000-pound-thrust P. & W. hydrogen/oxygen engines. Known as S-IVB, this modified stage will be used in advanced Saturn configurations for manned circuinlunar Apollo missions.
X-15 No. 3 made first flight, a successful test of new automated control system, NASA’s Neil A. Armstrong as pilot in his first flight of XLR-99-engined X-15. At half throttle, X—15 reached speed of 2,502 miles per hour and an altitude of 81,000 feet.
Reported from Moscow that U.S.S.R. was planning to orbit a man around the Moon in 1962, and that the U.S.S.R. had ICBM’s in being with 100-megaton warheads.
Soviet Cosmonaut Gagarin in New Delhi said that “we will not have to wait long” for the first manned flight to the Moon. Gagarin was making a 9-day visit to India.
Two pilots sealed in 8- by 12-foot simulated space cabin for 17-day round trip to the Moon, at the School of Aerospace Medicine, San Antonio, Tex.
NASA selected MIT’s Instrumentation Laboratory to develop the guidance-navigation system for Project Apollo spacecraft. This first major Apollo contract was required since guidance-navigation system is basic to overall Apollo mission. The Instrumentation Laboratory of MIT, a nonprofit organization headed by C. Stark Draper, has been involved in variety of guidance and navigation systems developments for 20 years.
Nationwide Gallup poll released which showed that 38 percent of those questioned thought the United States led in space research, while 38 percent thought the U.S.S.R. led. The same balance also was tabulated on which Nation will be the first to place a man on the Moon.
NASA Apollo briefing held at Space Task Group for all prime contractors interested in submitting bids.
Complete system studies of the Apollo spacecraft system that were begun in November 1960 were completed by three industrial contractors.
Ranger 2 shot postponed indefinitely as the 8-day “window” (i.e., when the Moon, Sun, and Earth were in favorable positions) had ended before technical difficulties could be corrected.
IB stage of the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle would be built by the Boeing Co., NASA announced. The $300 million contract, to run through 1966, called for development, construction, and test of 24 flight stages, plus several for ground tests. Assembly would take place at the NASA Michoud Operations Plant, New Orleans, La. The S-IB would be the first stage of the vehicle that would launch the three-man Apollo spacecraft for direct circumlunar flight or, with rendezvous, for lunar landing.
Dr. Edward Teller, Associate Director of Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, told American Nuclear Society in Washington that peaceful use of atomic explosives had “the potentiality of becoming the first really important and thoroughly economic use of atomic energy.” Feasibility of such use was demonstrated last summer with 100-kiloton thermonuclear explosion at 635-ft. depth in Nevada, the explosion removing about 7,500,000 cu. yds. of earth and leaving crater 1,200 ft. in diameter and 320 ft. deep. Dr. Teller said radioactivity can be controlled so that excavated area can be entered a few weeks after the explosion with no more exposure than in an atomic laboratory. He predicted nuclear explosions on the moon could be used to extract water from chemical compounds in lunar rock.
British astronomer Zdenek Kopal of the University of Manchester said the gravitational pull of the earth might have heated the interior of thejmoon to nearly 2,000° C. He ascribed the moon’s growing diameter and its rising temperature to constant push-and-pull action of the earth’s gravitational force, causing tidal friction within the lunar interior. The friction generates heat faster than the heat can escape from the moon, thus contributing to the addition of tens of thousands of sq. mi. to the moon’s surface and 1,832° of temperature over the last 4.5 billion years. Kopal was speaking before the Conference on Lunar Exploration, Blacksburg, Va.
Dr. Harold Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, predicted U.S. would land a man on the moon in 1969.
nasa announced it would negotiate with three companies to conduct three-month studies of a lunar logistics system. Negotiations with Space Technology Laboratories, Inc., related to $150,000 study of types of spacecraft which could carry supplies to manned Apollo landing site on the moon; negotiations with Northrop Space Laboratories and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. related to $75,000 studies and operational analyses of possible cargoes for the lunar logistics spacecraft. Various nasa centers simultaneously would study lunar logistics system trajectories, launch vehicle adaptation, scheduling, alternate spacecraft propulsion concepts, lunar landing touchdown dynamics, and use of roving vehicles on the lunar surface.
Upon returning to Sweden from Moscow, Swedish scientist Bjoern Malmgren reported that two Soviet cosmonauts were being trained in Swedish-built centrifuge for a trip around the moon and back. Malmgren reported Soviet space officials told him the venture was planned for late next year.
U.S. and Australian scientists reported in Science that phases of the moon affect rainfall on earth. Their studies in both northern and southern hemispheres disclosed that heavy rains fall most frequently in the first and third weeks of the synodical month— the period from one new moon to the next.
Speaking before the Lunar Exploration Conference in Blacksburg, Va., Nobel physicist Dr. Harold C. Urey said that modern space science indicated the moon and the earth originated independently. It appeared likely that the moon was drawn into earth orbit early in the history of the solar system, some time after both bodies had been essentially formed in their present sizes and masses. He said that science now tended to disprove two widely accepted theories on the moon’s origin: (1) that the moon had been broken from the earth by tidal action, and (2) that the moon and earth had originated together in one gaseous cloud.
ranger iv impacted on the moon at 7:49:53 AM est, ending a 231,486-mi. journey from amr that began with its launching on April 23. Goldstone Tracking Station maintained contact with the 50-milliwatt transmitter in the lunar landing capsule until it passed behind the left edge of the moon. Impact velocity was 5,963 mph, point of impact 229.3° E, 15.5° S, on a part of the moon never seen by man. ranger iv’s instrumentation, which ceased useful operation some ten hours after launch, never functioned again. About the same time as the lunar impact, the Agena B 2nd stage passed to the right of the moon and went into orbit around the sun.
U.S. space experiments with regard to the moon may well give scientists new information on “how the Earth and the planets and the Sun were formed,” Dr. Gordon J. F. MacDonald, Associate Director of the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics of the University of California, said in a Voice of America broadcast. The seismometer to be landed on the moon by nasa’s Ranger, for example, would help determine whether there are “moonquakes” some eight times more frequent than earthquakes, as there should be if the moon contains the same concentration of radioactive elements as the earth.
Optical and radar observations of Project Highwater experiment, 23,000	gallons of water bursted from upper stages of Saturn test launch at 65-mile altitude on April 25, showed that the burst took 2-3 seconds to expand to about 10 times the size of the moon in a roughly circular pattern, and lasted about 10 seconds. A second fainter trail, about one lunar diameter, followed along the trajectory from the burst and lasted a few minutes, presumably caused by venting out of the incompletely destroyed second stage. Project Highwater was an msfc responsibility, a bonus experiment to the Saturn test conceived by Dr. Charles Lundquist.
In concluding lecture in a Forum series on Space Science broadcast on the Voice of America, Dr. Carl E. Sagen of the Institute for Basic Research in Science at the University of California (Berkeley), explained that “extraterrestrial life and the origin of life are questions intertwined.” Recent study on these issues related to four topics: (1) the origin of life on earth; (2) the physical environment of the moon and planets; (3) the present evidence of life beyond the earth; and (4) prospects for future exploration. He discussed the chemical reactions which must have existed in the primitive terrestrial environment and produced organic matter. The critical event was the origin of a molecular system capable of synthesizing itself, and “this event—which occurred some 4,200 million years ago—can be identified with the origin of life on Earth.” From then on the long evolutionary sequence from molecule to Man was under way. Dr. Sagen asserted that “through the interaction of organic molecules life must arise on countless other worlds, in our solar system, and other solar systems . . . [but] the forms of living organisms on other planets must be intriguingly diverse.” Dr. Sagen reviewed the improbability of life on Venus, the possibility of life on the moon, and the “favorable” environmental features for life on Mars. It is not, he said, a closed question with regard to life on Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. The presence of extraterrestrial organic matter in meteorites “greatly substantiates the belief that organic matter is an abundant constituent of the solar system.” Detailed characterization of extraterrestrial organisms likely to be found in exploration of the moon and the planets “will open up a new era, not only in biology but in all fields of human endeavor.”
X-15 No. 3 flown to speed of 2,830 mph (mach 4.06) and to altitude of 179,000 ft. in a test of new adaptive control system to be used in Dyna-Soar and Apollo vehicles, nasa's Neil A. Armstrong was pilot. Whereas the previous control system was automatic only while the X-15 was within the atmosphere and the pilot had to control flight with reaction jets while in space, the new system would be automatic in both regimes.
British astrophysicist, Zdenek Kopal, suggested in ars lunar conference at Cleveland that the moon may have an abundant water supply, including geysers and under surface glaciers or permafrost.
George M. Low, nasa Director of Spacecraft and Flight Missions, predicted in Voice of America interview that final decision on manned lunar flight technique would be made soon. Of the lunar orbit rendezvous (lor) method, he said: “We in nasa have already reached the firm conclusion that this is the best, cheapest, most reliable and quickest way to reach the moon. . . . The final decision has not been made, but in the meantime, we are proceeding with the lunar orbit rendezvous approach.”
Rep. Edgar Hiestand asked citizens of the 21st Congressional District of California'—“Do you consider scientific information resulting from a U.S. moon flight worth its $40 billion cost?” Results of the poll were: 44% replied “no”; 35% replied “yes”; and 21% replied “undecided.”
Chairman of the Joint Congressional Committee on Atomic Energy, Rep. Chet Holifield, stated that he saw a narrowing of the Nation’s objectives in space: “I cannot help but wonder about the sincerity of our entire space effort in view of the trends which I see in our current program. It appears, increasingly, that our goal is gravitating toward a one-snot manned mission to the moon. “This effort is centered around the development of chemical rockets whose limitations, compared to nuclear propulsion, are severe. “. . . The leader in space cannot afford to be so lacking in vision as to fail to appreciate the need for nuclear power. If we are sincere in our effort to be the first on this new frontier, we must maintain a concerted effort to develop nuclear powered machinery for use in space.” Holifield’s views were made known in a statement accompanying publication of testimony taken during September 1962.
Dr. Carl Sagan, University of California astronomer, warned scientists at the Lunar Exploration Conference, Blacksburg, Va., of the need for sterilization of lunar spacecraft and decontamination of Apollo crewmen, pointing out that lunik ii and ranger iv probably had deposited a million terrestrial micro-organisms on the moon, possibly contaminating areas around the impact points. Even more serious, he said, was the possibility that lunar microorganisms might be brought to earth where they could multiply explosively.
usaf announced it wollid extend space survelliance to the moon through a system developed by the Space Track Research & Development Facility at Laurence G. Hanscom Field, Mass. There will be surveillance of orbiting man-made or natural objects beyond the earth’s nominal, low-altitude orbital areas out toward the moon.
Reported that nasa wollid build facilities worth $15 to $18 million at White Sands Missile Range (wsmr), N.M., for testing Apollo spacecraft’s propllision and abort systems. Facilities for flight tests of the abort system and the lunar excursion modllie would be ready in January 1963; static-firing sites for testing propulsion systems would be operational in mid-1963.
Soviet Academician Nikolai N. Semenov, Nobel Prize-winning chemist, was quoted as suggesting the moon be made into a major power source for earth. If the moon were covered with semiconductors and photo-elements of high efficiency solar energy falling on the moon could be converted to electrical power far exceeding that produced on earth. He also proposed the moon be made the site for all atomic and thermonuclear power stations, to avoid overheating and irradiating the earth. Research may find a way, he continued, to transmit the power to earth— perhaps by lasers or masers.
nasa first made public drawings of three-man Apollo spacecraft to be used in lunar landing development program.
nasa signed $1.55 million contract with Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. for development of spacesuit for Apollo crewmen. As prime contractor, Hamilton Standard has management responsibility of the overall program and wollid develop life-support, back-pack system to be worn by crewmen during lunar expeditions; Latex would fabricate the sllit with Republic Aviation Corp. furnishing human factors information and environmental testing. The suit wollid allow crewman greater mobility than previous spacesuits, enabling him to walk, climb, and bend with ease.
nasa selected Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. as prime contractor to manage and integrate spacesuit program for Project Apollo as well as to design and produce its life-support pack. Spacesuit development and fabrication would be done by International Latex Corp. under subcontract.
ranger v, its batteries dead, passed within 450 mi. of the moon on its way into orbit of the sun.
In speech at the Seattle World’s Fair, Secretary of State Dean Rusk urged that activities in space be subjected to international law and supervision before it is too late. Without international regulation, he said, “the frontiers of space might be pierced by huge nuclear-propelled dreadnaughts, armed with thermonuclear weapons. The moon might be turned into a military base. Ways might be found to cascade radioactive waves upon an enemy. Weather control might become a military weapon. . . .”
mit ordered a Honeywell 1800 electronic computer from Honeywell Electronic Data Processing, for work on Project Apollo navigation system. After installation in 1963, the computer would aid in circuitry design of Apollo spacecraft’s guidance computer and also wollid simulate full operation of spacebome computer during ground tests.
aec announced University of California Lawrence Radiation Laboratory and Texas a&m Activation Analysis Laboratory would conduct nasa- and AEC-funded research in methods of determining chemical composition of lunar surface. First week in November: Armour Research Foundation reported to nasa that surface of the moon may not be covered with layers of dust. Initial Armour studies indicated dust particles become harder and denser in higher-vacuum environment such as that of moon, but studies had not proved that particles eventually become bonded together in rock-like substance as vacuum increased.
Neil A. Armstrong, nasa research pilot, awarded the 1962 Octave Chanute Award by the Institute of the Aerospace Sciences (ias), as the pilot who had contributed most to the aerospace sciences during the year. He was cited for “outstanding contributions in both engineering and piloting capacity in the development of an experimental adaptive control system and in the flight testing of that system in the X-15, No. 3 aircraft.”
Radarastronomy observations of the moon taken by Millstone radar, mit Lincoln Laboratory, revealed unusually strong echo from region of crater Tycho. G. H. Pettengill and J. C. Henry, who reported on experiments in Journal of Geophysical Research, concluded the enhanced radar reflectivity may be explained by unusually rough crater floor and by crater walls consisting of material characteristic of lunar subsurface.
Report released by White House of study committee examining nonprofit research groups. Report stated that Government must continue to rely heavily on private institutions, including nonprofit research groups, to carry out Federal research programs. At the same time, the committee recommended that steps be taken to improve the competence of the Government’s own scientific staffs and laboratories to direct research programs. Late April: faa awarded first seven contracts, totaling $2.66 million, for commercial supersonic transport aircraft, faa Administrator N. E. Halaby said the action was “the first step leading to the development of a safe, practical, economical airplane to carry the traveling public beyond the speed of sound.” During April: Dr. John C. Houbolt, of nasa’s Langley Research Center, writing in the April issue of Astronautics, outlined the possible advantages of lunar-orbit rendezvous for a manned lunar landing as opposed to direct flight from earth or earth-orbit rendezvous. Under this concept, an Apollo-type vehicle wollid fly direct to the moon, go into orbit around the moon, detach a small landing craft which wollid land on the moon and then return to the mother craft, which wollid then return to earth. Advantages wollid be the much smaller craft having to perform the difficllit lunar landing and take-off, the possibility of optimizing the smaller craft for this one function, the safe return of the mother craft in event of a landing accident, and even the possibility of using two of the small craft to provide a rescue capability.
World’s first regularly scheduled Hovercraft transportation service ended. Operating since July with 8 round trips daily from Rhyl, Wales, to Wallasey, England, the experiment proved Vickers Armstrong 24-passenger Hovercraft could successfully negotiate soft sand and shallows as well as deeper water. Hovercraft rides 8 in. above surface (land or sea) on cushion of air.
Dr. Hans-Georg Clamann, Chief of Space Medicine at sam, submitted that a mountain peak near the south pole of the moon may be the ideal location for a lunar hase. Continuous sunlight would provide support for growing vegetation.
Four “hot spots” on the moon were reported discovered by Bruce Murray and Robert Wildey of Cal Tech, using new telescope with heat-sensitive, gold-plated mirror to detect infrared radiation. The two space scientists speclliated that hot spots collid indicate large areas of bare rock exposed on the lunar surface. Spots were discovered during survey of the moon which also revealed the lunar surface gets colder at night than previously believed, —270°F compared to —243°F recorded by earlier heat-measuring devices. Murray said the new evidence collid mean there are prominences of heat-retaining rock protruding through thick dust layer on lunar surface.
Unnamed Soviet scientist, called “chief designer of Soviet spaceships,” reported by Tass as saying that U.S.S.R. planned to establish an “industrial undertaking” on the moon.
Balloon-borne Cassegrain telescope was launched from Artesia, N.M., to altitude of about 86,000 ft. by usaf Cambridge Research Laboratories. Besides the telescope, the 850-lb. payload included interferometer spectrometer to take spectra of moon and planet Venus. Other information obtained on this initial Project Sky top flight concerned amount of water vapor present in upper atmosphere. Third objective of flight was to obtain information required to measure amount of different gases in upper atmosphere of Venus. Instrumentation failure prevented the telescope from orienting on Venus for sufficient length of time.
In news conference at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, Gherman Titov forecast cooperative flights to and around the moon if world leaders could come to an agreement on disarmament. He also stated that Soviet Cosmonaut No. 3 was ready to go.
Hindu astrologers predicted disaster during the period February 4-5 when five planets, the sun. the moon, and an invisible body called Khentu moved into rough alignment. Predictions of disaster were based on astrological tables. Reaction was so widespread that it prompted Prime Minister Nehru to ridicule the predictions in an address: “I do not know the secrets of nature. We will know them gradually. But what we don’t know, we should not accept blindly. At least what strikes our intelligence as completely absurd should not be accepted.”
nasa announced that the Advanced Saturn launch vehicle, to be used for manned flights around the moon and for manned lunar landings with rendezvous technique, would have five-engined first and second stages. The first stage (S-IB) would be powered by five F-l engines (total of 7.5 million pounds thrust) and the second stage (S—II) would be powered with five J-2 engines (total of 1 million pounds thrust). A third stage (S-IVB) with a single J-2 engine would be used on escape missions.
nasa announced plans to launch Ranger (5) toward the moon during mid-October. The 775-lb. lunar probe would represent third U.S. attempt to take close-up photographs of the moon, gather information on lunar surface composition, and land instrumented capsule on lunar surface.
In interview in Yugoslav Government newspaper Borba, Soviet Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said U.S.S.R. was planning flight to the moon in 1965. “If some problem arises and a solution is not found immediately, the time is extended.”
nasa announced that nine companies had submitted proposals to develop lunar excursion module (lem), one of three modules comprising the Apollo spacecraft. After evaluating proposals, nasa would award contract “within six to eight weeks,” according to the Wall Street Journal.
Dr. Richard W. Porter, head of the U.S. delegation to cospar meeting in Washington, reported that the moon emits x-rays as a result of solar and cosmic ray bombardment. Rockets shot of October 24, 1961, detected x-radiation from the lunar surface. By future studies of these energies it is hoped to determine the composition of the surface of the moon.
In reviewing technical considerations leading to nasa’s selection of the lunar orbital rendezvous mode (lor) for Project Apollo, D. Brainerd Holmes, Director of Manned Space Flight, told ars lunar conference in Cleveland: “The mission I have described has been widely reported in the newspapers and technical journals, with a liberal use of superlatives in assessing its magnitude and complexity. In this case, resort to superlatives is well-advised—this is truly a staggering undertaking. Entirely new concepts of component and system reliability must be developed and proven. Extensive tests must be carefully planned and conducted, and results must be exhaustively studied. Crew capabllities must be developed and meshed with proven automatic systems so that the two work together with Swiss-watch precision. “It is a challenging task, studded throughout with difficult decisions which must be soundly based and properly made. . . . “With the decision as to the method by which we wlli go to the moon we think we have taken a giant step forward. Essentially, we have now ‘lilted off’ and are on our way. ...”
gsfc awarded contract to ibm Corporation’s Federal Systems Division for computer support services for Project Mercury flights, nonrendezvous Gemini, and unmanned lunar flights scheduled for Project Apollo.
Reported by Irene Fischer of the Army Map Service that three experimental methods measured the mean distance from earth to the moon as 238,866 miles, a figure accurate within about a mile. A fourth method gives a figure accurate within about 8% miles. The 238,866-mile distance is 9 miles more than previously accepted figure used for decades and based on direct observation of the parallax of the moon at its mean distance from the earth.
Walter C. Williams, Associate Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said “I can’t guarantee we’re going to be first [to land a man on the moon], but if we don’t try, we’re going to be last. Either we have to spend more money on space ... or change our goals.” Williams was speaking at dinner commemorating 59th anniversary of Wright brothers’ flight, in Beverly Hills, Calif.
mariner ii flight-path correction was postponed for at least 24 hours, because scientists could not determine if the Venus probe was stabilized on the moon or the earth, jpl scientists received moon-reference indication from mariner ii’s earth-sensing system and earth-reference indication from its high-gain antenna. If mid-course maneuver were executed with moon-lock instead of earth-lock, the probe probably would come within 12,000 mi. of Venus instead of 10,000 mi.
nasa selected three companies for negotiation of production contracts for major components of the Apollo spacecraft navigation and guidance system in support of mit’s Instrumentation Laboratory initial development of the complex Apollo navigation-guidance system, a contract let last August. Companies selected from 21 bidders, which will work under Manned Spacecraft Center contract were: A.C. Spark Plug Division of General Motors Corp. to fabricate the inertial guidance with associated electronics, ground support, and checkout system, and to assemble and test all components of the system; Raytheon Company to manufacture on-board digital computer; and Kollsman Instrument Corp. to build the optical subsystems including a space sextant, sunfinders, and navigation display equipment.
nasa selected General Dynamics/Convair to design and manufacture “Little Joe II” launch vehicle to be used to boost the Apollo spacecraft on unmanned suborbital test flights. Little Joe II will be powered by solid-fuel motors in a cluster.
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced beginning of nasa Apollo environmental control system tests in Garrett-AiRe-search Los Angeles, ecs would provide life supporting atmosphere in command module of Apollo spacecraft. Tests would include simulating prelaunch, ascent, orbital, and re-entry pressure conditions on the system, (msc Release 63-61)
It would be two or three years before the U.S.S.R. tried to land a man on the moon, according to Soviet scientist Prof. Leonid Sedov in an interview with the Brussels newspaper Le Soir. He said the Russians do not yet have a definite system for landing a man on the moon but did have the technical ability to do it. (upi, Wash. Post, 10/8/63)
According to Soviet lunar-exploration timetable published in HunSrian magazine Lobogo, U.S.S.R. planned first manned circum-lar flight for 1964r-65, first manned lunar landings for 1966-68, and first “temporary laboratory” on moon for 1968-70. Article said manned Vostok flights had “virtually accomplished 80 per cent of a space rendezvous maneuver, lacking only the coupling of the two spaceships.” Next step after orbital rendezvous should be trip to moon. Abstract of article, which appeared in June 26 issue of Lobogo, was published in translation by Joint Publications Research Service of Dept, of Commerce’s Office of Technical Services. (Schmeck, NYT, 9/4/63)
Cancellation of five follow-on flights of the Ranger lunar impact spacecraft announced by nasa Associate Administrator for Space Sciences and Applications Dr. Homer E. Newell. Decision to cancel the follow-on series represented $90 million saving in the Ranger project. Dr. Newell said: “By this move, we are placing greater reliance on the remaining four Rangers, the Surveyor landers and the Lunar Orbiters for unmanned lunar exploration prior to manned landings on the Moon. At the same time, this move will contribute to necessary economies in the overall nasa program.” (nasa Release 63-276)
Disputing New York Times editorial (June 28) which approved House Science and Astronautics Committee’s rejecting nasa lunar orbiter for special survey of the moon, Assistant Director of Univ. of Calif. Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics Gordon J. F. MacDonald wrote that “no other program funded or contemplated will provide critical data on the moon’s gravity field and on the radioactivity of the lunar surface. . . . “[nas Space Science Board] . . . noted that the surveillance of the moon on a planetary scale is of first importance both to the manned landing and to the long-range scientific investigation of the moon .... “The full value of [Ranger and Surveyor] limited observations can ’	’’	’	1 ''	''	1 ia less detailed but orbiter .... “The long-range manned and unmanned exploration of the moon will be delayed by failure to fund during the current fiscal year the orbiter program. This failure is another expression of the inability of the scientific community adequately to present their case to Congress.” (Letter, 7/1/63, NYT, 7/16/63, E8)
Two major contracts for the Apollo project were awarded recently for (1) a lunar charting sendee by the usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center, St. Louis, Missouri; and (2) an exploratory study of guidance system techniques in emergency abort operation of the Apollo uf.m during lunar landing, awarded to Chance Vought Astronautics Division of Ling-Temco-Vought, Inc., Dallas, Texas, (msc Fact Sheet *96)
Discussing President Kennedy’s proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar cooperation, James J. Haggerty, Jr., said in Army-Navy-Air Force Joumal and Register article: “The big question ... is how far along are the Soviets in a moon program and which mode of approach did they select? “. . . if the Soviets have adopted one of the approaches we have discarded, any cooperative arrangement would require program reorientation on the part of both nations of such magnitude that the only imaginable result is complete chaos, compounded of the basic difference in approach, the language barrier, differing technological philosophies and engineering standards. “Even if the U.S.S.R. is already proceeding on the same lines as the U.S., i.e. the lunar orbit rendezvous mode, there are different methods of attaining the same end and it is extremely unlikely that their systems development parallels our own in every detail. “It is possible of course that the cooperative program consist of joint funding, a single lunar launch base and a common pool of astronauts, with the technical differences being resolved through the use of one spacecraft/launch vehicle combination without altering current developmental lines. But which one ? Who gets the program management? One can see a political and technical argument over the ‘Apollostok’ (or should it be ‘Vostapollo?’) which would leave the moon safe from assault for at least a couple of decades.” (A-N-AF Journal <& Reg., 9/28/63, 14)
Development of the Apollo spacesuit and backpack was entering the manned test phase of the prototypes. Under a 3-phase program, Hamilton-Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. and International Latex Corp. were now well into the second phase. The first phase had been design; the second called for development of prototypes of three suit designs, each building on test data from its predecessors. Prototypes of first suit were finished in August; prototypes of the second suit were nearing completion. The third phase, to be concurrent with the second phase, would include environmental and physiological tests. (Av. Wk., 10/28/63, 49)
Rep. Ben F. Jensen (R.-Iowa) inserted in Congressional Record a Washington Post article which said that majority opinion expressed by 25 U.S. Nobel Prize Winners criticized “waste” and “inefficiency” in America’s “crash program” to land man on moon by 1970. (Eisele, Wash. Post, in CR. 5/7/63,7424)
First public showing of guidance and navigation system for Apollo
Commenting on President Kennedy’s proposal for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. lunar exploration negotiations, nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans said in Houston press conference that the proposal did not mean Soviet cosmonauts would fly in Apollo spacecraft. Dr. George E. Mueller, nasa Deputy Associate Administrator, compared a cooperative moon program to cooperative exploration of Antarctica—U.S. and Soviet scientists explore the continent together but, he said, “they get there in different ships.” (Burnett, Wash. Sun. Star, 9/22/63)
nasa selected Marion Power Shovel Co. to design and build crawlertransport vehicle for lifting and transporting three-stage Saturn V launch vehicle mated to Apollo lunar spacecraft and associated launch equipment. Vehicle would be required to haul the 400-ft.-high, 12-million-lb. assembly a distance of a little more than two miles—keeping it within 1/10 of a degree of true level—and deposit it on Merritt Island (Fla.) launch pad. Crawler would weigh 5.5 million lbs. and would measure 130-ft. long, 115-ft. wide, and 20-ft. high. Plans called for Saturn V-Apollo to be assembled in Vertical Assembly Building at nasa Launch Operations Center’s Complex 39, then transported via the crawler to launch pad. nasa planned to buy two crawlers at cost of $4-$5 million each, (nasa Release 63-27; msc Release 63-24)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, held press conference after returning from three-week tour of Soviet space tracking observatories. Lovell said that “there is a great deal of discussion in the Soviet Academy as to whether it will ever be worthwhile getting a man on the moon . . . .” “I think at the moment, the Americans are racing themselves . . .’ [for manned lunar landing], adding that he favored manned lunar exploration. He announced agreement on tracking deep space probes reached between tracking station in Crimea and Jodrell Bank facility, and agreement on three astronomical programs in which Soviet and Jodrell Bank telescopes would be synchronized. (Farnsworth, NYT, 7/17/63; AP, Wash. Post, 7/17/63)
Team of four usaf and Lockheed experts, headed by Laurence Stoddard of Lockheed-Califomia Co., Lunar and Planetary Sciences Laboratory, announced they would attempt to photograph moon during 37-sec. solar eclipse near Cape Town, South Africa, Jan. 25. “Knowledge of the exact shape of the moon will give us additional information on the effects of moon gravity. This information is of great importance in planning lunar landings and computing the lifetime of manmade vehicles orbiting the moon,” Stoddard said. Stoddard photographed similar eclipse last July in Senegal, West Africa. (AP, Wash. Post, 1/21/63, A3)
Prof. Eugen Saenger, Prof, of Space Research at Technical Univ. in Berlin, predicted in interview that if manned observation stations were established on the moon “no large-scale happening of any consequence anywhere in the world could go unseen.” Noting that it costs several thousand dollars to orbit a pound of payload, he predicted that by 1975 cost would be only $25 per pound. Dr. Saenger’s interview was published in Good Friday issue of German weekly publication Christ und Welt, (cdns, Wash. Post, 4/15/63)
afcrl research project to find if tliere were any correlation between phases of the moon and rainfall on earth involved checking 1,000 dates over 92 years of observations, checking each date against the lunar phase. Result of research, reported afcel’s Dr. Fred Ward, indicated there was no correlation between rainfall and the lunar cycle. (OAR Research Review, 12/16/63,2)
Army Corps of Engineers awarded nasa contract to Westinghouse Astronuclear Laboratory for estimate of power needs of a manned lunar base and design of nuclear generator that could be sent to the moon for such a base. Data would be used by nasa in evaluating feasibility of lunar base, (dod Release 1255-63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., prime contractor for development of Apollo lunar excursion module (lem), had awarded $8,370,000 contract to Hamilton Standard Div. for design, development, and production of environmental control system for lem. (msc Release 63257)
Soviet news agency Tass reported astronomer Pyoter Shcheglov had discovered a “flat cloud of hydrogen shaped like a pancake” circling the earth at an altitude of 6,200 mi. Similar to a ring around planet Saturn, the cloud would be visible to spacemen on the moon with special viewing instruments, (upi, Atlanta Journal and, Constitution, 3/31/63)
President Kennedy’s news conference. Asked about developments on his proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation on manned lunar landing, the President replied: “We have had no indication that the Soviet Union is disposed to enter into the kind of relationship which would make a joint exploration of space or to the moon possible. But I think it is important that the United States continue to emphasize its peaceful interest and its preparation to go quite far in attempting to end the barrier which has existed between the Communist world and the West and to attempt to bring as much as we can the Communist world into the free world of diversity which we seek . . . .” Asked whether the question of verification had come up in U.S.-U.S.S.R. talks on an agreement to ban the orbiting of nuclear weapons, President Kennedy said: “... there is not an agreement. The United States has stated it would not put weapons in outer space. We have no military use for doing so, and we would not do so. The Soviet Union has stated that it does not intend to. We are glad of that. There is no way we can verify that, but we are glad to hear the intention .... “This is a matter, it seems to me, that can best be handled not through any bilateral agreement but as a General Assembly matter, because other countries may have the same capability, and I think every country should declare that they are not going to put atomic weapons in the atmosphere, which could threaten not only the security of a potential adversary but our own security, if for some reason the weapons should miscalculate and descend upon us . . . .” (Wash. Post, 10/10/63, 14)
nasa announced signing of $387,900,000 contract with Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. for development of lunar excursion module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. Contract provided that Grumman, on cost-plus-fixed-fee basis, would design, fabricate, and deliver nine lem ground test vehicles and 11 lem flight models, and also would provide certain operational support. Selection of Grumman for lem contract negotiations was announced Nov. 7, 1962. (nasa Release 63-51; msc Release 63^9)
I believe that man will not merelv endure; he will prevail. He is immortal . . . because he has a soul, a spirit capable of compassion and sacrifice and endurance. “In exploring the moon and planets, I am convinced with Faulkner that man will prevail.” (Text, CR, 5/21/63, A3220)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Britain’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said in U.S. News and World Report interview that U.S.S.R. did not have a priority program for landing a man on the moon. The president of the Academy of Sciences [Mstislav Keldysh] said that the Soviet Academy saw certain insuperable difficulties. “First, they did not at the moment see how it was possible to protect any lunar voyages from the lethal effects of solar radiation. “Secondly—and mixed up with this—is that they did not think it was economically feasible with present techniques to land sufficient material on the moon to give the necessary protection against solar radiation and, at the same time, to enable a scientific program to be carried out and also to give the chap a reasonable chance of getting back to earth. “Most important of all, it seemed to me, is this: They have decided that with a soft landing of instruments on the moon they can extract nearly all the scientific information they want long before there would be a chance of getting a man there to do it .... “I told the president of the Academy quite frankly that I didn’t agree with this sentiment, because I’m a very firm believer in the importance of getting a man on the moon not only for scientific reasons but also because it is a great challenge facing the human race . . . .” Sir Bernard said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on two objectives in space exploration: (1) “soft landing of instruments on the moon . . . and, subsequently, other planets” and (2) “assembly of a platform in space .... The cosmonaut program is related ... to this effort to erect a big platform in space and put a telescope on it . . . .” (Interview, U.S. News, 8/12/63)
At breakfast meeting of Republican Congressmen in Washington, Former President Dwight D. Eisenhower said that anyone who would be willing to spend $40 billion to get to the moon was “nuts.” (Finney, AFT’, 6/13/63)
Writing on possible effects of subgravity on human beings, Dr. Tau-Yi Toong, consultant, usaf oar, said: “Two major difficulties present themselves in a study of such effects in earth-bound laboratories; first it is difficult to simulate subgravity on earth for long durations and, secondly, it is impossible to scale human beings up or down. . . . “It was pointed out to the author by Dr. Harold J. von Beckh that part of the effort of a human heart is spent to overcome gravity. It would seem that a lighter load is imposed on the heart of a man on the moon and thus his heart beat slows down. . . . The human heart might possibly degenerate to such an extent that its beat slows down further to something corresponding to the ‘normal heart beat of an abnormal giant’ on the earth. The situation might become even worse should he again return to the earth’s gravitational field with his weakened heart. . . .” (oar Research Review, 2/11/63, 3)
Senate Republican Policy Committee made public its report questioning priority of U.S. manned lunar program. “The question is not . . . whether man will ultimately reach the moon and beyond. The question is, rather, how shall it be done, and whether other aspects of human needs should be bypassed or overlooked in one spasmodic effort to achieve a lunar landing at once .... “A decision must be made as to whether Project Apollo is vital to our national security or merely an excursion, however interesting, into space research. “If our vital security is not at stake, a less ambitious program may be logical and desirable.” (CR, 5/14/63, 7916; Toth, NTT, 5/11/63,1,6)
msc successfully conducted the first off-the-pad abort test of the Apollo launch escape system at White Sands Missile Range, N.M. A boilerplate version of the Apollo command ~y.~ J —1- / T"» _ " 1 1_a._ XT_ O \_i:A.-J	il__"IKK AAA 1I1UUUU5 ^A>UUt5rpia.W5 J^U. uj Wits lllltJAt UU 11U5 pitU. Uy L11C Ib.-thrust launch escape motor mounted on a launch escape tower attached to the Apollo module. Thrust continued to a height of 4,100 ft. (T + 8 sec.), escape tower jettisoned at 4,900 ft. (T+15.5 sec.), and parachutes deployed for the recovery. Primary purpose of the test was to determine the stability and operational characteristics of the escape configuration during a pad abort. (msc Release 63-247; NYT, 11/8/63,16)
Unnamed nasa official said nasa had reviewed Pratt and Whitney’s prototype of fuel cell for Apollo spacecraft and had accepted the fuel cell. Recent criticism had previously been reported that the fuel cells fell short of nasa’s requirements. (Simons, Wash. Post, 12/27/63)
Rep. Bob Wilson (R.-Calif.) speaking for Republican Party’s Advisory Committee for Space and Aeronautics, charged Kennedy Administration had failed to build a strong military space program and recommended usaf be given authority to undertake an immediate military "space program with priority over nasa’s manned lunar landing program: “Very little of the hardware developed by nasa can be used militarily. But the Kennedy Administration tends to lead the public to believe that the opposite is true .... [nasa projects such as Mercury and Apollo] could no more be converted to competitive military space systems than could a Liberty ship into an aircraft carrier or a truck into a tank . . . .” (AP, Boston Herald, 1/4/63)
Ground-breaking ceremonies for eight-story nasa structure to be used for pre-flight testing of Gemini and Apollo spacecraft were held near Cape Canaveral. $7.69-million building would be first of 40 buildings in industrial complex located in the 87,000-acre Merritt Island area nasa had acquired for its space • projects. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
In convocation address at the University of Maine, President Kennedy outlined U.S. foreign policy. Referring to the Cuban crisis of October 1962, the President said: “A year ago it would have been easy to assume that ail-out war was inevitable—that any agreement with the Soviets was impossible—and that an unlimited arms race was unavoidable. Today it is equally easy for some to assume that the cold war is over— that all outstanding issues between the Soviets and ourselves can be quickly and satisfactorily settled—and that we now have, in the words of the psalmist, an ‘abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth’ .... “The fact of the matter is, of course, that neither view is correct. We have, it is true, made slight progress on a long journey .... We have concluded with the Soviets a few limited enforceable agreements or arrangements of mutual benefit to both sides and the world .... “In times such as these, therefore, there is nothing inconsistent about signing an atmospheric nuclear test ban, on the one hand, and testing underground on the other; about being willing to sell to the Soviets our sumlus wheat while refusing to sell strategic items; about probing their interest in a joint lunar landing while making a major effort, to master this new environment; or about exploring the possibilities of disarmament while maintaining our stockpile of armaments. For all of these moves, and all other 741-623 o—64--26 elements of American and Allied policy toward the Soviet Union, are directed at a single, comprehensive goal—namely, convincing the Soviet leaders that it is dangerous for them to engage in direct or indirect aggression, futile for them to attempt to impose their will and their system on other unwilling peoples, and beneficial to them, as well as all the world, to join in the achievement of a genuine and enforceable peace .... “It is in our national self-interest to ban nuclear testing in the atmosphere so that all our citizens can breathe easier. It is in our national self-interest to keep weapons of mass destruction out of outer space—to maintain an emergency communications link with Moscow—and to substitute joint and peaceful exploration for cold war exploitation in the Antarctic and in outer space .... “. . . For without our making such an effort, we could not maintain the leadership and respect of the free world . . . .” (Text, AP, Wash. Post, 10/20/63, A7)
Analysis of radar observations of planet Venus indicated Venutian surface is smoother than that of earth or the moon, it was reported. Observations were made Nov. 29-Dec. 7, 1962, by National Bureau of Standards’ radartelescope at Jicamarca, Peru. (Wash. Post, 1/11/63, A5)
A. M. Nowitsky, Director of Spacecraft Sterilization, Lockheed Missiles & Space Co., said in speech before Aerospace Medical Association meeting in Los Angeles that sterilization of lunar spacecraft was essential to prevent contamination of moon and to detect any organisms on the moon: “For millions of years the moon has been a vulnerable target in the path of extraterrestrial debris, possibly organic, bacterial and living—possibly disease-causing and preserved in a state highly acclimated to unfavorable environmental extremes. “If such forms do exist and are in any way dangerous or destructive, their early detection'would prove vital to man’s future planetary exploration and the protection of earth from mutual contamination.” (Miles, L.A. Times, 5/2/63)
First anniversary of mariner ix fly-by of planet Venus, providing data that clouds surrounding Venus are cold and dense and that Venus has surface temperature of 800° F. After passing the planet, mariner n continued in perpetual solar orbit. Since launch Aug. 27, 1962, mariner n has traveled 754 million mi. in 474 days. It is currently ahead of earth at straight line distance of 76,172,000 mi. Analysis of mariner n tracking data provided new determinations of the Astronomical Unit, the mass of Venus and the moon, and locations of points on earth. Communications records included sending commands to the spacecraft flying by Venus (36 million mi.), and reception of signal from the spacecraft at distance of nearly 54 million mi. (nasa Release 63-275)
Washington Post editorial said of U.S. manned lunar program: “We may not get to the moon first, or we may not get to it at all— but that will not mean all has been in vain. In trying to reach such a spectacular goal, we are developing the rockets that will place us in the forefront of the space age, and in developing the scientific and engineering skills required to achieve this purpose we are enormously expanding the country’s capacity to achieve scientific goals as yet unspecified. The skills and talents nurtured at nasa will be making their contribution to the knowledge, the comfort, the convenience and the survival of the United States long after moon landings have been accepted as a commonplace or abandoned as an impossibility. The world was altered by the voyages of Columbus, even though they failed of their planned objectives. And the world is being altered before our very eyes 741-623 0—64---13 by a new struggle to master man’s environment. Enterprises such as this are not to be judged by the ordinary criteria of scientists, economists or sociologists. They are not to be weighed on the balance against some other more practical and more appropriate or more feasible endeavor. Such heroic enterprises move by their own laws, abide by their own rules and set their own precedents and when they are over, leave humanity with its knowledge multiplied, its future expanded, its horizons widened, its outlook sharpened and its hopes uplifted by a new sense of man’s unending and unlimited possibilities.” {Wash. Post, 5/7/63; CR, 5/8/63,7491)
U.S.S.R. announced successful launching of lunik iv probe on a Si/, -day flight toward the moon. Mission of 3,135-lb. instrumented spacecraft, said to have been placed in parking orbit around the earth and then fired toward the moon, was not disclosed. Tass announcement said all onboard equipment was functioning normally, scientific stations in U.S.S.R. were tracking the probe and receiving scientific information from it. “According to data which was already processed the flight of the automatic station continues along a trajectory which is close to the calculated trajectory.” At 4:00 p.m. Moscow time, lunik iv was reported 50,486 km. (31,350 mi.) from earth, (nyt, 4/3/63,1,14; Pravda, 4/3/63, eos Trans.)
msc announced the award of a formal contract to Raytheon Company’s Space and Information Systems Division of Lexington, Mass., for industrial support to mit, which is developing the guidance and navigation systems for Apollo, in the design and development of the onboard digital computer for the command module, (msc Fact Sheet #96)
Sending Man to the Moon Jointly: Not sure_________________________________11%
Dr. Barry Commoner, Prof, of Plant Physiology at Washington Univ., St, Louis, said in speech before convention of National Science Teachers Association in Philadelphia that U.S. scientific research was becoming too “mission oriented.” “In 1962 about one-third of the total federal obligation for basic research—and federal funds are now the major source of support for basic science—came from a single agency, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. In a total federal budget of about $900 million for basic research, nasa was obligated to provide $350 million, while the National Science Foundation provided under $90 million .... “We are engaged in a spectacular balancing act. Education is supported by science, science by space, and space by the man on the moon . . . [The] policy of supporting education through science and science through space is dangerously unsound .... We should recognize this policy for what it is—a short-sighted, pinch-penny effort to buy a few selected fruits of the tree of knowledge, without accepting the honest responsibility of nourishing the whole living, growing organism.” (NYT. 4/7/63: St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 4/7/63) During April: William A. Hyman, internationally known trial lawyer and author of “The Magna Carta of Space—The Legal Lodestar,” speaking at the Inter-American Bar Association in Panama, said: “The Space Committee of the United Nations has failed to give due consideration and take appropriate action on the important question of sovereignty and security as they become involved in the use of space.” (CR. 6/27/63, A4133-34)
Soviet scientists reported that radio soundings had indicated that the surface of the moon was “hard and extremely porous,” in contrast to other theories that the moon was covered with a thick layer of dust, (upi, Wash. Dally News, 11/14/63; Izvestia, 11/15/63, 6, afss-t Trans.)
U.S.S.R. would use earth-orbit rendezvous for an early circumlunar manned flight with present-generation hardware, according to article in Pravda by “chief designer” of Vostok spacecraft. Author indicated that the tandem flight of L/Col. Valery Bykovsky and Jun. Lh Valentina Tereshkova was successful preliminary to such flight, which he said would last 8 to 12 days. Re-entry, he indicated, was the most difficult part of the moon flight. (M&R, 7/1/63,29)
The Space Vehicle Panel of the President’s Scientific Advisory Committee met at msc for briefings and presentations on the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo programs.	(Space Newft Roundup, 1/8/64, 2)
On the eve of its fifth anniversary, nasa had run into a patch of “attack by partisan politicians, budget-cutters, those who want the military to have a stronger role in space, mismanagement sleuths, and persons confused by President Kennedy’s bid for a joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. moon venture,” Howard Simons claimed in the Washington Post. He cited nasa’s budget troubles, with the $5.7 billion request already cut to a $5.3 billion authorization, another $200 million already cut by a House Appropriations Subcommittee, and even further cuts threatened in the full Committee. nasa Administrator Webb, Simons said, had blamed budget problems on House Republicans, charging that they “ ‘are following a political line trying to make the President’s program look foolish—‘Nuts,’ as Eisenhower called it. They have moved to the position that military activities in space are the only ones worthwhile.’ ” Under mismanagement charges, Simons listed the gao report on the Centaur program and the nasa charges of substandard workmanship by industry in the Mercury program, which in itself implied, according to Simons, a nasa admission that it had not supervised industry effectively. (WasA Post, 10/5/63, 4)	*
U.S.S.R. reported lunik iv had covered 216,000 km. (134,150 mi.), more than half the distance to the moon, during its first 24 hours of flight. Tass announcement said several measurements had been made to establish spacecraft’s trajectory but did not indicate whether the “automatic station” was on course. Telemetry data indicated onboard instruments were operating normally, and internal pressure and temperature were within prescribed limits. There still was no description of the probe’s mission. Article in Izvestia by Soviet geologist Aleksandr Khabakov said that “a soft landing on the moon of a container with instruments and auxiliary apparatus seems to be technically feasible.” (NTT, 4/4/63,18; Izvestia,4/4/63, eos Trans.)
nasa announced it would negotiate contract extension with General Electric Co. for plant- and test-support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Extension was expected to exceed $25 million, nasa had selected GE in February 1962 to support Project Apollo including systems integration, checkout, and reliability—including plant and test support at mtf. (nasa Release 63-283)
After a technical lecture on the chemical structure of matter, Dr. Linus Pauling, 1963 Nobel Peace Prize winner, attacked the U.S. lunar program before the National Academy of Sciences meeting in the Department of'State auditorium: “I believe that it [the lunar program] is a pitiful demonstration. Something is wrong with our system of values when we plan to spend billions of dollars for national prestige.” Pauling claimed that for the same investment it would be possible “to answer 1000 interesting and important questions about the human body for every one question answered about the moon.” (Simons. Wash. Post, 10/23/63, 1)
nasa announced selection of Boeing Aircraft Co. to negotiate contract for four-month study of lunar base concept. Study would be first phase of broad lunar base study program to determine feasibility of such a project following Project Apollo. (nasa Release 63-145)
lunik iv passed within 8,500 km. (5,281 mi.) of the moon at 4:26 a.m. Moscow time, Tass reported. “The experiments and measurements which were conducted by means of the spacecraft are completed. Radio communication with the spacecraft will continue for a few more days. “Broad experimental data, which are of great value for the solution of a number of technological problems related to the conquest of the moon, were obtained. Measurement data are now being processed and studied in scientific centers of our country which are responsible for the investigation of cosmic space.” Tass still did not reveal nature of probe’s mission. Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station in England, was quoted as saying he believed the Soviets had failed in an attempt to land instruments on the moon. “It is hardly conceivable, after a lapse of three years, with all the improvements in techniques, that the Russians would merely set out to do again what they did with lunik iii.” (Pravda, 4/7/63, eos Trans.; AP, Wash. Post, 4/7/63, A7; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/7/63)
gsfc held bidders’ briefing with 350 representatives of 55 aerospace firms hearing outlined the “Unified S-Band” method of providing tracking and communications for Apollo lunar missions. Conferees were notified of firm design and production requirements for two complete systems and three partial systems. Contract would be awarded after April 1, 1964. (gsfc Release G-30-63)
A roundup of Congressional opinion on Premier Khrushchev’s statement of Oct. 26 that the Soviets did not plan to land a man on the moon and its possible effect on the U.S. manned lunar landing program indicated that most Congressmen thought it would result in some reduction in funds for the U.S. program. (Wash. Post, 10/28/63)
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, Director of Carnegie Institution’s Geophysics Laboratory and editor of Science, criticized costs of landing men on the moon in this decade: “What we are witnessing is the expansion of a new, sophisticated form of the prewar Public Works Administration. Science is being used as a ‘front’ for technological leaf-raking. . . .” Dr. Abelson was speaking at Univ. of Maryland. (Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/63, Al)
The International Academy of Astronautics, at regular meeting, elected Dr. Charles Stark Draper to succeed Dr. Frank J. Malina as President of the Academy. Dr. Draper is one of the world’s leading space engineers, engaged in the solution of problems of guidance and control of space vehicles. His latest and largest undertaking is the design of the guidance-navigation system to be used aboard the Apollo spacecraft, which is to carry man to a Moon landing and a safe return. He is Head of the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as well as Director of the mit Instrumentation Laboratory, in which capacity he leads a team of 1,800 scientists, engineers and technicians, (iaf Release 17, 10/1/63)
In space studies symposium at Argonne, 111., Bernard I. Spinrad, Argonne National Laboratory scientist, predicted: “On the basis of techniques winch in general we now know, I believe that the larger scale exploration of the solar system will in fact be undertaken from a base on the moon.” (AP, Newport News Times-Herald, 5/4/63)
Premier Nikita Khrushchev told a group of visiting U.S. businessmen that U.S.S.R. was continuing its manned lunar landing program. Clarifying his remarks of Oct. 26, he said that “when we have the technical possibilities of doing this, and when we have complete confidence that whoever is sent to the moon can safely be sent back, then it is quite feasible, quite possible.” He said that polet i had made space rendezvous possible but that “no definite date” had been set for such an experiment. On the supersonic transport aircraft, he said: “I can say that we are designing and building a supersonic plane. I can’t give you the details because I don’t remember the technical data on that plane.” {NYT, 11/7/63,1; AP, Wash, Post, 11/7/63)
nasa Manned Spacecraft Center announced award of formal contract to General Dynamics/Convair for four Little Joe II vehicles, two launchers, and launch support for testing boilerplate models of Apollo spacecraft in unmanned, suborbital flight from White Sands Missile Range, N.M. (msc Release 63-31)
Premier Nikita Khrushchev, in an interview with Communist newsmen published in Izvestia, said: “At the present time we do not plan flights of cosmonauts to the moon. “I have read a report that the Americans wish to land a man on the moon by 1970. Well, let’s wish them success. “And we will see how they will fly there, and how they will land there or to be more correct ‘moon’ there. “And most important—how they will get up and come back. “We will take their experience into account. “We do not wish to compete in sending people to the moon without thorough preparation. “It is obvious there would be no benefit from such competition. “On the contrary it would do harm since it would lead to the destruction of people. “It is a joke in our country to say ‘Who is impatient on earth, let him go to the moon.’ “For us it is good enough on earth. But if we are to talk seriously we will have to work a lot and prepare well in order to complete a successful flight of man to the moon.” (upi, NTT, 10/27/63,1)	_
James Reston, writing of President Johnson’s attack on poverty, said the President was faced with having “to choose not necessarily between the moon and the slums, but between the problems of today and the problems of tomorrow. “. . . some of the President’s scientific advisers have recommended that . . . [the FY 1965 budget request for Project Rover] be cut again to $100 million, which is less than half the Rover project budget for the current [fiscal] year. “There is, of course, no assurance that money saved on this project would be approved by the Congress for an attack on poverty and illiteracy in the slums, but President Johnson’s decision on this will give some indication of the set of priorities he proposes to establish for his Administration . . . .” (Reston, NYT, 12/20/63, 28)
Scientist Dr. Charles R. Warren of U.S. Geological Survey’s Military Geology Branch said in Science magazine that the moon is probably covered with a layer of fuzz, about an inch deep. The “skeletal fuzz consists mostly of empty space” and could be a mesh or miniature tinker-toy structure or it might resemble a loose aggregate of snowflakes or reindeer moss. Dr. Warren had made study of lunar terrain for Army Corps of Engineers. (NYT, 4/12/63,29; upi, Wash. Post 4/12/63)
Boilerplate Apollo capsule underwent eighth drop test of the 3-parachute landing system. At El Centro, Calif., U.S. Naval-Air Force Parachute Facility dropped the capsule from a C-133 transport aircraft from 13,000 ft. in a test of the parachute combination under low-altitude abort conditions, (msc Release 63-i78)	...
Dr. Philip H. Abelson, editor of aaas magazine Science, criticized in editorial the four justifications cited for manned lunar landing program: propaganda value of program had been “vastly overestimated”; possibility of military applications seemed “remote”; “technological fallout” would recover “not more than a small fraction of the cost of the moon program”; and scientific questions about the moon could be satisfied with unmanned, instrumented probes. If a scientist is not among the crewmen, “the alternative of exploration by electronic gear becomes exceedingly attractive. The cost of unmanned lunar vehicles is on the order of 1 percent of the cost of the manned variety; unmanned vehicles can be smaller and need not be returned. Most of the interesting questions concerning the moon can be studied by electronic devices .... Unmanned exploration could provide the basis for realistic design of manned landing craft, thus decreasing the total costs and increasing the chances of success. A reexamination of priorities is in order.” (Science, 4/19/63, in CR, 6/11/63)
President Kennedy, asked in press conference whether reports that U.S.S.R. was not striving for manned lunar landing would affect Project Apollo, said: “Well, in the first place, we don’t know whether the Russians are—what their plans may be. What we are interested in is what their capabilities are. While I have seen the statement of Mr. Lovell [July 16] about what he thinks the Russians are doing, his information is not final. Their capacity is substantial; there is every evidence that they are carrying on a major campaign and diverting greatly needed resources to their space effort. With that in mind, I think that we should continue. It may be that our assumption or the prediction . . . that they are not going to the moon might be wrong a year from now, and are we going to divert ourselves from our effort in an area where the Soviet Union has a lead, is making every effort to maintain that lead, in an area which could affect our National security as well as great peaceful development ? I think we ought to go right ahead with our own program and go to the moon before the end of this decade. “The point of the matter always has been not only of our excitement or interest in being on the moon, but the capacity to dominate space, which would be demonstrated by a moon flight. [This] I believe, is essential to the United States as a leading free world power. That is why I am interested in it and that is why I think we should continue, and I would be not diverted by a newspaper story.” Asked about the possibility of cooperating with U.S.S.R. in a joint lunar mission, he replied: “We have said before to the Soviet Union that we would be very interested in cooperation. As a matter of fact, finally, after a good many weeks of discussion, an agreement was worked out on an exchange of information with regard to weather, but we have never been able to go into more detail. The kind of cooperative effort which would be required for the Soviet Union and the United States together to go to the moon would require a breaking down of a good many barriers of suspicion and distrust and hostility which exist between the communist world and ourselves. “There is no evidence as yet that those barriers will come down, though quite obviously we would like to see them come down. Obviously, if the Soviet Union were an open society as we are that kind of cooperation could exist, and I would welcome it. I don’t see it as yet, unfortunately.” (Text. Wash. Post, 7/18/63)
Speaking on floor of Senate, Sen. Barry Goldwater (R.-Ariz.) advocated deployment of Nike-Zeus and development of more advanced antimissile missiles: “Imagine a world, treaty or no treaty, in which the Soviets had achieved a substantial lead in development of an anti-iCBM. Where then would be the sword and shield of peace ? What then would be the position of the Soviets to back their aggressions, and what would be our ability to stop them? “President Kennedy is fully confident that we can put a man on the moon—no mean feat—and is willing to spend $5 billion a year to do it ... . “I have talked enough to competent scientists and engineers who believe that a good anti-iCBM, capable of protecting the American people, would be no tougher task. But of course it would require an equal enthusiasm, money, and effort as our moon program does to accomplish. Hmv can we fail to apply anything less than our best efforts to produce it ? . . .” {CR, 8/13/63, 14043)
In letter to Speaker of the House, President Kennedy described his proposed program of U.S. supersonic transport development. “A successful supersonic transport can be an efficient, productive commercial vehicle which provides swift travel for the passenger and shows promise of developing a market which will prove profitable to the manufacturer and operator. “It will advance the frontiers of technical knowledge—not as a byproduct of military procurement, but in the pursuit of commercial objectives. “It will maintain the historic U.S. leadership in aircraft development. “It will enable this country to demonstrate the technological accomplishments which can be achieved under a democratic, free enterprise system. “Its manufacture and operation will expand our international trade. “It will strengthen the U.S. aircraft manufacturing industry— a valuable national asset—and provide employment to thousands of Americans . . . .” (Letter, CR, 6/17/63 10304) Jwne 14: nasa announced signing contract with AC Spark Plug Div. of General Motors to fabricate, assemble, and test navigation and guidance system for Apollo command module, (nasa Release 63136)
nasa announced it would negotiate with General Electric Co. for an extension of GE’s Project Apollo support effort to provide plant and test support services at nasa Mississippi Test Facility. Estimated cost of initial one-year contract was $1.5 million, (nasa Release 63-75)
First drop test of Project Apollo earth landing system successfully accomplished by Northrop Corp. for nasa Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft command module was released from modified C-133 cargo plane and safely landed by cluster of three Northrop Ventura ringsail parachutes, (msc Release 63- 85)
nasa selected Boeing Co. for negotiation of incentive-type contract to build Lunar Orbiter spacecraft, contract expected to exceed $60 million. One of the five bidding firms, Boeing would provide probes that are three-axis stabilized, use Eastman Kodak-developed camera system, and rca power and communication subsystems. Five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft would be launched to take close-range photographs of lunar surface, as well as to measure such conditions as radiation and micrometeoroid density. Lunar Orbiter complements Ranger and Surveyor lunar probe projects, providing scientific data about the moon in preparation for Project Apollo manned lunar landing, (nasa Release 63-280)
Article in Soviet newspaper Pravda, reported in Missiles and Rockets, said the moon appears to be undergoing changes: During recent years, crater Linne has decreased to half its former size; crater Alhazen has disappeared; small craters have formed at bottom of Plato; and, at sunrise, greenish-gray spots periodically appear at bottom of some craters. Pravda said spots in bottom of crater Eratosthenes appear to some observers tobe moving. {M&R, 1/14/63, 23)
nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., speaking before the Chamber of Commerce, Albuquerque, N.M., said: “All of you saw the headlines saying, ‘Khrushchev Announces Withdrawal from Moon Race’ or words to that effect; but I wonder how many read the subsequent stories in which Khrushchev said his remarks had been misinterpreted, and that the Soviet Union intended to explore the moon as soon as this could be done with confidence of success.
Installation of new tracking system, Mistram (Missile Trajectory Measurement), on Eleuthera Island in the Bahamas, was announced. Mistram would provide more precise missile guidance and nose-cone impact data than presently possible on rockets fired from Cape Canaveral; it would provide accuracy required for controlling space rendezvous maneuvers in Project Gemini and for tracking return of Apollo lunar spacecraft. (AP, Balt. Sun, 1/29/63)
A technical services contract was awarded by the Manned Spacecraft Center to Lockheed Electronics Company to provide r&d support for Apollo. The contract involves vehicle instrumentation and communication systems to be used in the early flight phases of the program. ( msc Fact Sheet # 96)
Urging passage of $5.5 billion nasa FY 1964 authorization bill, Sen. Stuart Symington said: “It should be made clear that the United States is not committed to an all-out race, a crash program, so as to be first to the moon. “The moon is no finish line in a race. It is but a proving ground, where we will test and demonstrate that competence in space technology which our security should insure .... “[There is] a proper division of effort between military and civilian space programs, between space science and space technology, between current programs and advanced research in support of future programs, between the space program and other possibilities for substantial Federal contributions to research and development.” (AP, NYT, 8/9/63)
nasa was reported by Space Business Daily to be negotiating contract with Standard Oil Co. of Ohio for “a research investigation of a technique for abstracting information from non-cooperating objects in Earth-orbit.” (Space Bus. Daily, 3/6/63, 280) “The major problem remaining in the F-l engine program is the existence of the phenomenon known as combustion instability, which is characterized by pressure oscillations in the combustion gas inside the engine. Although combustion instability has developed in only seven of the 250 F-l firings in the last two years, even this small incidence cannot be tolerated. Consequently, we are placing major emphasis on solving this problem. The source of instability in liquid propellant engines has been the subject of considerable research, since most engines exhibit instability in the early stages of their development. . . . “We are confident that we will solve the instability problem on the F-l engine, just as it has been solved for all other liquid propellant engines in use, and we are confident that we can achieve the flight rating and delivery schedules. We are, however, giving this matter our closest attention and bringing to bear the knowledge and judgment of the most qualified experts in the United States. . . . In response to questions by Congressmen Emilio Q. Daddario (D.-Conn.) and James G. Fulton (R.-Pa.), Mr. Holmes said that both Projects Gemini and Apollo slipped about five months because of the Administration’s refusal to request FY 1963 supplemental appropriations last fall. (Testimony; M&R, 3/18/63,10)
Political Committee of the U.N. General Assembly opened debate on report by the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space. 741-623 o—64Addressing the 111-nation Committee, U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson said President Johnson instructed him to reaffirm the proposal for U.S.-U.S.S.R. cooperation in exploration of the moon that President Kennedy had offered last September. But, Stevenson continued, “If giant steps cannot be taken at once, we hope that shorter ones can. We believe there are areas of work, short of integrating the two national prorgams, from which all could benefit. We should explore the opportunities for practical cooperation, beginning with small steps and hopefully leading to larger ones.” Stressing that U.S. manned lunar program was only one part of the space program and that no more than 10 percent of the total U.S. space expenditure went directly for the lunar flight, he added: “Let me make clear that exploration of the moon is not a stunt, distinct from the outer-space program as a whole; nor is it the exclusive concern of only two nations. “Our policy of engaging in mutually beneficial and mutually supporting cooperation in outer space—with the Soviet Union as with all nations—does not begin or end with a manned moon landing. There is plenty of work yet to come before that—and there will be even more afterward.” (Teltsch, NYT, 12/3/63, 1,14; L.A. Times, Wash. Post, 12/3/63,1)
Robe	ix, president of Continental Airlines, speaking to an aviation group of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, proposed that the U.S. join with France and Great Britain to develop a mach 2.2 commerpial airliner and that at a later date those countries join the U.S. in developing a stainless-steel—titanium mach 3 airliner: “If our country can propose a joint effort with the Russians to reach the moon, we certainly should be able to entertain the idea of joint development of a supersonic transport with two of our best friends.” (Wall St. Journal, 10/2/63)
In article on lasers in Pravda, V. Vyenikov wrote that “an auxiliary optical system can focus the laser beam in such a way that the diameter of its cross-section reaches values of 1 micron. This is approximately 60 times smaller than the thickness of a human hair. A similar beam, directed toward the Moon, illuminated on its surface a region less than 4 kilometers. This experiment proves that theoretically it is possible to transmit energy from Earth to future participants of lunar expeditions.” (Krasnaya Zvezda, 3/9/63, afss-t Trans.)
Report that moon has porous surface consisting basically of silicon and aluminum oxides and that its core is very hot was made by team of Soviet radioastronomers at All Union Symposium of Radioastronomers in Gorki, U.S.S.R. (Komsomotskya Pravda, 3/8/63, eos Trans.)
Historian Arnold Toynbee, in Washington to address World Food Congress, said in news interview that U.S. and U.S.S.R. together controlled 80 per cent of world’s technical power but both nations were neglecting humanitarian applications. He cited the “moon race” as example of both nations’ “escapism” from basic problems of mankind. (Richmond News Leader, 6/12/63 )
msc officials said the Apollo Pad Abort Test No. 1, conducted at wsmr on Nov. 7,1963, appeared from data to have been successful in all respects and showed the aerodynamics of the Apollo escape system “to be just what we expected.” Liftoff and subsequent flight sequencing were within one second of program, (msc O\7________ ^ D ___7__ 11 /1 «»/£*»	1\ ir	x*.wivtujutof/? 11/ io/	A j
U.S. Geological Survey’s lunar mapping project, mapping 8.5 million sq. mi. of moon’s surface, was described in Washington Evening Star. Undertaken for nasa, project would provide basic geological information needed for placing instruments and men on the moon. (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 6/17/63)
Tass announced lunik iv was 314,000 km. (194,494 mi.) from earth at 8:00 p.m. Moscow time and would pass close to the moon’s surface, indicating for the first time that the probe would not orbit or land.. Speculation was tbat lunik iv might havs bca-n planned to soft-land an instrument package on the moon. Tass said radio communication with the spacecraft was good and that onboard instruments were functioning normally. (AP, Wash. Post, 4/5/63; Pravda, 4/5/63, eos Trans.)
nasa announced it would negotiate a contract with mit, AC Spark Plug Div. of GM, Raytheon Co., Kollsman Instrument Co., and Sperry Gyroscope Co., for the development, fabrication, and testing of the guidance and navigation system for the Lu,nar Excursion Module (lem) of the Apollo spacecraft. These same companies already are developing the guidance and navigation system for the Apollo command and service modules; the lem system would be as compatible as possible and have as many interchangeable parts as possible with the other systems, (nasa Release 63-234)
Missiles and Rockets reported nasa Goddard Space Flight Center was studying Mariner B and Voyager projects to determine if the Early January: Dr. Wemher von Braun, Director of nasa msfc, visiting West Berlin’s Technical University to receive honorary doctorate, said: “I am convinced personally that the Russians will not succeed in making a manned space flight to the moon and back before the Americans. The Russians now could send a man to the moon but that would be a one-way trip.” (Newport News Times-Herald, 1/12/63)
Soviet news agency Tass said Soviet scientists had concluded the moon’s surface was a “loose porous substance” and the interior was solid rock. Conclusion was said to be based on study of radio waves from the moon. (AP, Wash Post, 3/12/64)	,
NASA’s ranger vii spacecraft was launched from Cape Kennedy on its flight to the moon. After an almost perfect countdown, Atlas-Agena launch vehicle boosted the 806-lb. spacecraft into a parking orbit around the earth, and then the Agena engines refired to place ranger vii on its trajectory to the moon. The spacecraft carried six television cameras designed to take and relay to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. Flight to moon would take about 68 hours, with the pictures to be taken during the last 15 min. before craft impacted on the moon. The launching was so accurate that, even without the standard midcourse correction maneuver, ranger vii would hit the moon. However, scientists wanted pictures of the “Sea of Clouds” region and planned to execute midcourse correction to ensure impact and pictures in this area. (NYT, 7/29/64; nasa Release 64-176)
Rep. Peter W. Rodino (D.—N.J.) said on House floor: “. . . Hardly any problem seems beyond solution by our scientists and engineers. We marvel at our achievement of landing a vehicle on the moon, transmitting pictures of its progress to the very instant of impact. Yet, we are doing practically nothing to solve a major air safety problem, or, worse yet, to discover its cause. I refer to the increasingly serious jet age problem of clear air turbulence—CAT—a danger to every passenger flying commercial or military transport aircraft. . . . “Our scientific and industrial communities must be given adequate funds promptly to initiate work on the problem; and that can best be done through a coordinated research effort jointly undertaken by Government and private industry. . . . “Our failure to implement without delay a national effort to develop an effective cat detection and avoidance system may—in fact, probably will—cost the lives of many future air passengers. With every gain in air traffic, with every increase in aircraft speed, with every additional mile flown by every additional plane, the problem becomes more serious. . . .” He introduced into the Record an article on CAT by James A. Fusca in Space Aeronautics, August 1964. (CR, 8/19/64,19715-20)
Mockup of the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) was shown to the press at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. after three days of design inspection by officials of NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Objective of review was to establish design freeze on most areas of lem design. Under NASA contract, Grumman would build 9 lems for ground testing and 11 for flight. (Clark, NYT, 3/27/64, 7; M&R, 4/6/64, 26)
NASA announced that it had organized a moonwatch network to assist with development and operation of the “Moon Blink,” an instrument designed to verify and locate color on the lunar surface. When alerted by one of the stations, watchers at scattered distant points would train their telescopes on the moon to verify a sighting. Professional and amateur astronomers at some 35 stations linked by long-distance telephone were working with NASA to give volunteer assistance to the Moon Blink program. The instrument was being developed by NASA’s Office of Advanced Research and Technology under contract with Trident Engineering Associates, Annapolis, Md., and consisted essentially of rotating color disks which would blink when red color showed on the moon. Although the instrument was being developed for detection of unusual coloration on all types of bodies orbiting in space, the moon’s surface was considered of particular interest since the red color could signify a source of gases and possibly of energy. Any source of energy would be significant to the NASA lunar landing program, (nasa Release 64-316)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft was mated to Saturn I SA—6 at Cape Kennedy in preparation for flight later this spring. (Marshall Star, 4/8/64, 1)
NASA Director of Manned Lunar Mission Studies Thomas C. Evans discussed at aas meeting the systems that might be used for post-Apollo exploration of the moon. The concepts, making maximum use of the investment in Saturn and Apollo, included: Apollo itself, with separate missions to each point of interest; Apollo supplemented with Stay Time Extension Module (stem) , with increased payload capacity developed in Apollo system to transport “saddle bags” of supplies or surface equipment attached to outside of lem; Apollo supplemented with Apollo Logistic Support System (alss) , with two flights—one to transport two astronauts, the other to deliver support equipment and supplies probably including lunar surface vehicle; and, Apollo supplemented with Lunar Exploration System for Apollo (lesa), with 2-3 flights and payload to include shelter-laboratory and roving vehicle. (Text)
New York Times editorialized that delay of the 1969 target date for Project Apollo “may increase the chance that the project of landing a man on the moon will become an international effort, mobilizing all the resources of world technology. That certainly would be most appropriate for man’s first landing in the cosmos beyond this tiny planet.” (NYT, 1/17/64, 42)
In speech accepting Republican nomination for President, Sen. Barry M. Goldwater said: “I can see, and I suggest all thoughtful men must contemplate, the flowering of an Atlantic civilization, the whole world of Europe reunified and free, trading openly across its borders, communicating openly across the world. “This is a goal far, far more meaningful than a moon shot. . . (Text, NYT, 7/17/64, A10)
Article in U.S. News & World Report assessing impact of Project Apollo on U.S. industry quoted unnamed U.S. space official: “ ‘Project Apollo is the biggest single job in history. In terms of manpower used, it dwarfs the building of the pyramids 'by three times. It is five times greater in cost than the wartime crash program to build the first atomic bomb.’ “Over-all price tag on moon exploration in this decade is 20 billion dollars. Ten billion of that has been spent—or will be spent—on preliminary programs such as Projects Mercury and Gemini and for new facilities, Government payrolls, tracking stations, communications. . . . “At a time when Pentagon spending on missiles and rockets is going down, higher spending by . . . [nasa] comes as a shot in the arm to thousands of firms. . . . “Apollo is now entering a critical phase, one entrusted almost solely to U.S. industry. At the peak of the industrial pyramid are four major aerospace firms, supported by 66 other major companies holding NASA contracts of more than half a million dollars each. . . . “What is bound to impress anyone is how the big companies have been pulled together on this vast project. ... To people in industry, working together in peacetime on a ‘national goal’ is new and satisfying. Explains one official: ‘The amazing thing is that industry is finding that space is not only good business—but it is a real adventure for us, too.’ ” (U.S. News, 10/5/64)
Successful test of Apollo escape system was conducted at White Sands Missile Range by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center. Boilerplate model of Apollo spacecraft (command and service modules) was mounted on Little Joe II. At altitude of 17,000 ft. the Little Joe II was exploded. Instantly the rockets in the escape tower ignited and propelled the Apollo command module away from the exploding booster—to maximum altitude of 24,000 ft.; then the escape tower was jettisoned automatically. Drogue parachute opened from nose to stabilize the spacecraft as it descended. Then at about 7,500 ft. three large parachutes were deployed from the nose. First chute broke loose from the spacecraft, but the spacecraft landed safely with two chutes at speed of about 30 fps. The 7l/>-min. test was termed successful, with all objectives achieved, (nasa Release 64-108; Freelander, Houston Post, 5/14/64; Witkin, NYT, 5/14/64,18)
RANGER VII successfully completed its historic mission of taking and relaying to earth closeup pictures of the lunar surface. The spacecraft sent back 4,316 high-quality photographs of the moon before it crashed on the surface of the moon in an area northwest of the Sea of Clouds. All six cameras aboard the spacecraft worked properly, sending back photographs of the moon that improved the resolution of lunar detail as seen from the earth by a factor of 1,000. The closest pictures were snapped 2.3 sec. before impact, at 10.7° south latitude and 20.7° longitude, 68 hrs. and 36 min. after takeoff. At news conference on preliminary results from RANGER vii, held at JPL, principal experimenter Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of Univ. of Ariz. Lunar and Planetary Laboratory described sampling of the lunar photographs as they were shown to the public. In reply to a question, he said: “.. . the thing that struck me most was that the Moon, the region of the Moon, the dimensions which we have been able to observe ... this range, tremendous range of new knowledge has not resulted in any totally unforeseen problems_____ “The Moon has shown—the records show a continuity of features from the large craters observable with telescopes down to smaller sizes. “Think that the rounded features of the large numbers of secondary craters is new. Also their large number is new. . . . “It is also clear that primary craters exist, little pits which have very much the same shape. . . . They are smaller, but the shape, the form, is the same as the bigger craters. . . . “There are some ridges shown. These ridges in the maria are rather of the same nature, of the same shape, sort or form, as the larger ridges. “So I would say, in summing up, that the new region of knowledge is in a true sense an extension of the earlier knowledge. I think it shows that the craters continue to occur down to sizes of about three feet in diameter, about one foot depth. “This clearly implies that we are not dealing here with enormous layers of dust, of very, loose dust, that is, very loose material, where one would not expect any small features to be visible at all. It is not like sand, in other words.. , . “This is a great day for science, and this is a great day for the United States. . . . the amount of information that has been gained about the lunar surface is truly remarkable.” (nasa Transcripts)
NASA announced selection of RCA Missile and Surface Radar Div. for negotiations to procure C-band radars for support of Project Apollo. These radars would be part of instrumentation on the tracking ships being designed and built as joint dod-nasa effort, (nasa Release 64-107)
Army Map Service announced completion of its topographic study of the moon. Prepared under agreement with NASA, the lunar map was the most complete ever made, the first to show variations in heights over all the visible surface of the moon. Map covered area of about 8,000,000 sq. mi., and more than 5,000 surface features were identified by name. The topographers established that the moon’s highest peaks reach about 35,000 ft. above its lowest points—making the lunar mountains about 6,000 ft. higher than Mt. Everest, (nyht, Wash. Post, 6/24/64; Sehlstedt, Balt. Sun, 6/24/64)
Australian scientist Victor Albert Bailey speculated that moon may possess far-reaching electrostatic field, which could have been responsible for ranger VI camera failure by interfering with switches for the cameras. {SBD, 2/7/64,207)
Boeing study of post-Apollo manned lunar bases for NASA was basis for lesa concept (lunar exploration system for Apollo), lesa provided that a 25,000-lb. module would be soft-landed on the moon by a Saturn V launch vehicle. Three crewmen would follow by means of Saturn V/Apollo. The module would have 3,000 cu. ft. volume and could support three men for 90 days on the moon. Boeing’s lunar base was expandable simply by adding more of the basic shelter modules, and longer visits by larger crews could be made with larger lunar bases. (M&R, 3/16/64, 26-27)
Scientists at AF Cambridge Research Laboratories discovered definite relationship between phases of moon and cloudiness around the earth, oar announced. Statistics covering 21,184 days from 1905 to 1962 indicated sunshine was slightly below seasonal averages for a few days following each new moon and slightly above average between last quarter and the new moon. (S.F. Chronicle, 8/17/64; SBD, 8/18/64, 241)
George Low, recently appointed Deputy Director of nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, said in Houston that failure of ranger vi lunar TV probe was “a grave disappointment.” Despite Ranger failure, target date for manned lunar landing was still 1969, he said, but “we certainly can’t guarantee there won’t be technical difficulties that won’t let us do it. . . . If we have to use the Apollo as an unmanned reconnaissance craft our small margin [of time] will be eaten up.” (Houston Post, 2/15/64)
Federal investigators and an attorney from the NLRB were dispatched to Cape Kennedy to seek a solution to labor troubles which halted work on America’s programs for landing on the moon and for orbiting a manned space laboratory. An estimated 80% of workers on the Vertical Assembly Building for Project Apollo and the launch complex for the usaf’s Titan III refused to cross picket lines thrown up by the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees in protest to use of a Government-owned railroad spur which had been operated since Jan. 23, 1963, by nonunion personnel. Cost of the projects affected by the work halt was estimated at $215 million. (Chic. Trib., 6/9/64; Balt. Sun, 6/9/64)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright (D.-Ark.) called for 10% cut in NASA’s Apollo FY 1965 budget, in statement submitted to Senate Appropriations Committee. He stated 1970 Apollo goal had already been missed, so that cut in funds would have no serious effect, and that NASA’s past estimates of costs and time were not reliable, so that little confidence could be placed in NASA’s meeting its 1970 deadline. (Wash. Eve. Star, 7/2/64, A8)
Developmental spacecraft landing rockets were tested using a Gemini boilerplate. Spacecraft was dropped from a C-119 aircraft at 7,000ft. altitude. Two 12,000-lb .-thrust rockets were fired simultaneously when the spacecraft was ten ft. above the water with burn time one and one half sec. Landing speed of the craft was slowed from 27 fps to about nine to 10 fps; normal g-force of seven to eight g’s was reduced to approximately two and one half g’s on impact. A controllable parachute steered by radio commands from a NASA ship lowered the spacecraft into the waters of Trinity Bay, Tex. The landing rockets were not a definite part of either the Gemini or Apollo programs, (msc Roundup,12/23/64,7)
Temperature on planet Jupiter was reported to be higher than previously thought. Geology-astronomy team at Cal Tech that studied the planet with heat-sensitive detector fitted to 200-in. telescope on Mt. Palomar found sunlit atmosphere of Jupiter averaged 230 degrees below zero F. But in shadow cast by one of its moons—Ganymede—temperature jumped to minus 117 degrees. Dr. Bruce C. Murray, associate professor of planetary sciences, and Dr. Robert L. Wildey, research fellow in astronomy and geology, gave two possible explanations for the unexpected rise in temperature: “Perhaps in sunlight the atmosphere is photochemically stable, and the shadow removes the stability. Then the atmosphere may start to break down into more transparent material, permitting the heat detector to observe much deeper into the atmosphere where temperatures are higher. Another possibility is that a breakdown of the shaded atmosphere may result in an upwelling from deeper, warmer zones of the atmosphere.” Study also showed that another of Jupiter’s moons—Callisto—radiated twice as much heat as a normal moon would be expected to do. (Dighton, AP, Wash. Post, 5/17/64)
Maj. Gen. Leighton I. Davis (usaf), Commander of National Range Div., presented to Aviation/Space Writers Association meeting at Patrick AFB, Fla., a “status report” on newly organized nrd: “The activation of the NRD and the renaming of its organizations has already been well publicized.- Basically we have brought the old Atlantic Missile Range and the icbm and satellite test range portion of the Navy’s Pacific Missile Range under single management. Additionally, my job as the DOD representative in support of nasa’s Projects Gemini and Apollo has moved with me to the- new organization. . . .” (Text, afsc Release 45-R-61)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft with attached burned-out Saturn S-IV stage, launched into intentionally low orbit Sept. 18 by Saturn I SA-7, re-entered earth’s atmosphere over the Indian Ocean. The orbiting package was in its 59th orbit and had been in flight for three days, 19 hrs., 37 min. (nasa Release 64-250)
Highlights of Recent Space Research,” by Robert Jastrow and A.G.W. Cameron of Goddard Institute for Space Studies, NASA, appeared in Science. The article presented highlights of recent space research in the physical sciences: geodesy, meteorology, the upper atmosphere, magnetosphere, magnetopause, atmosphere of Venus, exploration of the moon, solar physics, x-rays and gamma rays.	(Science, 9/11/64, gsfc Reprint)
Head designer of Soviet spacecraft, name not identified, was interviewed in Izvestia. His predictions for the next five years: “. . . permanently operating orbital stations consisting of sputniks having various purposes such as providing service in investigating the Earth, the Sun, forecasting weather, monitoring the radiation conditions in space, etc.; . . . an all-purpose radio and TV system for transmitting through space, with the aid of the so-called ‘hanging’ (‘stationary’) satellites; . . . ways of using space . . . for mail-freight deliveries, requiring high speed, and finally passenger service; . . . permanent orbiting stations [where] regular shifts of scientific workers of the most diversified specialties will live and work. ... In general, during this period flights into near space and return to Earth will become very commonplace. I think that in the next five years, many comrades will sojourn in space.” Regarding “direct investigations in the region of the Moon and on its surface,” the designer said: “In all likelihood, in the imminent years such studies can be accomplished only with the aid of small automatic devices transmitting the data to Earth by radio.” (Izvestia, 1/1/64,1, atss-t Trans.)
Fuel cells producing power to operate all electronic equipment in Apollo spacecraft would also produce enough drinking water as a by-product to supply the three-man crew during 14-day journey to the moon and back, MSC announced, (msc Release 64-32)
Missile and Space Systems Div. of Douglas Aircraft Co. has submitted study to NASA which concluded that six-man space research station, capable of orbiting for one year, could be orbiting earth within five years. Crew, serving on staggered schedule, would travel to and from station on modified Gemini or Apollo spacecraft. Station itself would provide small, degree of artificial gravity by rotating slowly and would include centrifuge to simulate re-entry forces. (AP, N.Y. Her. Trib., 7/14/64)	_	_
Midcourse maneuver for ranger vi lunar spacecraft was executed from NASA—jpl Tracking Station, Goldstone, Calif., 16 hrs. after the spacecraft was launched from AMR. The radio signal activated an onboard motor which fired for 69 sec., aiming the spacecraft on collision course with the moon. Target for the lunar spacecraft: Sea of Tranquility. (Witkin, NYT, 2/2/64, 1; Houston Chron., 1/31/64)
DOD announced $5,550,012 contract for integrated navigation systems for three Project Apollo tracking ships had been awarded by Naval Bureau of Ships to Sperry Rand Corp. (dod Release 633-64)
NASA Nike-Apache vehicle launched at 12:13 a.m. edt from Wallops Station carried 65-lb. instrumented payload to 104-mi. altitude in experiment to measure light intensity and charged particle flux as functions of altitude. Payload and spent second stage, which were not separated during flight, impacted 98 mi. downrange in Atlantic Ocean. Experiment was fifth in series to measure and study the nature and causes of aurorae and airglow in the night sky during the dark of the moon, project of Rice Univ. under NASA grant. (Wallops Release 64-53)
nasa announced 84.6-million contract had been awarded by MSC to Space Technology Laboratories for mission analyses and trajectory simulation work in Projects Apollo and Gemini. Contract would be a continuation of Gemini spacecraft analysis project begun in September 1963 and an extension of similar activities in Apollo, (nasa Release 64-206)
msc operations at Cape Kennedy, renamed Msc-Florida Operations, was reorganized as “part of a broad NASA organizational realignment aimed at strengthening Gemini and Apollo management structures at Washington, Houston, and Florida.” The organization was headed by G. Merritt Preston, responsible for msc operations at the Cape since 1961. (ksc Release 43—64; MSC Roundup, 4/15/64,8)
NASA signed $80-million incentive contract with Boeing Co. to build five Lunar Orbiter spacecraft. Beginning in 1966, Atlas-Agena boosters would launch Lunar Orbiters from Cape Kennedy on missions to take close-range photographs of moon’s surface for scientific study and to help select landing sites for Project Apollo, (nasa Release 64-109)
NASA announced Collins Radio Co. and Philco Corp. had been selected for final competition for prime contract to provide Apollo Network S-Band Systems. Estimated $5-million contract called for basic purchase of two complete tracking and data acquisition systems with 30-ft.-diameter antennas and three electronic subsystems. The hand would handle such functions as tracking, telemetry, and TV and voice communication. (nasa Release 64-116)
In his State of the Union message to Congress, President Lyndon B. Johnson said: “. . . our ultimate goal is a world without war, a world made safe for diversity, in which all men, goods and ideas can freely move across every border and boundary. “We must advance toward this goal in 1964 in at least ten different ways, not as partisans but as patriots. . . . “Fourth, we must assure our pre-eminence in the peaceful exploration of outer space, focusing on an expedition to the moon in this decade—in cooperation with other powers if possible, alone if necessary.” (Text, NYT, 1/9/64, 16)
Tass reported that a Gorky Univ. team, headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the leading Soviet authority on radio emanations of the moon, had found evidence they believed showed that the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguishing it both chemically and in mineral content from deep layers. Results were obtained during the complete lunar eclipse of last Dec. 30 observed from Ussurisk, in far eastern Siberia. Troitsky’s group made use of the fact that the lunar surface cooled during eclipses and that the cooling caused a drop in the intensity of radio emanations. The Russians worked out the relationship between the decrease of radio emanations from the obscured part of the moon and the physical properties of the surface. Investigating the properties of the uppermost porous layer of the moon’s surface to a depth of about four inches, the Russians established that its electrical conductivity was 50% to 100% greater than that of the underlying rocks and concluded that the two layers differed in chemical composition and mineral content. The conductivity of the top layer was found to correspond to that of meteorites, confirming the hypothesis that bombardment by meteorites and the settling of meteoritic dust played an important part in shaping the uppermost layer of the moon. {NYT, 12/21/64)
Radar and Doppler velocity sensor system destined to assist the Surveyor spacecraft in its soft landing on the moon was in advanced test phases at Ryan Electronics, Missiles and Rockets reported. Flight tests of the system using helicopters at Holloman afb and at the Hughes Aircraft Co. airport had been successfully completed and had run from 6,000 to 20 ft. above the ground. (M&R, 12/7/64,17)
The hydrogen-fueled J-2 engine that would power the upper stages of the Saturn V launch vehicle successfully demonstrated its ability to stop and restart in a ground test carried out at the Santa Susana Field Laboratory of Rocketdyne Div. The 200,000-lb.-thrust engine would operate in a cluster of five to provide one million lbs. of thrust for the S—II second stage of the Apollo moon launch vehicle, as well as operating singly in the S-IVB stage of the Saturn IB. The test engine was operated initially for 165 sec. and shut down. Following a 75-min. “coast” period, the engine was restarted. After seven seconds, it was shut down for six minutes, then restarted and operated for the full duration of 310 seconds. Among specific objectives demonstrated by the test were automatic repressurizing of the start tank during engine operation, sustained tank pressure during the orbital coast period, and reliable operation of the electrical and pneumatic systems used for restart. (Marshall Star, 12/16/64, 1, 12; AP, Balt. Sun, 12/12/64)
Third anniversary of President Kennedy’s address to Congress on urgent national needs in which he said: “. . . I believe this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to earth.”
Washington Daily News editorialized that the success of ranger vii’s mission represented “a significant milestone on a historic road to manned exploration of the moon.” The lunar flight was termed “a demonstration of man’s ceaseless, boundless quest for knowledge—and one which, in the end, is likely to pay off as well as similar past voyages into the unknown.” {Wash. Daily News, 8/1/64; CR, 8/4/64. A4114)
Edward Z. Gray, nasa Director of Advanced Manned Missions, described manned lunar bases under study for post-Apollo missions, in testimony before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight. “The earliest system we can see for extending the capability of Apollo would be the Apollo logistic support system (alss) . “It consists of the launching on the Saturn V of an Apollo spacecraft with an unmanned LEM, wherein we have replaced the ascent stage of the lem with a cargo compartment. The Apollo spacecraft and unmanned lem, or lem truck are launched to the Moon. The lem truck is disengaged from the Apollo spacecraft in lunar orbit and lands in an unmanned mode on the surface of the Moon. “The payload capability with the present Apollo launch vehicles and spacecraft would be approximately 7,000 pounds. There would be a payload volume of about 2,000 cubic feet. This would provide a shelter with occupancy capability for two men for about 14 days on the lunar surface. An alternate payload that could be carried by the lem truck would be a two-man roving vehicle . . ., which would have a capability to cover about 200 to 300 miles on the lunar surface in the 14 days. . .. “Then looking beyond to the time when much greater staytime on the lunar surface would be desired, we show a lunar exploration system for Apollo (lesa) which weighs about 25,000 pounds on the surface of the Moon. These are Earth pounds. “It would be launched with a Saturn V without an Apollo spacecraft and would be delivered in an unmanned mode directly onto the surface of the Moon. It has a volume of over 3,000 cubic feet, and could provide satisfactory shelter and life support for 3 men to stay 90 days on the surface of the Moon. “The mode of operation would be to launch this unmanned vehicle to the surface of the Moon, and follow it up with an Apollo launch so that the lem would land in the near vicinity of the lesa payload, probably using a homing radar. ...” He described the LESA concept as expandable through addition of modules; for instance, three modules could form a base for 18 men, 24 months occupancy time. {1965 NASA Auth. Hearings, Part 2, 59799)
Bendix Products Aerospace Div. was awarded $99,973 NASA study contract for shock absorbing device to permit soft landing on moon, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center announced. Bendix would test various sizes and shapes of crushable aluminum honeycomb structures to determine performance characteristics under lunar environmental conditions, (msc Release 64-9)
ranger vii spacecraft successfully completed its midcourse correction maneuvers to put the spacecraft on its final collision course to the moon. RANGER vii carried out series of orders involving switching from the directional to the omnidirectional antenna, folding the directional antenna out of the way of the midcourse motor, pitch and roll maneuvers to properly orient the spacecraft, firing the midcourse motor, and reorientation by earth and sun acquisition after the midcourse motor had been fired. Telemetry indicated that everything aboard the spacecraft was normal after the midcourse correction activities had been completed. (NASA Release 64-187)
Senate passed (78-3) H.R. 10456 authorizing funds for NASA for FY 1965. Senate adopted the committee amendments en bloc. Amendment introduced by Sen. Fulbright to reduce R&D funds for Project Apollo by $267,750,000 was rejected by vote of 42—38. Bill would be sent to House-Senate conference committee. (NASA lar III/127; CR, 6/24/64, 14367-84)
Amateur astronomers in Riverdale, the Bronx, saw a red spot on the moon between the craters Aristarchus and Herodotus at 4:20 a.m. It vanished at 5:10 a.m. before the moon had come into view of the western observatories which had observed spots near Aristarchus last Oct. and Nov. (NYT, 6/18/64)
Republican Presidential candidate Sen. Barry M. Goldwater issued report on science prepared by his Task Force on Space, Science, and the Atom, in which he had this to say of Project Apollo: “Man should indeed explore the moon, but I see no good reason why we must incur the large unnecessary expense of a crash program. The first man on the moon will probably not gain for us any vital military advantage.” He proposed instruments be sent to the lunar surface, emphasis be concentrated on efforts to assure the “security of nearspace.” (Wash. Post, 10/25/64, A9)
Alvin H. Parker soared his Sisu 1A sailplane from Odessa, Tex., to Kimball, Neb. (644 mi.) to claim new world soaring distance record over the previous 544.331-mi. distance record. (SSA Release) During July: Two 10-story buildings had heen completed in ksc Merritt Island Launch Area and were turned over to NASA. They were the $7.8 million operations and checkout building for the Gemini and Apollo spacecraft, and the $1.3 million spacecraft pyrotechnic installation building. (AP, Orlando Sentinel, 7/22/64)
NASA announced it had selected Collins Radio Co. for procurement of a major portion of the S-band tracking, data acquisition, and communications system to be used in Project Apollo. Nine systems with 30-ft.-diameter parabolic antennas were to be provided, at a cost of approximately $20 million, (nasa Release 64-146)
President Johnson signed NASA Authorization Act (H.R. 10456) authorizing $5,227,506,000 for NASA FT 1965. Largest part of authorization was for Project Apollo, $2,677,500,000. The bill was $76,494,000 less than the Johnson Administration had requested. (AP, NYT, 7/15/64, 15)
In paper on manned lunar scientific operations, prepared for aas meeting in New York, NASA’s Dr. Paul Lowman (Office of Space Science and Applications) and Donald A. Beattie (Office of Manned Space Flight) said that . . it is apparent that the moon is a virtual Rosetta stone that, if properly read, may permit us to learn how the solar system, the earth, and the continents on which we live were formed. . . . “Since the scientific investigations of highest priority are in the fields of geology and geophysics, it appears that there is definite value in extending manned lunar exploration by the use of modified Apollo equipment. Experience has shown that geophysical and geological mapping investigations of large areas are Continuing tasks; like the painting of the Golden Gate Bridge, they are never really finished, because new concepts, questions, and methods evolve during the program. The occasionally-expressed view that the major questions about the moon could be settled by a few landings and the return of a few samples ignore the experience of several centuries of terrestrial geology and geophysics. . . (Text)
Results of five public opinion surveys conducted in 12 cities over 14 months for Thiokol Chemical Corp. and Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. were announced. Findings indicated that most Americans supported the national goal of landing men on the moon by 1970 but they felt no sense of urgency about achieving it. One third of those interviewed thought spending should be reduced. (NYT, 11/15/64, 66)
Rep. Thomas M. Pelly (R.-Wash.) introduced a concurrent resolution to change the goal of the manned lunar landing to before 1975 instead of before 1970 (H. Con. Res. 257). “The change of policy ... is to allow our scientists greater flexibility in meeting the challenging technological problems of the Apollo project. Especially, I have in mind the desirability of eliminating the pressures of meeting time schedules, of minimizing perils such as solar radiation, and frankly I would stretch out the fantastic cost of the manned space exploration program over a longer period of time. . . . “My new resolution is to invite the opinions of qualified experts and knowledgeable persons on this subject. . . . Congress should provide for an overall reappraisal of such a costly manned flight activity which accounts for two-thirds of the $5 billion space budget. Certainly, I cannot believe there is any valid reason why the Space Administration and those engaged in the manned space research venture should not be given more latitude in the scheduling of the program. Any slippage in time schedules due to reasons of safety and increasing assurance of success should not require any apology or excuse. Nor should the program be speeded for prestige at the cost of added risk. Congress by adopting my resolution would be setting a policy of proceeding at an orderly and normal speed and of avoiding undue risks in establishing any deadline. Finally this greater latitude should allow for tighter budgeting and contribute to reductions in the level of annual appropriations.” (CR, 1/23/64, 932)
Baltimore Sun editorialized on ranger vii: “. . . we hear much talk of what this means in international prestige, and to what extent we have given the Russians (as well as the moon) one in the eye. Yet surely the thing itself is the thing itself, and is wonderful in the full sense of that word. To see actual photographs close-up of the surface of the moon, whose mystery throughout the history of mankind has but been enhanced by its proximity and by the fact that something could always be seen there, is a matter of awe and wonder; and that is the main thing about this moonshot.” (Balt. Sun, 8/1/64)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., said at aiaa Luncheon in Washington: “. . . the concept of the lunar landing was not new when NASA was founded in 1958. Research was continuing on the various technical aspects of such a mission. In 1959, inhouse work began on mission definition. In the fall of 1960, three six-month feasibility design study contracts were awarded. In January 1961 NASA received these interim findings. There were two basic vehicle approaches to be considered—direct ascent and rendezvous. In May of 1961, the study contract results were available, and supported our interim findings, and the recommendation was made to the Congress that the nation proceed with the mission. . . . “There will be missions after Project Apollo. We are already examining their feasibility, cost, and potential return. We are carefully establishing a variety of future space missions, both manned and up-manned, that exploit the near earth, lunar, and planetary environments. No decisions have been made and we are not ready to recommend them yet. As the information becomes available and as the results are analyzed, we will be able to present the country with a solid spectrum of achievable, well-conceived mission alternatives and options. The selection will be a national, not an agency, decision.” (Text)
George H. Arthur, Deputy Director of the International Telephone and Telegraph Aerospace Laboratory at Nutley, N.J., predicted that the Russians would go to the moon before 1970 and make a manned circum-lunar mission in two and one half years. He said the United States would also be able to get to the moon by 1970 if it had as much success with its developmental program in the Saturn IB and Saturn V as it had with Saturn I. (Balt. Sun, 11/5/64)
“. . . I think we can safely say that our structural problems have been overcome and nuclear rockets can be developed for the performance of future missions beyond Apollo.” (Text)
New York Gov. Nelson Rockefeller, campaigning in New Hampshire Republican primary for presidential nomination, said there was a “very serious question” whether U.S. should abandon Project Apollo manned lunar project and rely instead on instrumented spacecraft. About 95% of information obtainable by men on the moon “for a half an hour” could be gathered by instruments, he said. He said the decision for Apollo came after the abortive Bay of Pigs invasion, when the Administration decided the U.S. needed something “dramatic.” Rockefeller proposed reconsidering the space plan advocated by President Eisenhower, calling for a slower, less expensive, “scientific” program, (nyt, 2/14/64, 10; AP, Wash. Post, 2/14/64)
Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, reported in New Scientist that technical difficulties, and not a deliberate slackening of effort, were hampering Soviet activities in getting men to the moon. He noted that the Russians apparently had not made a probe work in space successfully for more than a few weeks and concluded that the Soviets were failing where “once they shone—in basic rocketry techniques.” (Simons, Wash. Post, 7/9/64)
Educator Robert M. Hutchins, writing in the Omaha World-Herald, said of U.S. project to land a man on the moon: “I think it will not be argued that the primary object of this venture is to advance knowledge. It seems rather to be designed as a huge public relations stunt. The ‘knowledge industry’ will restore the prestige we lost when the Russians outdistanced us in space. . . . “If we were dedicated to advancing knowledge, we would have had some serious debate about the best way to do it. Is it to improve our colleges and universities or to put on scientific spectaculars?” (Omaha Sun. World-Herald, 3/29/64)
Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, Director of msc, was one of featured speakers at opening of Houston Museum of Natural Science and Burke Baker Planetarium in Houston. Dr. Gilruth said msc was negotiating with museum officials for part time use of planetarium for Apollo project, (msc Roundup, 7/22/64, 1)
Ryan Aeronautical Corp. was awarded contract from RCA to design landing radar for the Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. RCA, responsible for major lem subsystems, would integrate landing radar with lem’s overall sensor system. (M&R, 1/13/64,10-11)
Prof. A. A. Blagonravov, chief delegate of the U.S.S.R. to the U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, told a news conference in Geneva that the Soviet Union had no set plan for landing a man on the moon “within the present decade.” (AP, Houston Post, 6/6/64)
Boilerplate Apollo spacecraft arrived at Cape Kennedy, where it would be orbited by Saturn I SA-6 in April. Three separate usaf aircraft transported the boilerplate launch escape system, command module, service module,.related ground service equipment, and adapter. Within a few hours, S-l stage and instrument unit for SA-6 arrived by barge after 13-day trip from Huntsville, Ala. (msc Release 64-33; MSC Roundup,2/19/64,1)
Dr. Robert C. Seamans, Jr., NASA Associate Administrator, visiting NASA Manned Spacecraft Center, said extended manned exploration of the moon “does make considerable sense” as follow-on program to Project Apollo. He said such a program was one of several which NASA would present as possible post-Apollo goals to the President “in approximately a month’s time.” Other possibilities would include such programs as landing unmanned spacecraft on other planets. (Maloney, Houston Post, 8/28/64)
Discussing U.S. space costs in terms of the gross national product, Sen. Stuart Symington (D.-Mo.) said the GNP was nearly $2 billion a day, “and I guess we can afford a couple of days of that to get to the moon.” (AP, Louisville, Ky., Courier-Journal, 8/7/64)
In honor of ranger VII, the International Astronomical Union meeting in Hamburg, Germany, designated the region where the lunar probe impacted on the moon as “Mare Cognitum.” (Sullivan, NYT, 9/2/64,14)
Sen. J. W. Fulbright, Chairman of Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said at Copenhagen celebration of 50th anniversary of Denmark-America Foundation: “The most urgent need of this troubled world is new thoughts and attitudes toward the old problem of human relations, as distinct from excessive preoccupation with traveling to the moon.” (AP, Kansas City Times, 5/12/64)
Full-scale metal mockup of Lunar Excursion Module (lem) for Project Apollo was review by NASA Manned Spacecraft Center officials at Grum-man’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Mockup’s appearance was highlight of week-long analysis of the mockup design with a critique aimed at defin-itizing the lem design, (msc Roundup, 10/14/64, 1)
France’s preparations for hydrogen bomb development in the South Pacific were reaching unexpectedly large proportions, New York Times reported. Gaston Palewski, French Minister for Scientific Research, had recently said in Papeete that “France has engaged herself in Polynesia for a very big task.” Test site and military installations were being constructed at Mururoa in the Tuamotu Islands, 720 mi. southeast of Tahiti. French sources indicated France would become a thermonuclear power by late 1967 or early 1968. (NYT, 1/16/64, 4) Mid-January: Work on test site for Project Apollo at White Sands Missile Range was halted by strike of operating engineers, (sbd, 1/15/64, 72)
Use of lasers to measure craters on the moon was reported by J. S. Courtney-Pratt, of Bell Telephone Laboratories, to Society of Photographic Scientists and Engineers in New York. Based on computations made with laser beams sent to crater lips and then to crater bottoms, lunar craters were found to be as deep as 20,000 ft. (Devlin, NYT, 4/29/64, 15)
Dr. I. M. Levitt, Director of the Fels Planetarium in Philadelphia, displayed in Tel Aviv a clock designed for lunar explorers. The clock, designed by Dr. Levitt, accounted for the fact that a lunar day and night would be more than 28 times as long as the earth’s 24-hour cycle. His clock showed Greenwich time on earth as well as local time for any point on the moon. (NYT, 6/7/64, 78)
nasa presented ranger VII press briefing, essentially the same presentation as that planned for the iau three days later, in which refined flight data were announced. RANGER VII impacted on the moon within 19 sec. and 6 mi. of the planned time and target. It landed in one of the rays from the crator Tycho; Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker and Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper expressed opinion that the crater rays were lava flows. Dr. Kuiper stated the impact area was not typical of the lunar surface. Of the RANGER VII lunar photographs, Dr. Kuiper revealed that the photographs resolved objects down to 10—15 inches, and the resolution was considered 1,000	times better than the very best earth-based observation and 5,000 times better than routine earth-based observation. 200 more of the lunar photographs were released. On the question of the nature of the lunar surface, no firm conclusion was drawn. Dr. Kuiper, who estimated erosion on the moon to be about 5 ft., said it was “purely a guess” that there was “fairly solid stuff there.” He added that it was not possible to obtain such data as surface bearing strength from the ranger vii photographs. Dr. Harold Urey, whose paper was read in his absence, also expressed his belief that the photographs did not answer the question of surface strength; however, he said that a “spongy,” “fairy castle structure” could be prevalent many feet down. Dr. Shoemaker, who expressed view that moon loses more material than it gains, suggested erosion could be on the order of 50 ft. He said U.S. Geological Survey was converting the photographic data into topographic profiles, and the results were showing that moon’s surface was “smoother than I had dared hope.” He said average slope in the area being studied did not exceed 10° and pointed out that this was reassuring for Project Apollo, whose Lem spacecraft had been designed to land safely on slope of 15°. (NASA Press Conf.; Finney, NYT, 8/29/64; Toth, Wash. Post, 8/29/64; Watson, Balt. Sun, 8/29/64)
Dr. J. Allen Hynek of Northwestern Univ. said that he and his colleagues would submit a proposal to NASA for a 24-in. telescope to be landed on the moon by the mid-70’s. Such a telescope might double the size of the optically observable universe from its present radius of about 5 billion light years to perhaps 10 billion. It would also “see” radiations from deep space that are totally excluded by earth’s atmosphere. (Schmeck, NYT, 11/20/64)
Soviet aircraft designer Artem I. Mikoyan, brother of Soviet President Anastas I. Mikoyan, remarked in Moscow: “Whatever secrets surround the earth’s nearest neighbor, they will be solved by man. And one would like to believe that the first man on the moon will be our Soviet cosmonaut. We are confident of this. Confirmation of this may be seen in the flight of the spaceship ‘Sunrise’ [voskhod] .”	(AP, Wash. Post, 10/26/64)
Three USAF test pilots entered Apollo command module at Martin Co., Baltimore, for simulated 7-day lunar landing mission. (AP, NYT, 1/13/64, 9)
The first Apollo spacecraft adapter was delivered by Army CH-47A helicopter from Tulsa, Okla., to NASA Manned Spacecraft Center-Florida Operations at Merritt Island. The 4,000-lb., 22-ft.-dia., 28-ft. long, cone-shaped unit structurally simulated the adapter section that would house the Apollo lunar excursion module (lem) on its trip to the moon. It would undergo tests to determine whether the mechanical fit was adequate, if sufficient access was provided to perform service and checkout of the LEM, and to determine its compatibility with test facilities and ground handling. Helicopter was chosen over other forms of transportation because of the awkwardly large diameter of the section. (ksc Release 227-64)
The first NASA University Program Review Conference in Kansas City, Mo., assembled over 400 university representatives interested in learning how their institutions could qualify for NASA grants for space-related research or expand present programs. Dr. Thomas L. K. Smull, Director of the NASA Office of Grants and Research Contracts, reported that 200 universities were participating in the program, that some of the grants were for specific projects, some in university sustaining programs, and others for the support of predoctoral candidates. He said that while NASA was “mission oriented,” its job was not limited to putting a man on the moon: “Its objective is the expansion of human knowledge of phenomena in the atmosphere and space. One problem is how the academic community can communicate with nasa.” (McCoy, Kansas City Star, 3/1/65) In a luncheon address, Dr. Raymond L. Bisplinghoff, NASA Associate Administrator for Advanced Research and Technology, urged educators not to strangle “the holy curiosity of inquiry.” He said the success of the U.S. space program depended largely on “formation of ideas by individuals working as individuals in universities.” (Text) Sen. Stuart Symington (D-Mo.) told the Conference that the U.S. must “widen the scope of man’s imagination, trample rough-shod over intellectually inhibiting barriers and stimulate to their fullest potential the mental powers of young and reasonably young Americans if the United States were to achieve and maintain preeminence in space.” Symington emphasized the need for communication of new knowledge. (Kansas City Times, 3/3/65) Dr. Willard F. Libby, Director of Univ. of California’s Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics, reviewed activities supported by NASA multidisciplinary grant: “In the three years UCLA has administered [the . . . NASA grant, we have aided in bringing thirty-seven visiting scientists to this campus for short periods of time. This grant has supported fourteen visiting researchers for periods of up to one year. Through the use of these funds and program enrichment funds from the NASA Predoctoral Traineeship grant, we have aided in bringing seven new faculty members to this campus to augment the existing faculty in space-related fields. . . . Finally, we have made over fifty sub-grants to faculty for new starts on space-related research in various areas—Biology and Medicine, Physical Sciences, Engineering, and Business Administration.” (Text)
luna vin would land on the moon Dec. 6 at about 4:50 p.m. est, Tass reported. Telemetry data indicated the spacecraft was on a correct trajectory and functioning normally. (Reuters, NYT, 12/6/65,43)
At Vatican City, Pope Paul vi saw a movie made up of photos taken by ranger vii as it neared the moon. NASA Associate Administrator Robert Seamans, Jr., in Europe on. other business, and NASA European representative, Gilbert W. Ousley, were received by the Pope, showed him the movie, and answered his questions. (N.Y. Herald Trib., 1/11/65; ap, Balt. Sun., 1/11/65)
The New York Times commented on the success of the U.S.S.R. zond jii mission: “Like the Ranger and Mariner feats before it, Zond 3 has again shown what enormous gains in man’s knowledge can be obtained by using instruments alone, a technique much cheaper and less hazardous than sending men to the moon or the planets. There is every reason to suppose that a United States satellite could have gotten similar photographs of the other side of the moon even earlier than Zond 3 had a sustained effort to this end been made. “The restraining element has been the limitations imposed on this country’s exploration of space with instrument-carrying rockets by the overriding priority given to the enormously expensive Apollo project for landing a man on the moon by 1970. The Soviet propaganda and prestige gains that will result from the current accomplishment represent one of the costs of the decision to put so much emphasis upon a manned voyage to the moon.” (NYT, 8/17/65, 30)
U.S.S.R.’s photographic moon probe, ZOND III, was 33.4 million miles (52.8 million km.) from earth. Transmission of photos of the moon’s hidden side had been resumed according to the flight program. Pictures were of good quality. (Tass, 10/28/65)
According to USAF Cambridge Research Laboratories study, a continuous barrage of meteoroids was causing moon to lose up to 6,000 tons a day and earth to gain 10,000 lbs. a day. Because of its strong gravity, earth absorbed about four times as many impacts as moon, (oar Release 3-65-3; Chic. Trib., 3/11/65)
The task of effecting a soft landing on the moon had been placed on the agenda of space projects in the U.S.S.R., Academician Leonid Sedov, leader of the Soviet delegation to the 16th iaf Congress, said at a press conference. He added: “Such a landing has already been worked out on the ground.” (Tass, 9/17/65)
NASA announced it had asked astronomers and scientists in 38 countries to help analyze and interpret the closeup photographs of the moon taken by ranger vii in July 1964. The scientists would first receive a set of 199 high-quality pictures taken by ranger vii’s “A” camera; photographs taken by other cameras would be sent later. NASA had also sent ranger vii photographs to the European Space Research Organization, the European Launcher Development Organization, the International Committee on Space Research, and the United Nations, (upi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/15/65)
NASA Associate Administrator Dr. Robert Seamans said during FY 1966 budget briefing: “. . . it is conceivable . . . that the lunar landing would occur in early 1970 ... we feel actually greatly encouraged at the progress that has been made freezing the design, and we feel very reassured at the test results we are achieving on our propulsion systems and with our stages. So that we really feel that there is more chance that we can get off the flight on an earlier mission than I would have said a year ago.” Dr. Seamans said Apollo gave the nation a capability for a wide variety of scientific and technological flights in earth orbit, in orbit around the moon, and also for an extended lunar stay time. He commented that the objectives of the current extended Apollo (Apollo-X) design and feasibility studies were to extend the time of the lunar mission out to the order of two weeks. He also said that Apollo-X circumlunar flights, in polar orbit about the moon and taking photographs of the entire lunar surface, on missions that could involve staytimes on the moon of up to one or two weeks, all would have great possibility and would offer great interest scientifically. In commenting on an earlier agreement (1963) with the Pentagon for developing of a manned orbiting laboratory, Dr. Seamans said: “At the time of that agreement, we were really thinking of something that we now realize is further out in time, namely, a more permanent space station that could stay in orbit for a year’s time and could be resupplied, and would permit the crew to be ferried into orbit and bring them back. The study really related to that kind of possibility which we now realize is much further out in time ... we may end up with what is called the MOL, and we may also find that there are important uses for the Apollo system beyond the present manned lunar landing program.” He said NASA studies of improving both the Saturn IB and the Saturn V launch vehicles indicated that “these two launch vehicles can take care of our needs for an extended period of time.” (NASA Budget Briefing FY 1966)
Writing in Pravda, I. Akulinichev, Dr. of Medical Sciences, said: “. . . Of course, the question of lunar laboratories is now only at the level of scientific planning. ... To bring this possibility closer to our times, it is necessary to accomplish manned flights to the region of the Moon. Further, we need to solve reliably the question of methods to use for a successful lunar landing of a spacecraft and the return of the cosmonauts to Earth. In my view, the first lunar laboratories will initially study the possibilities of the prolonged sojourn of man on the Moon. Scientists will investigate ways of using the lunar conditions for assisting the normal life activity of people. . . . Finally, the scientists will study the conditions of orientation on the Moon and the possibilities of the navigation of interplanetary spacecraft.” In the same issue of Pravda, Soviet Academician B. Konstantinov wrote: “In this New Year’s article, I wish to dwell on the possibility of international cooperation in the use of solar energy. . . . What appears most attractive is the conversion of solar energy into electricity. In the foreseeable future, man may solve this problem; along with this, it is conceivable that the problems of controlling the weather and climate will also be solved.” (Pravda, 1/3/65, 4, atss-t Trans.)
Paul Haney, NASA Manned Spacecraft Center Public Affairs Officer, announced at a news conference the crew selected for the Gemini VIII spaceflight: Neil A. Armstrong, a civilian, would be command pilot; David R. Scott (Maj., usaf) would be copilot. Backup crewmen named were Charles Conrad, Jr. (Lcdr., usn), and Richard F. Gordon, Jr. (Lcdr., usn). Gemini vm was scheduled to include practice on rendezvous and docking maneuvers and a space walk that could last as long as one orbit of the earth—about 95 min. (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 9/21/65; ap, Balt. Sun, 9/21/65, 6)
Apollo Extension Systems (Aes) schedule was summarized by James J. Haggerty, Jr., in the Journal of the Armed Forces: “nasa has worked up a tentative Aes schedule. It calls, first, for perhaps three or four 14-day earth-orbital missions, using a basic Apollo spacecraft only slightly modified, starting in 1968. This phase would be followed by extended earth-orbital (45-day) missions at the rate of five or six a year in 1970-71 and 14-day lunar exploration missions at the rate of one or two a year in 1970-71.” (Haggerty, J/Armed Forces, 9/25/65, 23)
Louis Walter, gsfc geochemist, told ap reporter his research with tektites indicated lunar surface may be sand-like. The key to this conclusion lay in Walter’s discovery of the presence of coesite in tektites, believed to be particles of the moon sent into space when meteorites impact the lunar surface. Coesite, also found around the world at known meteorite craters and sites believed to have sustained meteoritic impacts, is a form of silicon dioxide—a major constituent of sand—produced under high pressure. “If we accept the lunar origin of tektites, this would prove or indicate that the parent material on the moon is something like the welded tuft that we find in Yellowstone Park, Iceland, New Zealand, and elsewhere,” according to Walter. Welded tuft was said to have some of the qualities of beach sand, (ap, Chic. Trib., 3/1/65)
NASA announced that Launch Complex 16 at Cape Kennedy would be modified to convert the former Titan missile facility into static test stands for the Apollo' manned lunar spacecraft. Construction bids were expected to be opened by Army Corps of Engineers, late this month. The modified test facility would replace an Apollo static test stand originally planned for the NASA Kennedy Space Center’s Merritt Island facility. Officials estimated that the modification of Complex 16 would represent a cost reduction of about 72 per cent under the original $7 million construction estimate for test stands on Merritt Island, (ksc Release 7-65)
nasa had awarded a new $47,655,103 cost-plus-incentive/award fee contract to trw Inc., for work on the Gemini/Apollo mission trajectory control program and the Apollo spacecraft systems analysis program, (nasa Release 65-378)
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center reported it had saved $12 million toward a $35 million cost reduction goal for FY 1965. Major portion of this saving was made possible by a suggestion from Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, that instead of spending the budgeted $7,873,000 for a static test stand for the Apollo spacecraft at Cape Kennedy, the reserve Titan Launch Complex 16 be modified for static test use. Cost of modifying the Titan launch complex would be $3,982,900, with a net saving of $3,890,100. (msc Roundup, 2/3/65, 8)
B. F. Goodrich Corp. had been selected by Hamilton Standard to replace International Latex Corp. as subcontractor for garment portion of the Apollo spacesuit. Change followed problems with certain portions of garment. iM&R. 3 15 65, 7)
NASA selected four companies to perform four-month design studies on an experiments pallet to fly aboard Project Apollo missions: Lockheed Missiles and Space Co.; McDonnell Aircraft Corp.; Martin Co.; and Northrop Space Labs. The firms, under separate and concurrent fixed-price contracts valued at approximately $375,000, would design, develop detailed specifications, and produce mock-ups of a pallet to house scientific, technological, and engineering experiments to be carried on Apollo missions of up to two-weeks duration beginning in 1968. After review and evaluation of the design studies, NASA planned to select one of the firms to develop the experiments pallet flight hardware under a cost-plus-incentive-fee contract, (nasa Release 65-361)
An analysis of worldwide press reactions to the successful GEMINI IV flight indicated that most newspapers took the occasion to call for U.S.-Soviet cooperation in space ventures. “That this [cooperation] is unlikely shows how far our politics lag behind our technology,” Britain’s Manchester Guardian said. Dutch newspapers joined in asking for cooperation in space and Trouw said the duplication of effort by the Soviet Union and the United States “is a waste of money and know-how.” The West Berlin press highly praised the U.S. policy of reporting the Gemini flight as it was taking place. Swedish newspapers refrained from any comment amid a wave of anti-American sentiment over Viet Nam and the Dominican Republic. The Hindustani Times commented: “It is a pity that the two nations [U.S. and Soviet Union] are going about the job with such secrecy. The time has come for both nations to pool their resources and make the projected attempt on the moon a truly human adventure.” ( Wash. Post, 6/9/65, A3)
NASA was negotiating with General Electric Co. to provide 50-w. isotopic power generator for Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Packages (Al-sep) program. The thermoelectric nuclear power unit, designated Snap—27, would use plutonium-238 as the heat source. The packages would transmit selected measurements back to earth. AEC would manage detailed design and development of the unit based on studies of prototypes by nasa Manned Spacecraft Center, (aec-nasa Release H-226)
half of the lunar disc was in shadow. The first frames show a considerable part of the moon visible from the earth. Later frames show the surface of the moon when there was considerable solar side illumination, when the relief formations cast distinct shadows. The images from Zond 3 are sent with a clarity of 1,100 lines. When photographing from a distance of the order of 10,000 km., images of a lunar surface area of about 5 million square km. are possible. The quality of the photographs obtained make it possible to see numerous details of the lunar relief, which are of considerable interest. The photo obtained from Zond 3 will be published in leading newspapers and scientific journals. To analyze the result obtained and to name the craters, ranges, and other formations on the newly photographed sections of the moon, the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R. has set up a special commission. Scientific investigations are continuing on Zond 3. For further testing of the radio line the transmission of photographs of the far side of the moon from the station will continue during subsequent communications sessions, right up to the greatest distance from the earth. Thirty-eight communications sessions have been conducted from Zond 3. All on-board systems are functioning normally.” (Izvestia, 8/15/65, 1)
Gen. Omar N. Bradley (usa, Ret.), Chairman of the Board of the Bulova Watch Co., disclosed at the annual stockholders meeting that Accutron-type electronic clocks were being designed for use on the control panel of nasa’s Project Apollo Lunar Excursion Module. Star-tracking devices incorporating Accutron would be in the moon vehicle’s navigation system. A special “moon van” containing components and examples of hardware for use in Project Apollo was on display at the meeting. (NYT, 7/28/65,43C)
U.S.-Mexican agreement for operation of NASA tracking station at Guaymas, Mexico, had been extended to 1970, NASA announced. The station would be used to track Project Gemini and Project Apollo. The two Governments also agreed to cooperate on meteorological sounding programs, (nasa Release 65-76)
In an article in The Huntsville Times, Richard Lewis said: “If Project Apollo continues at its present pace, the United States will be able to attempt the landing of astronauts on the moon in 1968. . . . “This impression of the status of Apollo . . . was gained by this reporter in tours of both industrial and test centers for the mammoth project. . . . “The story at these centers is this: no new breakthroughs in electronics, mechanics, metallurgy, propulsion or guidance and navigation are required for the program. All major problems are settled. They have been solved or ‘worked around.’ . . . “So well does Apollo appear to be running that there is a strong probability it will overtake the later flights of Project Gemini, the two-man spacecraft program.” (Lewis, Chicago Sun-Times, Huntsville Times, 1/20/65)
nasa had contracted with Collins Radio Co., Dallas (Tex.) Div., to procure Unified S-Band Telemetry Systems for three 85-ft. -diameter antennas in support of Project Apollo. Under the fixed-price type contract worth $2,740,000, Collins would install the three systems at antennas to be built at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra, Australia; and Madrid, Spain, (nasa Release 65-63)
Deploring the “belated decision” to finance the space defense of the U.S., syndicated columnist David Lawrence wrote: “It is interesting to note that on October 7, 1963, Louis C. Wyman, Republican, who was then a member of Congress and formerly was attorney general of New Hampshire, submitted alone a minority report to the House appropriations committee, in which he criticized at length the administration’s indifference to the military significance of space developments. He said: ‘As a first priority, rather than racing to the moon, the United States should establish and maintain an integrated weapons system in inner space within manned space capsules that have a capability to observe, intercept and, if necessary, destroy other objects in space.’ “Mr. Wyman’s extensive report will go down in history as a remarkable prophecy as well as an interesting example of how often minority reports become majority opinion.” (Lawrence, Kansas City Times, 9/16/65)
NASA had decided to replace Lem’s fuel-cell power subsystem with a more conventional battery system, Missiles and Rockets reported. Motivation was concern for reliability. Decision would not affect use of fuel cell in the Apollo command module. (M&R, 3/8/65, 14)
NASA’s ranger ix, equipped with six television cameras, was successfully launched toward the moon from Cape Kennedy by an Atlas-Agena B. After the Agena had carried the 800-lb. ranger ix into 115-mi.-altitude parking orbit with 17,500 mph orbital speed, the Agena engines were cut off. Second burn of the Agena lasted about 90 sec., increasing the velocity to about 24,525 mph and freeing ranger ix from the major pull of the earth’s gravity, ranger ix then continued on its 2*/2-day, 245,000-mi. trip to the moon. About 70 min. after launch, NASA announced the spacecraft had been commanded to deploy its solar panels that would convert solar energy to electrical power for its equipment. Projected target was the crater Alphonsus, about 12° south of the moon’s equator, where gaseous emissions had been reported. On the day of impact, Alphonsus would be illuminated by slanting sunlight, producing long shadows and bringing out subtle surface features. The terminator—dividing line between the dark and sunlit portions of the moon—would be only 11° from Alphonsus. Five hours after lift-off, NASA announced that ranger ix’s course was so accurate it would hit the moon only 400 mi. north of the crater target; an inflight maneuver would be executed later to correct this small course error, (nasa Release 65-25; Wash. Post, 3/22/65; Sehl-stedt, Balt. Sun, 3/22/65; Sullivan, NYT, 3/22/65; WSJ, 3/22/65)
Ikeya-Seki comet reached perihelion (closest approach to the sun) with the comet only about 300,000 mi. from the visible solar disk and within a solaf radius of the sun’s surface. Traveling along an elliptical path that would carry it around the sun and deep into the solar corona, Ikeya-Seki had a visual magnitude of —10, nearly as bright as the moon. It was the brightest comet since the one in 1882 which reached an intensity of —7. (NASA Release 65-332; Osmundsen, NYT, 10/20/65, 39; Sullivan, NYT, 10/21/65, C23)
Course of Soviet spacecraft luna viii was successfully corrected and it was now on a trajectory toward the moon close to the calculated one, Tass announced. (Tass, 12/6/65)
luna vi, Soviet probe, would miss the moon by 160,000 km. (99,379 mi.) because of an unsuccessful midcourse maneuver, Tass announced. Engine used to adjust the spacecraft’s trajectory could not be switched off, causing a deviation from the planned course. (Tass, 6/10/65)
NASA was acquiring eight kc-135 jet transports and three ships to help maintain communications during Apollo moon flights. In addition, two ships of the existing DOD instrumentation fleet were being remodeled for support of the Apollo lunar mission’s reentry phase. The KC-135’s would be used during reentry to combat the effects of the plasma sheath blackout which had drowned out communications on previous manned launchings. In addition, three primary ground stations were being prepared at Goldstone, Calif.; Canberra; and Madrid. (nasa Apollo Proj. Off.; ap, CSM, 7/19/65)
NASA’s decision to divert funds from its basic science research program to Project Apollo as a budgetary expediency was criticized by the New York Times: “[nasa] is sacrificing scientifically important projects whose sole defect is that they lack the spectacular publicity value of Project Apollo, which already consumes most of nasa’s huge appropriation. “We believe this is an irrational set of priorities, the result of the public-relations approach. There is no compelling scientific reason why a man should be landed on the moon by 1969 rather than in 1971 or 1973. . . .” (NYT, 12/17/65, 38)	_
Editorial by Henry Eyring, Univ. of Utah, in Science: “. . . The crash program on the atomic bomb grew out of groundless fears that our antagonists would get the atomic bomb first. The vast sums being spent at present on a crash program for an early landing on the moon have their own somewhat obscure, psychological basis. If the moon program is really the most effective means of staving off all-out war, expensive as it is, it is still a bargain. On the other hand, the attempts which are sometimes made to sell the moon program on its scientific merits alone, in competition with other scientific uses of the money, are less convincing. The charitable conclusion is that in public affairs it is deemed necessary to oversimplify actual objectives so that the general public will best serve its own interests for the wrong reasons. This oversolicitude is probably neither necessary nor desirable. . . .” {Science, 10/22/65, 439)
NASA announced management assignments in the Apollo Applications area: msc would be responsible for development and procurement of all standard and modified spacecraft (Command, Service, and Lunar Excursion Modules), astronaut activities, flight operations, and integration of experiments in the command and service modules; MSFC would be responsible for development and procurement of launch vehicles, integration of experiments into the Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn instrument units, and s-ivb stages (top stages of both Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles); KSC would assemble, check out, and launch Apollo Applications space vehicles and their associated payloads. Proposals for possible Apollo Applications experiments were expected to be submitted by the world scientific community, industry, other Government agencies, and the entire NASA organization. (NASA Release 65-381)
Man might be able to change the orbit of asteroid Icarus and make it an orbiting earth station, suggested Soviet scientist K. Stan-yukovich in an interview published by Economichesky Gazetta. Icarus has almost a one-mile diameter and weighs over six billion tons; every 19 yrs. it passes within 4 million mi. of earth. “There is a great demand for a natural moon of Icarus’ size,” Stanyukovich said, where man could build scientific observatories and warehouses to store fuel for spaceships departing on interplanetary trips. He doubted that it could be captured on its next approach in 1968, but foresaw a possibility for 1987. (Burke, L. A. Times, 11/6/65)
ranger VIII lunar photography probe struck its target on the moon at 4:57:36.8 EST, after radioing to earth about 7,000 close-up pictures of the lunar surface during the last 23 min. of flight. The point of impact was 2.59° north latitude, 24.77° east longitude, in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area slightly east-northeast of the center of a full moon. The spacecraft impacted at slightly less than 6,000 mph. Total distance of travel along its trajectory from lift-off had been calculated as 248,766 mi. Accuracy of the shot was reflected in the fact that impact had been planned for 4:57:30, and at 3° north latitude and 24° east longitude. ranger viii had been programed to execute a “terminal sequence” just before impact to point the six tv cameras more in the direction of flight; this sequence was omitted to allow the cameras to cover a larger area than planned and to provide greater continuity with the pictures transmitted by ranger vii last July 31. A second change in the flight was to turn on cameras 23 min. before impact instead of 13 min. and 40 sec. as planned. The new time had been chosen so that initial pictures would be about equal to earth-based resolution and then continue into impact. Two small anomalies: one part of the spacecraft had registered a higher temperature than had been anticipated and more telemetry data had been lost during midcourse maneuver than had been expected. ranger viii had been launched Feb. 17 from Cape Kennedy. (NASA Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65, 1, 65)
NASA awarded mit separate cost reimbursement contract, with no fee, to cover further work on guidance and navigation of Apollo command and lunar excursion modules. The new contract, running from March 1 through November 4, 1965, totaled §15,529,000, including $1.4 million to support research activities in the guidance and navigation field. (NASA Release 65-116)
Soviet scientists, writing in the bulletin of the Soviet Academy of Sciences, asserted that a flight to the moon can now be regarded as fully reliable from the medical and biological viewpoint. This conclusion was reached in summing up the results of the medical-biological research carried on in the two Voskhod spaceflights. Careful training and selection of visual reference points in advance helped to offset the anticipated disorientation of spaceflight. (Tass, 9/3/65)
Boeing Co. unveiled to the public a mockup of its Molab (Mobile Laboratory), a six-wheeled vehicle being studied by NASA for use in manned exploration of the moon, (ap, Tulsa Daily World, 5/6/65) May 6: mariner iv, after 159 days in space, was 72 million mi. from earth, had travelled 243 million mi. The spacecraft continued to return scientific and engineering data to ground stations daily and to set new records for distance of communications, (nasa Release 65-148)
ComSatCorp announced agreement on a $4,512,772 contract with Page Communications Engineers, Inc., for three transportable earth stations to be used as links in providing communication services for Project Apollo. Contract was filed with the Federal Communications Commission in conformity with FCC rules requiring 10 days notice for such awards. ComSatCorp also had filed with the Commission a related application seeking authority to construct the stations and asking FCC approval of their technical characteristics. (ComSatCorp Release)
Telemetry data from ranger ix indicated that the probe was on such an accurate course toward the moon that jpl engineers decided to delay for one day a planned mid-course correction, ranger ix began its 245,500-mi. trip to the moon Mar. 21, and was 144,488 mi. from earth at 9 p.m. est. (upi, Wash. Daily News, 3/22/65; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 3/22/65; ap, Phil. Eve. Bull., 3/22/65)
NASA would negotiate with International Latex Corp. and Hamilton Standard Div. of United Aircraft Corp. for development and production of Project Apollo flight suits and a portable life support system for extravehicular activities during earth-orbital flights and on the lunar surface. International Latex would receive about $10 million to produce the flight suits, consisting of a liquid-cooled undergarment, constant-wear garment, pressure garment assembly, and thermal-micrometeoroid protective over-garment. Hamilton Standard, under separate contract, would receive about $20 million to produce the life-support system: a backpack weighing about 65 lbs. containing an oxygen system, thermal control system, and communications equipment. Present plans called for the pressure suit to be worn during the latter phase of the Apollo/Saturn IB earth orbital mission series and during Apollo/Saturn V missions. Gemini pressure suits would be used on initial Saturn ib missions, (nasa Release 65-346)
Comparing luna in [lunik iii] and zond ill, H. Pfaffe said in an article in East Germany’s Berliner Zeitung: “Owing to its trajectory, Zond 3 was able to photograph the moon under favorable illumination conditions for one hour and eight minutes. Luna 3 was able to photograph only 40 minutes. Zond 3’s trajectory was so chosen that the probe assumed a planetary orbit around the sun. Luna 3, on the other hand, assumed an elliptical orbit with the earth as one focal point. While Luna 3 transmitted its photos of the moon from distances of 400,000 km. and 40,000 km., Zond 3 began to transmit from a distance of 2,200,000 km. This and the fact that the new photos were on a 1,100-line basis indicated the advances made in the Soviet radio and photographic systems.” (Pfaffe, Berliner Zeitung, 8/15/65, 3)
At a press conference during the Symposium on Unmanned Exploration of the Solar System, presented in Denver, Colo., by the American Astronautical Society, Univ. of California chemist Harold C. Urey said that he hoped the moon was “interesting enough to make the $20 billion exploration program ‘worthwhile.’ ” He added, “If it turns out that the moon escaped from the earth, it will be just another incident and I will be disappointed. If, however, it was captured by the earth it will be an outstanding link in history.” Urey backed the U.S. program designed to land men on the moon by 1970 and said he did not consider the cost excessive. (Denver Post, 2/10/65)
Surveyor mission to softland a television camera on the moon had been postponed until May 1966, JPL announced. Unspecified technical problems in the spacecraft and testing gear were blamed, (ap, NYT, 11/23/65, 11)
Prof. Hannes Alfven of the division of plasma physics at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden, revived a theory that the moon was once an independent planet. In an article written for Science, he said that “many if not all of the craters of the moon were produced” by an “intense bombardment of fragments of itself” when the moon swept too close to the earth and partly disintegrated under the tremendous tidal forces that were generated. “It is also possible,” the theory suggested, “that so much of the lunar matter fell down [on this planet] that the upper layer of the earth—the crust—originally derives from the moon.” Prof. Alfven wrote that this theory was first stated by H. Gerstenkorn of Hanover, Germany, and published in 1954 in Zeitschrift fur Astrophysik under the title “Uber die Gezeitenreibung beim Zweikorperproblem” (“About Tidal Friction in a Two-Body Problem”). (Osmundsen, NYT, 4/24/65, 31: Myler, Wash. Post, 4/24/65)
Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the Univ. of Arizona, heading the panel for scientific evaluation of ranger viii photographs, said at a press conference that one of the most important results of this flight had been the discovery that the Sea of Clouds and the Sea of Tranquillity were similar in structure. He noted several “odd depressed regions” and said that they could be areas where collapse had occurred, which might suggest the presence of lava fields. He believed the lunar surface was composed of very light, frothy material such as would be formed when rock was melted and allowed to resolidify within a high vacuum, like that on the moon. The material envisioned by Dr. Kuiper might be considered similar to certain volcanic rocks found on earth: while it would probably be lighter than water, it could still have substantial strength. This theory was based on laboratory attempts several years ago to simulate conditions existing when the moon was formed. Ewen A. Whitaker of the Univ. of Arizona said he felt the lunar material, which he thought had a consistency of crunchy snow, would support a manned spacecraft. He said color lines and sharp boundaries tended to show that the surface was some sort of frothy, lava-like material and definitely not dust. Another member of the Panel, Dr. Harold C. Urey, of the Univ. of California, noted dimples on the moon’s surface and said their curved walls indicated material must have been thrown out of their centers when comparatively soft terrain was gouged by heavy masses of rock. He thought he saw spots in the center of some dimples into which soft material might be draining and estimated the depth of some dimples at 50 to 60 ft. Dr. Urey also suggested the surface material might have the consistency of crunchy snow, (nasa Transcript; Appel, NYT, 2/21/65; Miles, L. A. Times, 2/21/65; ap, Indianapolis Star, 2/22/65) February 20: No evidence of lunar origin had been found in rock samples from western Iowa tested at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, said Donald E. Perry, gsfc Information Officer: “We had not . . . found anything in Iowa which could be identified as meteoritic or of the nature of a tektite.” NASA had requested a six-county area of western Iowa to submit rocks for analysis since gsfc astronomer, Dr. Walter O’Keefe, had had the theory that tektites came from the moon. Western Iowa had been chosen as a likely spot for the search for tektite fragments because of its heavy deposits of loose soil and near absence of natural rock formations. (Barton, Omaha Sunday Worid Herald, 2/21/65)
Two Soviet scientists retained their full capacity to work after spending 30 days in a closed test chamber—said to be the period necessary on a spaceflight to circle the moon. Psychologists did not favor a two-man crew for long space flights, however, since the experiment showed that “even trifles psychologically are blown out of all proportion.” Results and data of the experiments were published in Problems of Space Biology. (Tass, 9/6/65)
U.S.S.R. launched luna viii unmanned spacecraft toward the moon. Objectives were testing of soft lunar landing system and scientific research. Weighing 1,552 kg. (3,422 lbs.), the spacecraft was following a trajectory close to the calculated one. Equipment was functioning normally. (Komsomolskaya Pravda, 12/4/65, 1, ATSS-T Trans.)
A suggestion made at the White House Conference on International Cooperation that the U.S. seek international agreement on a legal code for human activity on the moon received editorial comment in the New York Times: “An important precedent for a code of lunar law exists in the Antarctic Treaty of Dec. 1, 1959. That pact, to which both the United States and the Soviet Union adhere, provides that Antarctica shall be used only for peaceful purposes and shall contain no military bases. It suspends all territorial claims to the Antarctic and establishes the principle that all settlements and activities in the area are open to inspection by observers designated by the nations ratifying the treaty. “The contracting nations agree to make available to each other all scientific information gathered there, and to exchange personnel among their expeditions and stations. “Adoption of an analogous code for the moon would be a major triumph of international cooperation . .	(NYT, 11/30/65, 40)
Speculation that the earth might briefly have had another moon, one of pure iron which disintegrated and fell to earth in a series of fireball showers, was reported in Science. Discovery of a 47-mi.-long string of craters and meteorites extending northeast to southwest in northcentral Argentina led scientists to propose that the rare meteorites, consisting of almost pure iron, might be remnants of a single object which had orbited inside the Roche Limit, been torn apart by the gravity of the earth, and fallen from orbit. Perigee of the hypothetical orbit would have been over the latitude of Argentina and inclination would have been about 40° to account for the alignment of the nine craters. {Science, 9/3/65, 1055-1064)
Soviet cosmonaut Col. Vladimir Komarov, who commanded the threeman spacecraft VOSKHOD I on its orbital flight, told a Havana newspaper: “I believe I will take part in a similar trip—if not to the moon, then to another place.” Komarov was a member of the Soviet delegation in Havana for celebration of the sixth anniversary of Fidel Castro’s revolution. (New Orleans Times-Picayune, 1/3/65; ap, Hartford Courant, 1/3/65)
NASA awarded a $8,879,832 fixed-price contract to the Univac Division of Sperry Rand Corp., for digital data processors to be used in Project Apollo. The contract also called for computer programing assistance in modifying present computer programs or developing new ones for Project Apollo requirements, (nasa Release 65-50)
In an editorial in Aviation Week and Space Technology, Editor Robert Hotz said: “This is a year in which we will hear much about the growing pains of Apollo. It would be most amazing if we didn’t. For Apollo is now in the midst of that difficult period when the problems of creating this incredibly intricate and complex technical system are being hammered the hardest toward solutions. It is also the period when the effectiveness of the management structure in welding all of the complex subsystems into a successfully functioning overall system within the time and money boundaries already established becomes most vital.”	(Av. Wk., 1/18/65, 17)
Ten areas on the moon had been selected by NASA for planning photography by the Lunar Orbiter spacecraft next year. Areas included examples of all major types of moon surface to permit assessment of their suitability for spacecraft landings. Nine of the sites were within the area proposed for Apollo manned landings; eight were potential sites for Surveyor softlanding spacecraft. The 10 areas were located along the moon’s equator beginning at about 43° east longitude and stretching to 65° west longitude, (nasa Release 65-335)
New York Times continued its editorial opposition to the national objective for Project Apollo of landing a man on the moon in this decade. On Feb. 19, an editorial drew from the two successful major launchings of the week (ranger viii and SATURN i sa—9) the lesson that the kinds of experiments on these flights (lunar photography of ranger viii and pegasus I micrometeoroid detection satellite on Saturn I) proved there wrere many unmeasured perils in space and that “In the face of these uncertainties, the American space program ought to retain maximum flexibility of timing, rather than try at all costs to achieve the artificial goal of a manned lunar landing by 1970.” On Feb. 22, following the successful conclusion of the RANGER viii lunar photography mission, another editorial praised the accomplishment, then noted that the Ranger series was not providing all of the answers to lunar questions critical to the Apollo program, and concluded:	“The two successful Ranger shots, however, make clear that much valuable information can be gathered about the earth’s natural satellite by relatively cheap instrument-carrying rockets that do not risk human lives. This demonstration, and the continuing uncertainties about matters essential for a safe manned round trip to the moon, strengthen still more the case for making progress slowly, without any arbitrary deadline, on Project Apollo.” {NYT, 2/19/65, 34; 2/22/65, 20)
luna v “hit the moon in the area of the Sea of Clouds” at 10:10 p.m. Moscow time [3:10 p.tn. edt], Tass announced. The release continued: “During the flight and the approach of the station to the moon a great deal of information was obtained which is necessary for the further elaboration of a system for soft landing on the moon’s surface.” The announcement revealed no further details of the landing. Western experts saw evidence that the Soviets had attempted a soft landing and failed. (Tass, 5/12/65; Shabad, NYT, 5/13/65, 1, 24)
Chairman of the ucla Astronomy Dept. Dr. L. H. Aller believed the moon might be as solid as metal below the top few inches of surface, reported George Getze in the Los Angeles Times. According to Getze, Aller said chances were good that the chemical composition of the moon was more like the sun’s than the earth’s and that elements in the sun as gases would be found in the moon as solids. “The first few inches of the moon’s surface may have been changed a good deal by meteor hits and solar radiation, but if we go down a few feet we will probably find that the composition is like the sun’s,” he said. (Getze, L.A. Times, 5/6/65)
A panel of scientists analyzed slides of the ranger ix lunar pictures at a post-impact press conference and noted that crater rims— some with level areas—and ridges inside the walls seemed harder than the plains but that floors of the craters appeared to be solidified volcanic froth that would not support a landing vehicle. Volcanic activity was inferred from indications that the moon had at least three types of craters not caused by meteorite impact. Dr. Ewan A. Whitaker of the Lunar and Planetary Laboratory of the Univ. of Arizona said parts of the highlands around the crater Alphonsus and ridges within it seemed harder and smoother than the dusty lunar plains. Dr. Gerard P. Kuiper of the same laboratory said of the crater: “It might well be better to make landings there.” Most significant finding of ranger ix’s photographs, according to Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geological Survey, was the smoothness of the crater walls and of the long ridges on the floor of the crater. Dr. Harold Urey of the Univ. of California referred to black patches in the pictures which he said might be composed of graphite: “. . . these dark halo craters are due to some sort of plutonic activity beneath the surface of the moon. They do not look to me like terrestrial volcanoes. . . . They look like a unique lunar type of object.” Dr. Urey said a Soviet scientist had reported a red flare near a peak in Alphonsus and that analysis had indicated presence of a molecule with two carbon atoms. He said this was “a very curious situation because this molecule . . . does not escape from any known volcano” on earth, (nasa Transcript)
Geologist G. J. H. McCall of Univ. of Western Australia said he believed the lunar surface to resemble plastic, and he recommended another Ranger spacecraft be sent to the moon to test his theory. McCall was in Bend, Ore., attending the International Lunar Geological Conference. (ap, San Diego Eve. Trib., 8/27/65)
Dr. Eugene Shoemaker, head of the astrogeological branch of the U.S. Geological Survey, said in an interview with the Houston Post while at Rice Univ. as a speaker in the President’s Lecture Series that the Ranger program had cost a total of about $200 million. He estimated that each Ranger shot had cost just under $30 million and said that although four of the seven Ranger missions had failed, it would have been foolish to settle for one success: “Just imagine that the Martians sent a Ranger-like camera to take pictures of the earth. With just one shot, they’d end up with pictures of a space no bigger than the size of an urban lot, or of the peak of the Alps, or of the sand dunes in Arabia. Could they tell anything about the earth from pictures of just one of these?” The Ranger program, just concluded with the success of ranger ix, gave U.S. scientists good pictures of three different areas of the moon, Shoemaker said. “A Ranger picture is worth a million computer words.” (Perez. Houston Post, 4/8/65)
Commenting on how swiftly man had moved into the space age, an article in the Baltimore Sun said: “Travel in space . . . remains and will remain dangerous—a work for none but the brave, the skilled and the dedicated. There will be moments of breathless drama, many of them, as when the first man arrives on the moon, and of tragedy. But short of those moments, travel in space near the earth is beginning to be routine.” (Balt. Sun, 9/17/65)
Soviet spacecraft luna viii impacted on the moon. Indications were that it was destroyed instead of making a soft landing. Tass reported that “the systems of the station were functioning normally at all stages of the landing except the final touchdown.” Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the Jodrell Bank radiotelescope tracking station, said: “The recordings of the final stages of Luna 8 made at Jodrell Bank indicate that a minor fault probably developed approximately four minutes before touchdown. The retrorockets did not have full effect and the probe probably made a hard rather than a crash landing, but nevertheless sufficient to put the instruments out of action. It seems clear the Russians narrowly missed complete success. . . . They have probably obtained a great deal of new information which will enable them to correct the remaining minor faults. . . .” (Tass, 12/7/65; Balt. Sun, 12/8/65)
Tass had reported that Soviet astronomers believed the upper layer of the moon’s surface was saturated with meteoric matter distinguished chemically and in mineral content from deeper layers. “Highly accurate and reliable” observation had been made by a Gorky University team headed by Vsevolod S. Troitsky, the Soviet Union’s leading authority on radio emanations of the moon. (Sha-bad, Louisville Courier-]ournal, 1/31/65)
ranger VIII lunar probe successfully executed a midcourse maneuver that corrected the path established at launch and aimed it for impact on the moon in the Sea of Tranquillity, an area centered 2.6° north of the lunar equator and 24.8° west of the moon’s north-south line. Signal for the maneuver was radioed from earth to activate commands previously stored in the spacecraft’s computer. At that time, the 808-lb. photo probe was 99,281 mi. from earth, traveling toward the moon at 4,100 mph. First command ordered the spacecraft to roll 11.6°; the second ordered the pitch maneuver of 151.7°; the third commanded the motor to burn for 59 sec. Then, after the spacecraft was ordered to break its attitude stabilization locks on the sun and earth, a “go” command was transmitted and ranger vm executed the maneuver in about 27 min. The correction completed, the spacecraft reacquired its stabilization locks and continued on its course. One measure of the accuracy of the maneuver was the current expected impact time on the moon:	Feb. 20 at 4:57:30 a.m. plus or minus 60 sec. The original planned time was 4:57:30 a.m. The photo probe’s initial course would have missed the trailing edge of the moon by 1.136 mi. (NASA Transcript; L.A. Times. Miles, Wash. Post, 2/19/65; Appel, NYT, 2/19/65; UPi, Phil. Eve. Bull., 2/18/65; ap, Chic. Trib., 2/19/65; Av. Wk., 2/22/65, 34)
NASA announced plans to negotiate with Lockheed Missile and Space Co. to modify five Agena D second-stage launch vehicles for use in Lunar Orbiter missions. Modifications under the incentive contract would include vehicle engineering support; systems testing; overall system integration functions; shroud, adapter and interface coordination; and design fabrication of ground equipment. The Lunar Orbiter program would secure topography data of the moon’s surface to extend scientific knowledge and to help select and confirm landing sites for the Apollo manned moon landings. (NASA Release 65-6)
Soviet scientist Dr. V. S. Troitsky, of the Scientific Research Radiophysics Institute in Gorky, said that radio emissions from the moon indicated that its interior was so hot that it must be four times as radioactive as the inside of the earth. He also said that radio observations indicated a surface layer of light material about 20-ft. thick, overlying denser rock. Dr. Troitsky made these statements at an international conference on the solar system, being held at Cal Tech. (NYT, 9/15/65)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of the radiotelescope facility at Jodrell Bank, England, said that the telescope would try to track Soviet lunar probe LUNA v on May 10. “We have been expecting the Russians to make an attempt to achieve a soft landing of an instrumented package on the moon for some time now,” he said. “This may possibly be the attempt.” {NYT, 5/10/65)
NASA had selected Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. for contracts to study feasibility of including optical-technology experiments— particularly lasers and large telescopes—in future extended Apollo flights. NASA was also interested in optical communication in deep space, the effects of space environment on optical systems, and related secondary experiments. The program would be directed by MSFC. (msfc Release 65-223)
Editorializing, the Hartford Courant said: “. . . Lunik V’s purpose was openly said to be a soft landing on the moon, an experiment that might have sent back the first pictures of the moon from the actual lunar surface, and information about the physical nature of that surface. Possibly the Russians were sure they had the problems of a soft landing solved. But just possibly they decided this time to be frank and out in the open about the whole business. After all, why be scared? Look at all the failures the United States has admitted. And right now the Russians have something to console themselves with. It’s called honesty, and its just as good to be distinguished for this as it is for technology.” (Hartford Courant, 5/16/65)
Soviet engineer T. Borisov suggested that cause of LUNA v’s apparent failure to soft land on the moon might have been failure of the braking rockets to fire “precisely when needed,” the New York Times reported. Borisov pointed out that earth stations could not help the automatic equipment during this phase because it takes 2% sec. for radio signals to make round-trip between earth and moon. (NYT, 5/14/65, 3)
Robert Hotz, editorializing in Aviation Week and Space Technology, said that it could be a “dangerous mistake” to defer development of earth-orbital operational capabilities until financial and technical peak loads of Apollo had been passed:	“The Soviets obviously have chosen the earth-orbital approach to their lunar landing mission. Therefore, they necessarily must develop rather fully their hardware and operational techniques in this area as a vital prelude to their lunar landing attempts and not as a postlude, in the manner of current U.S. planning. They also have made little attempt to conceal their primary military interest in the development of manned spacecraft operations in the earth-orbital area. “Thus, it is entirely possible that unless U.S. policy is drastically changed soon, the Soviets may have an opportunity to achieve the technical surprise in space that they so narrowly missed in the race to an intercontinental ballistic missile.” (Av. Wk., 4/12/65, 21)
Soviet Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov said at a press conference at the International Transport Exhibition in Munich that the Soviet Union planned to land a man on the moon in 1970. Komarov, in charge of the first spacecraft with a three-men crew, was awarded the Pioneer Chain of the Compass Card—a top international aviation decoration. (Reuters, Houston Post, 9/16/65)
The problem of the moon’s origin should be solved when Surveyor spacecraft had sent samples of the lunar surface to earth, predicted Dr. Harold C. Urey, Nobel prize-winning chemist, at a news conference during the meeting of the National Academy of Sciences in Seattle. Absence of terrestrial matter in lunar soil would indicate that the moon originated elsewhere in the solar system, Urey said, (ap, Wash. Eve. Star, 10/13/65)
Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said at the annual meeting of the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia: “Beyond military and political advantages of getting to the moon are possibilities we cannot conceive.” The moon, he said could prove to be “the Rosetta stone of the universe. Its lifeless surface could give us the clue to the process of life.” (Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/21/65)
Little Joe II launch vehicle boosted a five-ton unmanned Apollo spacecraft to 15-mi. altitude from wsmr in test of ability of Launch Escape System (Les) to rescue the spacecraft from an abort at medium altitude. Planned pitch-up maneuver was executed and satisfactory launch escape vehicle performance demonstrated; successful canard operation caused command module to stabilize in proper attitude. After jettison of the Les, the hard part of the boost protective cover, and the forward heat shield, command module made safe descent on its three main parachutes. Test, conducted at maximum-Q conditions, was slightly marred by telemetry failure, (nasa Release 65-348; upi, NYT, 1/21/66,10; AP, Balt. Sun, 1/21/66)
Johnson Administration could not increase NASA’s FY 1968 budget because of Vietnam war, but it could make a pobcy decision on a post-Apollo program, wrote Robert Hotz, in Aviation Week. "What it will take to get this effort going is some political courage to restate the necessity of proceeding beyond Apollo, a decision to chart a specific course from the available alternatives and some modest Fiscal 1968 funding to retain the technical resources that will be required for the future—particularly engineering and scientific manpower. This combination of activity has already been deferred one year beyond its critical moment by the Johnson Administration. Delay for another fiscal year could impose a braking effect from which eventual acceleration would be much more costly and much less effective.” (Hotz, Av. Wk., 10/10/66, 21)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xi spacecraft, which entered lunar orbit Aug. 27, stopped transmitting at 2:30 gmt Oct. 1 when its batteries were exhausted, Tass reported. Spacecraft had completed 277 orbits around moon and had sent 137 transmissions of scientific information and trajectory data to monitoring stations on earth. Results would be published later. (Tass, 10/4/66; Tass, Pravda, 10/5/66, 1, uss-t Trans.)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) ascent engine test completed at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
nasa selected Bendix Corp. for negotiation of a $17-million costplusincentive-fee contract to manufacture four Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Packages (Alsep). The 170-lb. packages containing scientific instruments to measure lunar surface characteristics and atmosphere would be carried to moon in Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) on initial Apollo landing missions and would transmit data back to earth for six months to one year after crew’s departure from lunar surface. Contract would be managed by msc. (nasa Release 66-63)
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar, Univ. of Chicago astrophysicist, was one of 11 scientists named by President Johnson to receive 1966 National Medal of Science. (Pres. Doc., 1/2/67, 1832-3) Landing sequence began when spacecraft was oriented vertically to the moon. At 43-mi. (69-km.) altitude, radar system aimed at lunar surface and turned on retrorocket, and shock-absorbing system was prepared. Less than one second before impact, after spacecraft had been slowed to 18 mph, instrument capsule was ejected and softlanded. Four minutes later, its petal-like covering opened, its antenna opened, and radio transmissions began. 18 hrs. after touchdown, luna xiii began photographing a panorama of the moon’s surface. Pictures showed barren, heavily pitted landscape littered with stones ranging upward in size from one inch, which Soviet scientists concluded had resulted from either volcanic eruptions or impacting meteoroids. There was no evidence of a thick layer of dust. In addition to photographic equipment, spacecraft also carried two mechanical manipulators to test firmness and density of lunar soil: (1) a rod which was driven into surface with specific force; and (2) a meter which measured soil’s resistance to radiation. Analysis of data indicated that lunar surface could bear manned spacecraft and that soil from 8- to 12-in. depth was similar to medium-density terrestrial soil. Also onboard were a dynograph which tested firmness of lunar surface by recording duration and force of impact impulse, and a radiation meter which revealed that moon’s surface reflected about 25 per cent of electrically-charged particles which struck it. Tass commented on LUNA xm’s successful mission: "There is no doubt now that it is these cosmic stations that can supply the information permitting a new approach to solve such important problems of science as the origin of the solar system, the origin and development of life on other planets, and the internal structure of celestial bodies.” (NYT, 12/25/66, 1, 40; 12/26/66, 19; 12/31/66, 6; AP, Wash. Eve. Star, 12/26/66, A3; 12/27/66, A4; upi, Wash. Post, 12/21/66, Al; 12/31/66, 1,	7)	.	.	.	.	. .	.
U.S. and U.S.S.R. were reported to have reached basic agreement on text of treaty for free and peaceful exploration of moon and outer space. Text would be presented within next two or three weeks for approval of U.N. General Assembly. U.S. was said to have agreed that all countries —not just U.N. members—should be allowed to sign treaty. Communist China, East Germany, North Vietnam, and North Korea would then be free to adhere to it if they chose. (AP, NYT, 11/27/66, 78)
Urgency of NASA decision on post-Apollo program was discussed by Karl Abraham in Philadelphia Evening Bulletin. He noted Saturn V’s potential for solar system exploration and many scientists’ fear of overcommitment to investigation of the moon. Among other factors involved, Abraham said, NASA "must consider how particular programs will affect its farflung field centers and their specialized work . .. some are so highly specialized that a sharp change of direction in rocketry or spacecraft and satellite objectives would tear them apart unless sufficient advance time were allowed for gradual changeovers to the new missions.” (Abraham, Phil. Eve. Bull., 1/17/66; CR, 2/10/66, A704)
T-38 aircraft of M/G Irving H. Branch (usaf), Commander of Flight Test Center, Edwards afb, crashed over Puget Sound when attempting an instrumented approach to Boeing Field, Seattle, during rainy weather. Branch was enroute from Edwards afb; his body was later recovered from Puget Sound by divers. (Seattle Times, 1/6/66, 31) During week of January 3: Representatives of U.S. Dept, of Agriculture’s Plant Quarantine Div. met with NASA’s Planetary Quarantine Committee to discuss handling and disposal of soil and rock samples brought to earth from the moon or other planets. A Dept, of Agriculture spokesman warned that without precautions, insects and microorganisms from outer space could conceivably be brought to earth on returning spacecraft and multiply unchecked in an environment that would not control them. (NYT, 1/9/66, 58)
NASA was considering landing unmanned Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) equipped with an Apollo-type lunar television camera on the moon before the first manned mission, Aviation Week reported. Photographs from the camera, which would be mounted externally and coupled with a scanning device to permit broad coverage, would provide mission planners with information on lunar surface characteristics. (Av. Wk., 1/10/66, 36)
NASA selected Dynatronics, Inc., to provide 18 additional pulse code modulated (Pcm) telemetry decommutator systems for Project Apollo communications under $2.3-million fixed-price contract. Systems would receive, identify, sort, and prepare "real time” and "onboard stored” data. (NASA Release 66-114)
Compania Telefonica Nacionale de Espana (ctne)—the Spanish national telephone company under nasa contract—awarded ITT contract to establish a ground station terminal complex on Grand Canary Island to support communications for U.S. Apollo mission. Stations, equipped with 42-ft. parabolic antenna reflectors, super-cooled low-noise amplifiers, and 10-kw transmitters, would furnish multichannel telephone and telegraph service, (itt Release)
Analysis of NASA lunah orbiteh i’s orbit led to assumption that moon is homogeneous, not layered, Dr. C. L. Goudas of Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories said in an interview with Walter Sullivan of the New York Times. He said its shape—-flattened at the poles with several bulges at the equator and slightly pear-like—was not "dominated by a 'frozen tide.’ ” Gamma ray recordings by U.S.S.R.’s luna x spacecraft indicated similar conclusion; lunar surface lacked emissions typical of granites, which are associated with layering. (Sullivan, NYT, 11/27/66, E7)
U.S. and U.S.S.R. introduced their draft space law treaties at opening session of U.N. Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space’s Legal Subcommittee, meeting in Geneva to discuss peaceful cooperation in exploring the moon and other celestial bodies. U.S. Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg told Subcommittee that although drafts were different in scope, they could be reconciled if there were good will and common purpose to reach agreement. Soviet representative Platon Morozov charged U.S. should not speak of peace in outer space while continuing its "shameful aggressive war on the peaceful people of Vietnam.” (Reuters, NYT, 7/12/66; Wash. Post, 7/13/66, A23)
NASA announced schedule changes in manned Apollo flights because of launch vehicle and spacecraft development problems: second manned flight of an Apollo spacecraft (AS-205), scheduled for spring 1967, was postponed and no new date set; AS-205 prime crew Walter M. Schirra, Donn F. Eisele, and Walter Cunningham became backup crew for AS-204 mission—first manned Apollo flight—scheduled for first quarter of 1967. (nasa Release 66-295)
NASA awarded Honeywell, Inc., a $4.2-million, fixed-price contract to provide six computer complexes to support Apollo command-module and lunar-module simulators at msc and ksc by March 1967. (nasa Release 66-254)
NASA Apollo Lunar Excursion Module (Lem) descent engine, Phase II, test began at Arnold Engineering Development Center, (aedc)
arc’s new Hypervelocity Free Flight Facility would be fully operational by the end of July, nasa announced. "Light-gas guns” would fire free-flying spacecraft models into three wind tunnels. Muzzle velocities up to 20,000 mph against an air stream flowing up to 10,000 mph in the opposite direction would enable models to achieve test speed of 30,000 ,mph, simulating atmosphere reentry flight from moon or planets. (nasa Release 66-189; arc Release 66-10)
General Dynamics Corp. received eight-month, $275,000 msfc contract to investigate concepts of large space structures having possible post-Apollo use. Three structures which could fly as Apollo Applications (Aa) payloads on Saturn launch vehicles would be selected, evaluated, and validated for immediate useful application in space, (msfc Release 66-245)
U.S.S.R.’s luna x completed its 284th orbit around moon and transmitted Communist anthem, "Internationale,” on command from Soviet center of deep space communications. Instruments were functioning normally. (Pravda, 5/10/66, 1, uss-T Trans.)
28-member Legal Subcommittee of the U.N. Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began article-by-article examination of drafts by U.S. and U.S.S.R. for proposed treaty governing exploration of space. U.S. Ambassador to U.N. Arthur J. Goldberg announced that U.S. had agreed to extend negotiations beyond proposal for treaty to ban military use of moon and other celestial bodies to cover "space itself along the lines proposed by the Soviet Union.” Agreed text would be presented to U.N. General Assembly in New York in September. (NYT, 7/22/66, 11)
Dr. Athelstan F. Spilhaus, dean of Univ. of Minnesota Institute of Technology, received patent for an astronomical clock to keep track of the movements of the sun, moon, stars, and tides; provide a perpetual calendar; and show local and world time. Dr. Spilhaus said his clock could aid astronomers and navigators. (Jones, NYT, 5/7/66, 35)
NASA Lunar Orbiter, scheduled to orbit moon in spring 1966, might photograph luna ix to gain perspective dimensions of lunar surface and determine spacecraft’s size and extent of damage caused by landing, the New York Times speculated, luna ix’s landing area, the Ocean of Storms, was not included in original flight plan of 10 regions to be photographed. (NYT, 2/7/66, 4)
Mstislav Keldysh, president of Soviet Academy of Sciences; Alexander Lebedinsky, professor; and Alexander Vinogradov, geochemist, held 216-hr. televised press conference in Moscow on the luna ix mission. Keldysh said U.S.S.R. had mastered the soft-landing technique and was planning more soft-landing missions in 1966 to obtain information on physical conditions on the moon, composition of lunar rock, and variations in lunar temperature. He said the next major challenge would be designing a spacecraft capable of returning men to earth from the moon and called for U.S. "cooperation not competition” in a program for manned lunar landing, luna ix’s mission was "only to photograph the surface of the moon and measure cosmic radiation,” Keldysh said. The full panorama of the lunar surface included 6,000 lines and was transmitted to earth in 100 min. Spacecraft contained no solar batteries. Lebedinsky revealed that luna ix had "shifted between the second and third transmissions of the panorama, and as a result, the inclination of the phototelevision camera changed several degrees, while the camera itself shifted its position several centimeters.” Keldysh added: "It may be that the station landed on an unstable small stone, or perhaps the ground settled slightly. Such a very small deformation could occur because of temperature changes on the moon or a certain mechanical impact by the station itself.” He expressed confidence that the lunar surface could support manned spacecraft. Lebedinsky said luna ix had measured rate of radiation in outer space at 30 millirads a day and that the spacecraft had detected additional radiation on lunar surface—apparently produced by nuclear reactions from cosmic rays hitting moon’s upper layers—but he did not disclose amount. Vinogradov reported that lunar surface was hard, porous, volcanic cracked rock, Dut acknowledged that other areas might be different. Keldysh announced that venus ii and venus hi spacecraft, launched Nov. 12 and Nov. 16, 1965, respectively, were scheduled to approach Venus March 1. (Wash. Post, 2/11/66; Balt. Sun, 2/11/66; Sullivan, NYT, 2/11/66, 17)
surveyor i bounced two to three inches upward on first impact with lurain June 2, jpl announced. According to data returned by 620-lb. spacecraft, signals generated by strain gauges indicated the three shock-absorber legs had all landed simultaneously on a horizontal surface. Eight-inch-diameter circular footpads rebounded clear of surface before settling on moon. Spacecraft exerted pressure of about 0.5 psi on lurain after it came to rest. Pressure of footpads at impact was about 8 psi. (AP, Wash. Post, 7/25/66, A3; Wash. Eve. Star, 1/25/56, A12; AP, NYT, 7/25/66, C3; Tech. Wk, 8/1/66, 9)
"The answer to the housing problem lies on the way to the moon,” technologist and Southern Illinois Univ. research professor Buckminster Fuller told Wolf Von Eckardt of the Washington Post. Much of the complex apparatus used in development of closed ecological systems for long manned space flights could be used in terrestrial housing, Fuller said. He envisioned enclosing the necessary machinery in a "little black box. . . . We are investing $7 billion in it. It weighs 500 pounds. We can probably mass-produce it for $2 a pound. "That means we can give all the things they need foremost in a house —water, heat, cooling and waste regeneration—for $1000. And we can give it to them without tying them down to real estate with its wastefully expensive water pipes and sewers . . . with high-pressure sprays and chemical regeneration, a man can quench his thirst and clean himself for a long time with just a glass of water. "[It] . . . also solved the pollution problem. . . .” (Von Eckardt, Wash. Post, 10/2/66, Gil)
Edgar M. Cortright, NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Space Science and Applications, testifying before the House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Space Sciences and Applications in support of NASA’s FY 1967 authorization, discussed the merits of the Apollo and Surveyor programs: "The scientific advantages of having Surveyors in the program along with Apollo is the ability to sample more sites and to determine what areas of the moon are worth visiting by man, for example, in addition to going to sites that man is not likely to for the next decade or more—up near the poles and certain of the mountain regions. "We would like to help develop this total strategy of exploration of the Moon in a sensible way. We think automated equipment continues to have a role to play. . . . "I think there is nothing we can fly on Surveyor that would improve or even come close to equalling what can be done by the Apollo once it gets there. In other words, bringing a sample back is so much better than doing analyses on the lunar surface.” (Transcript)
Success of U.S.S.R.’s luna ix and luna x missions supported two important conclusions, suggested the New York Times in an editorial: "The Soviet Union is now well ahead of the United States in scientific exploration of the moon; Moscow’s scientists are straining to beat this country in achieving man’s first round-trip to the moon. . . . "But no matter which nation will be first to conquer the moon, it is important to clarify the legal issues arising from this development. There should be general international agreement that the moon is the property of all mankind and not of any one nation . . . [and] is open for research by scientists of all nations. . . .” (NYT, 4/5/66, 36M)
U.S.S.R.’s luna xii was probably less than 100 mi. from moon, reported director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Sir Bernard Lovell. He said: "Last night the signals from tbe probe Were steady and indicated that, contrary to luna x and xi, it was ejected into orbit without rotation. That means that potentially it was a more successful exercise.” (AP, Balt. Sun, 10/27/66)
Defense Electronics, Inc., received a $2,380,000 contract from usaf for telemetry equipment for Apollo airborne tracking aircraft. Firm would supply C-135 trackers with prediction playback monitors and other equipment to provide communications link to Apollo spacecraft prior to insertion into lunar trajectory. (Wash. Post, 4/5/66, C7)
$3,000 block of magnesium used as vibration test fixture for Lunar Excursion Module’s propellant-gaging system brought $28.14 in Los Angeles junk yard. Two trash collectors had diverted block from Apollo project into their disposal truck while emptying trash cans at Giannini Corp., Duarte, Calif. They were booked on suspicion of grand larceny, (upi, Wash. Post, 6/24/66, A6)
Cosmonaut Aleksey Leonov was quoted by Tass as saying that he was in favor of strict international law governing cooperation in space. Through agreement, all stations, equipment, and spacecraft sent to moon or the planets could be available for use by representatives of other states, he noted. "However, all this would be justified only if the moon and the other celestial bodies are used by all treaty participants for peaceful purposes.” (Tass, 10/26/66)
nasa selected Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. and Martin Co. for negotiations of parallel one-year $l-million fixed-price study contracts on integration of experiments and experiments support equipment in space vehicles and spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications (Aa) missions. Companies would define experiment integration work (payload integration in Apollo lunar module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument unit, and S-1VB stages of Saturn IB and Saturn V vehicles.) Contracts would be managed by msfc. (nasa Release 66-137)
Launch from etr of first unmanned Apollo spacecraft, scheduled for Feb. 23, was postponed because of cloudy, uncertain weather that would hamper visual and long-range photographic coverage of liftoff. {NYT, 2/23/66, 20; Stern, Wash. Post, 2/23/66, Al; Hines, Wash. Eve. Star, 2/23/66, A6)
luna ix was launched by U.S.S.R. on a trajectory toward the moon, Tass announced. All systems were functioning normally. Launch was apparent attempt to softland on the lurain. (Pravda, 2/3/66, USS-T Trans.)
luna x completed its 150th orbit of the moon and marked Lenin’s birthday by beaming back to earth the Communist anthem, "Internationale.” (upi, NYT, 4/23/66, 5)
Plans for manned solar astronomical mission to orbit earth in Apollo spacecraft during period of maximum solar activity beginning in 1968 were announced by NASA. Mission objectives would be to acquire high-resolution measurements and observations of structure and behavior of sun above earth’s atmosphere and to test man’s capabilities for conducting astronomical observations in space, msfc would have project and experiment development responsibility, (nasa Release 66-232)
General Precision Equipment Corp. received $8.6-million nasa contract to provide three sets of equipment to modify Apollo simulators at ksc. {WSJ, 11/2/66, 3)
President Johnson sent FY 1967 budget request to Congress including total space budget of $6.8 billion. Of this sum, NASA would receive $5,012 billion (nasa had originally requested $5.58 billion); dod, $1.65 billion; aec, $173.7 million; Environmental Science Services Administration, $27 million; and National Science Foundation, $2.8 million. NASA R&D program was a major area of reduced expenditure with reduction of approximately $186 million (comparedwith FY1966 appropriation) mostly absorbed by the sharp drop in requirements for Project Gemini. With only three flights remaining to be made in FY 1967, the total budget dropped from $226.6 million in FY 1966 to $40.6 million requested for FY 1967. Sum included $19.1 million for the spacecraft and $8.5 million for mission support. There was also a reduction of some $54 million in lunar and planetary exploration and $12 million in physics and astronomy. Funding for Project Apollo increased slightly—from $2,967 billion in FY 1966 to $2,974 billion, including $1.2 billion for spacecraft (as compared with FY 1966’s $1.17-billion level). $100 million requested for Apollo Applications (Aa) program—once considered the single program with any potential for new major funding—was not approved. Major portions of the dod space budget would be spent on development of the Manned Orbiting Laboratory (Mol)—which would be slowed down with no increase in funds over the $150 million allowed in FY 1966; development and launch operations costs of the Titan III launch vehicle; continuation of the reconnaissance and Vela nuclear detection satellite programs; navigational satellite launches; and initial launch of a satellite by the Defense Communications Satellite System, dod budget also provided for initiation of procurement of the FB-111B aircraft and development of a new short-range air-to-surface missile (Sram). aec’s budget allotment for space programs included $78 million for Project Rover; $39.5 million for testing of the Nerva engine system; and $8.2 million for testing of the Snap-8 nuclear reactor. essa’s Tiros weather satellite program would involve expenditures in FY 1967 of $17 million for spacecraft and launchings and approximately $10 million for data acquisition, processing, and archiving. faa’s FY 1967 budget request for $758 million contained $80 million for six more months of supersonic transport research. (Text; Wash. Post, 1/25/66, A10; Schmeck, NYT, 1/25/66, 1; Av. Wk., 1/31/66, 23, 29, 30; M&R, 1/31/66, 25)
Scheduled test of Apollo Launch Escape System (Les) at WSMR was postponed indefinitely due to heavy cloud cover. Countdown for the Little Joe II had proceeded to minus 30 min. [See Jan. 20.] (upi, NYT, 1/19/66, 38)
aec Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg discussed space role of nuclear energy in keynote address at Western Electronic Show and Convention in Los Angeles. In addition to advantages of nuclear propulsion, Dr. Seaborg said Snap (Systems for Nuclear Auxiliary Power) systems offered: (1) independence of sunlight, permitting use in shadow of a planet or moon and at great distances from the sun; (2) reduced atmospheric drag and propellant weight for maintaining low orbits of manned orbiting stations; and (3) larger quantities of electric power. He suggested nuclear power systems assembled on the moon could not only provide heating, cooling, and electric power, but could extract water and minerals and help produce synthetic food. (Text)
Television system on U.S.S.R.’s luna ix, which transmitted first pictures from moon Feb. 3-6, weighed less than 1.5 kgs. (3.3 lbs.), disclosed the Soviet designers of this equipment in an Izvestia interview. Since the TV camera had to "distinguish minute details of the surface and transmit to earth simultaneously the landscape around the spot where it landed,” a miniature Vega photocamera with lens that could "photograph at distances from two meters to infinity without focusing” had been used. First "radio communication session with the moon” began within 4 min. 10 sec. after the soft-landing and first television reportage began within seven hours. Complete panoramic scanning took 100 min. Future probes of moon’s surface would use camera coupled with microscope for minute study of the lurain. (Izvestia, 2/19/66, 1)
After trip from Seal Beach, Calif., aboard usns Pt. Barrow, S-II-F facilities stage—nonflight version of Saturn V/Apollo launch vehicle’s 2nd stage—arrived at ksc for use in testing launch facilities. Stage would be mated with two other facilities stages and an Apollo spacecraft mockup to form the 365-ft.-tall Saturn V launch vehicle. This would mark first time all major components would have been joined in the Saturn V configuration, (msfc Release 66-47)
Hughes Aircraft Co. engineer’s smuggling of a small U.S. flag on nasa’s surveyor I spacecraft which softlanded on the moon June 2 was a breach of discipline and a violation of international space policy, wrote Joshua Lederberg in the Washington Post. ". . . NASA policy requires 'minimum contamination’ so that the moon can remain a useful preserve for the detection of any life that might be transported by, say, meteorites. This calls for 'clean room’ standards during the assembly of spacecraft components. "A bootlegged flag which could not have been subjected to such control for decontamination is a clear violation of a policy to which this country’s honor has been attached and calls for strenuous disciplinary measures to insure the integrity and credibility of purpose of our future exploratory missions.” (Lederberg, Wash. Post, 8/7/66)
nasa might have attempted to send Surveyor spacecraft to the moon in tion Week contended. NASA had wanted to rush Surveyor into launch that would have landed during lunar night rather than preferred daylight opportunity, to ensure that U.S. achieved first soft-landing before U.S.S.R. (Av. Wk., 7/4/66, 15)
New York Times reported hint by Leonid I. Dubrovin, chief of 11th U.S.S.R. Antarctic expedition, broadcast by radio from Mirny Antarctic station, "that the Soviet Union planned to use the Antarctic as a testing ground for manned landings on the moon.” Dubrovin had said fierce Antarctic conditions would test man’s adaptability and scientists could learn much there "that would help man to survive in the desolate conditions of the moon.” (NYT, 5/1/66, 15)
Cosmonaut-pilots would head crews of all spacecraft landing on the moon in the future because landing "cannot be fully trusted to machines,” Soviet Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev predicted in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. Belyayev, who manually landed voskhod ii March 19, 1965, said that two methods of braking were possible: jet engines and use of aerodynamic forces. (Tass, 11/4/66)
All primary mission objectives of first unmanned Apollo Saturn IB mission Feb. 26 were achieved and flight was very satisfactory according to initial evaluation of test results, nasa announced. Guidance and control systems performed well; both S-IB and S-IVB trajectories and velocities were normal and no structural problems were found in either stage or instrument unit. Quality of data received at ground stations was excellent and few losses occurred in expected 1,300 measurements telemetered. All spacecraft systems and subsystems performed as planned with two exceptions: (1) one of the main parachute harness legs failed to sever after landing, thus retaining chute attached to module; and (2) Service Module (Sm) propulsion system exhibited below nominal performance during both firing periods resulting in reentry speed about 500 mph less than 18,500 mph expected, but sufficient to evaluate performance of heatshield for orbital missions. Earth landing system functioned properly to safely recover Cm, and unsevered parachute was recovered for post-mission examination. Spacecraft would be flown to Downey, Calif., for detailed inspection by nasa and naa Apollo officials and tests for improvements, (nasa Proj. Off.; msfc Release 66-51)
More than 1,500 building tradesmen staged one-day strike at ksc to protest nasa’s method of awarding construction contracts. Work on three key Apollo projects was delayed by walkout, which had been called by Brevard (County) Building and Construction Trades Council, but preparations for July 18 Gemini X mission continued uninterrupted, (upi, NYT, 7/14/66, 21)
Soviet proposal for keeping moon free of weapons was presented to U.N. Secretary General U Thant by Ambassador Nikolay T. Fedorenko, head of the Soviet delegation to the U.N. Four principles were suggested as basis for international agreement: "1—The moon and other celestial bodies should be free for exploration and use by all states without any discrimination. All states enjoy freedom of the scientific exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies on an equal basis and in accordance with the basic principles of international law. "2—The moon and other celestial bodies should be used for peaceful purposes only. No military bases and installations including installations of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction should be stationed on the moon and other celestial bodies. "3—The exploration and use of the moon and other celestial bodies should be carried out for the benefit and in the interest of all mankind. They are not subject to appropriation or any territorial claim. "4—In the course of the exploration of the moon and other celestial bodies, the states proceed from the principles of cooperation and mutual assistance and carry on their activities with due account of the respected interests of other states for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security.” Proposal paralleled treaty suggested by President Johnson May 7. (Marder, Wash. Post, 6/1/66, Al)
Sir Bernard Lovell, director of Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, told the press that luna x spacecraft had gone into orbit around the moon, but that "all may not be well” with it. He suggested that luna x was tumbling uncontrollably in orbit around moon at distance of 300 or 400 mi.; this theory evolved after Jodrell Bank detected a series of maneuvers beginning at 12:50 p.m. est—15 min. after Jodrell Bank had first picked up luna x’s signals. Frequency of the signals had begun to decrease, indicating the probe was under the moon’s gravitational pull at a distance of about 2,000 mi.; signals then faded out entirely, suggesting that the retrorockets had been fired and the probe had landed. At that point Lovell said: "We think Luna 10 landed at 1:44 P.M. [est].” Minutes later, however, signals again picked up and the situation became "extremely obscure.” He concluded: "At last hearing our signals could be interpreted as coming from a tumbling spacecraft. We find it difficult to believe that it is meant to be tumbling.” U.S.S.R. had announced luna x’s lunar-orbit mission after March 31 launch. Sir Bernard’s theory came a day before Soviet announcement of mission results [see April 4]. (NYT, 4/4/66, 9; AP, Balt. Sun, 4/4/66; Wash. Post, 4/4/66, Al)
nasa invited aerospace industries to propose definition studies of integrating experiment equipment to be used in spacecraft for manned Apollo Applications missions. Studies would define experiments integration work in the Apollo Lunar Excursion Module, Saturn launch vehicle instrument units, and top stages of Saturn IB and V vehicles; they would include consideration of mission analysis, experiment equipment, installation and integration of equipment, specialized crew requirements, launch facility requirements, tracking, and other support requirements. Two or more firms would be selected for negotiation of parallel nine-month study contracts, (nasa Release 66-14)
U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station reported that U.S.S.R.’s luna xii spacecraft had apparently entered orbit around moon and was transmitting telemetry but no photographic signals. U.S.S.R. had made no official statement since Oct. 22 launch, (upi, NYT, 10/26/66, 10; Wash. Post, 10/26/66, A16)
U.S. gave U.N. proposed treaty on exploration of moon and other celestial bodies and asked that U.N. Outer Space Legal Subcommittee meet July 12 to discuss it. Draft—based on May 7 statement by President Johnson urging treaty to reserve celestial bodies for peaceful purposes— declared such bodies open equally to all countries, subject to claim by none, and off limits to nuclear weapons, weapon testing, military maneuvers, and fortifications. Soviet source said U.S.S.R. had submitted similar treaty earlier in day; text of proposal was not made public [see June 17]. (AP, Wash. Post, 6/17/66, A4)
Two photographs of the moon produced at Jodrell Bank Experimental Station by feeding radio transmissions from luna ix into newspaper telephoto machine were shown on British television. Each picture took eight minutes to receive and was recorded at 100 lines to one inch for finished 10- by 11-in. photo. Sir Bernard Lovell, station director, said in a television interview that photos "seem to destroy the theory that the moon’s surface is covered with dust several feet thick. There may be a few inches of dust, but the pictures tend to confirm the view of the moon’s surface as hard, spongelike pumice stone substance. "It would be perfectly satisfactory for landing not only heavy vehicles but also men.” Lovell pointed out rock-like pinnacles estimated to be 10- to 20-ft. tall; small stones, some less than one inch in diameter; the curved horizon of the moon; and sharp shadows which indicated the sun was casting the shadow. He emphasized, however, necessity of knowing the proper scale before photos could be meaningfully interpreted. Lovell said luna ix had landed in a location which would receive sunlight for 14 days, thereby permitting solar power to replenish its batteries. (Wash. Post, 2/5/66, Al, A6; Sullivan, NYT, 2/5/66, 1, 10)
George C. White, Jr., chief of nasa Hq. Apollo Spacecraft and Vehicle Test Performance Office, was appointed Director of Apollo Reliability and Quality, (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
National Science Foundation and National Foundation for the Advancement of Arts and Humanities urged in comments filed jointly with fcc that satellite system be devised that would "permit the distribution of high-quality programs in the arts, humanities, and sciences to remote areas in the Nation where educational and cultural opportunities are often minimal.” Comments were filed in response to fcc request for suggestions on establishment of comsat facilities by organizations other than Government and communications companies. (AP, Wash. Post, 12/1/66, A18) During November: Two tests important to launch of nasa’s first manned Apollo mission had been successfully completed at msc. First was six-day manned Apollo systems test of spacecraft 008 which was conducted in Space Environmental Simulation Laboratory chamber. Second was entry-egress training in Gulf of Mexico for AS-204 prime and backup crews, (msc Roundup, 11/11/66, 8; naa s&id Skywriter, 11/11/66, 1, 2)
NASA awarded Perkin-Elmer Corp. and Chrysler Corp. nine-month, $250,000 contract extensions to continue evaluating optical experiments for possible future extended Apollo space flights, (nasa Release 66-300)
luna x completed 218th orbit of moon after a total of 120 radio communications periods, Tass announced. Equipment was functioning normally, and radio link was said to be stable. (Tass, 4/30/66)
"Whole towns” on the moon, complete with dome-like buildings linked by tunnels and parks under transparent hoods, might be constructed in 20th century, Soviet architect Nikolay Kolomiyets suggested in Krasnaya Zvezda. Kolomiyets said the moon town should provide a safe shelter for its inhabitants and be attractive as well. Best construction material would probably be lunar rocks. "It can be expected that after treatment with alkalis, lunar rocks can be used to build walls and roofs by pouring, just as they are made on earth by pouring concrete.” (Tass, 10/29/66)
Clarence C. Gay, Jr., Acting Director of Gemini Test, became Chief, Apollo Spacecraft Test, Apollo Test Directorate at nasa Hq. (nasa Ann., 11/18/66)
Fire in altitude chamber used to simulate environment of Apollo Command Module (Cm) at AiResearch Manufacturing Div. Torrance (Calif.) Facility severely damaged Apollo Environmental Control System, which had undergone 480 hrs. 37 min. of a 500-hr.-duration qualification test. Investigating board concluded that probable cause of ignition had been failure of electrical heater tape installed as part of the test set-up, and that some "ground test equipment and materials used . . . were not suitable for application in the vacuum aijd 5 psia 100% oxygen environments.” Board recommended improvement in selection of "some materials used in the Environmental Control System and Apollo Command Module” and pointed to a "potential fire hazard from arcing or direct short circuits.” (Senate, Hearing, Apollo Accident, Pt. 1, 2/7/67, 32-4)
Army Corps of Engineers had established Extra-Terrestrial Research Agency, headed by geologist Alice S. Allen, to coordinate studies of lunar surface in anticipation of moon exploration requirements. Comprehensive study of such surface properties as soil density, light reflectivity, and thermal and electrical conductivity, Corps of Engineers believed, would permit deductions about problems of "walking, digging, and moving of surface loads . . . providing shelter, water supply and necessary construction materials and tools.” (Henry, Wash. Eve. Star, 4/27/66, C3) o Properly managed, the value of the returns from Government investment in research and technology outweighed by "orders of magnitude” the investment itself, Dr. Chalmers W. Sherwin, deputy director (research and technology), Defense Department Research and Engineering, told a meeting in Chicago jointly sponsored by the Patent Law Assn, of Chicago and the Chicago Assn, of Commerce and Industry. Sherwin said the value of R&D had been confirmed by "Project Hindsight,” a study covering such systems as the Mark 46 torpedoes, Minuteman II, Hound Dog, Polaris, Sergeant, and Lance missiles. "We are not sure whether good ideas attract 'good5 (that is, flexible) money, or if innovative organizations just 'happen’ to always have such money. Available technology money simply must be spread all over the place in little pockets near the need. It is not the ivory towers which need flexible money the most, it is rather the organizations heavily involved in real problems— particularly in the early stages of development of new systems.” (Text)
U.S.S.R. launched two unmanned spacecraft, luna xiii, on mission to study the "moon and its close environments,” was following trajectory close to calculated one. cosmos Cxxxvii, carrying instruments for further investigation of outer space, was in orbit with 1,672-km. (1,032-mi.) apogee; 225-km. (140-mi.) perigee; 104-min. period; and 49° inclination, (upi, Wash. Post, 12/22/66, A3; Anderson, NYT, 12/22/66, 20)
President Johnson’s statement on surveyor i’s successful soft-landing on the moon: "Overnight the eyes of Surveyor I have become the eyes of the world on the Moon. Another exciting chapter in the peaceful exploration of the universe is open for men to read and share. . . . "The odds against achieving full success in such a difficult mission on the first flight were understandably great. This moment of triumph for all who have participated in the Surveyor project has been well earned, for back of Surveyor’s perfect performance on this first flight are years of hard work, painstaking care, and brilliant engineering. "Today our Nation salutes the highly deserving team of scientists, engineers, technicians, and managers—in Government, industry, and the universities—who have a vision and the skills to pursue it successfully. "As the day approaches when men land on the Moon, it is of the greatest importance that we agree to exchange openly all information that could affect their safety and welfare. It is equally important that we preserve these regions for peaceful, scientific activities. I welcome the constructive approach of the Soviet statement of May 31 on a treaty I have proposed to cover these matters and hope that progress can be made rapidly.” (Pres. Doc., 6/6/66, 728)
LUNA x had detected electrons with energies higher than cosmic radiation, Tass reported: "Data have been obtained which may be interpreted as evidence of the existence in the near-lunar space of fluxes of electrons with energies of tens of thousands of electron volts. These fluxes are 70 to 100 times more intense than the cosmic ray background. Possibly, this phenomenon is due to the earth’s magnetic 'tail.’ Later measurements will permit more positive conclusions on the radiation conditions near the moon.” In addition, preliminary data analysis showed that intensity of the moon’s magnetic field was "somewhat above the level of magnetic fields in free interplanetary space” and that meteorite "particle density” near the moon was higher than in "interplanetary space.” upi reported that U.S. scientists, including Dr. James A. Van Allen, State Univ. of Iowa, believed radiation observed by LUNA X was either the earth’s comet tail or a similar feature produced by the moon itself. Reported level of radiation would be no threat to manned operations near the moon, they said. (Tass, 4/9/66; upi, NYT, 4/10/66, 79; AP, Wash. Sun. Star, 4/10/66, A6)
Flight plan for Lunar Orbiter I, scheduled for launch between Aug. 9 and Aug. 13, had been changed to shift trajectory for mission so photographic spacecraft would pass over surveyor i twice. Stereographic photos, with resolution down to three feet, could thus be obtained. First seven areas selected for Lunar Orbiter photography remained unchanged and included examples of all major types of lurain to permit assessment of suitability for Apollo manned landing missions, (nasa Release 66-193)
NASA announced a change in sequence of two Apollo/Saturn IB launches scheduled for late 1966: AS-202 mission was rescheduled to follow AS-203 mission to "provide additional time for checkout of the Apollo spacecraft to be flown in . . . AS-202.” AS-203 would test Saturn V 3rd stage (S-IVB) and verify that orbital operations features of the liquid hydrogen propulsion system were satisfactory, (nasa Release 66-78)
nasa had eliminated final three Surveyors because of good results from Ranger series, surveyors i and n, and lunar ORHITERs i and ii. It had been determined that five remaining Surveyor spacecraft would provide necessary additional information about the moon to support Apollo manned lunar landing mission, (nasa Release 66-318)
Photographic proof that two clouds of "cosmic rubble”' were orbiting the earth in the same path as the moon was announced by Lockheed Missiles & Space Co. engineer J. Wesley Simpson. The "rubble” might have come from all over the universe and could offer clues to the earth’s origin, solar winds, and the possibility of life in outer space. Although photographic images were too faint to be reproduced on papeT, they were visible on negatives and when projected on a smooth white surface, (upi, NYT, 9/1/66, 24) During August: Dr. Raymond L, BisplinghofF, head of mit’s Dept, of Aeronautics and Astronautics and Special Consultant to NASA Administrator, wrote in Air Force and Space Digest that there appeared to be widespread lack of public understanding that aeronautical and space developments might have a profound effect on transformation of society: "It is not so much the possession of the new technologies . . . that counts. Of more importance are the quickened spirits, the sharpened intellects, and the developed resources that can permeate the whole fabric of a society.” (AF/SD, 8/66, 86-7)
State Dept, disclosed that on May 26 U.S.S.R. had given U.S. photos taken by luna ix after it softlanded on the moon Feb. 3. (upi, NYT, 6/10/66, 8)
AEC Chairman Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg predicted at Univ. of Texas lecture that if man decided to colonize the moon or planets, he would need nuclear energy to make the environments habitable for human beings and large nuclear reactors to provide "planet conditioning”—an outer space version of air conditioning. In addition, reactors could furnish power "to extract water from the rock, to help produce synthetic food and to extract minerals and other materials from the surface.” Dr. Seaborg said he foresaw in the more immediate future the use of nuclear power plants on manned orbiting laboratories: "... it is desirable to operate these stations at the relatively low altitudes of between 100 and 200 nautical miles. For these low orbits the smaller exposed area of nuclear power systems results in greater reductions in the atmospheric drag—and in the pounds of propellant required to keep the station in its assigned orbit. An unmanned scientific or defense system which has to operate close to the Earth will similarly have the advantage of low atmospheric drag if nuclear power systems are used.” (Text; AEC Release s-<5-66)
msc awarded $70,000 contract to Rodana Research Corp. to develop emergency medical kits that would "satisfy all inflight and training requirements for the Apollo Command Module and the Lunar Excursion Module.” Two training units would be delivered for each flight, in addition to one mock-up and six prototype models; they would contain loaded injectors, tablets, capsules, ointment, inhalers, adhesives, and compressed dressings, (msc Release 66-8)
NASA and USN completed an agreement calling for studies by U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office to define a series of experiments aimed at enhancing oceanographic and marine-technology research from manned orbiting spacecraft. Experiments would be considered for use in NASA Apollo Applications earth-orbiting missions and would employ existing or modified Apollo hardware, (nasa Release 66-6)
Apollo Spacecraft Lem Adapter (Sla) was transported by helicopter from Tulsa to msc for series of vibration and acoustics tests in conjunction with other Apollo spacecraft modu’es and a Saturn IB instrument unit. (msc Roundup, 5/27/66, 1)
Lee R. Scherer, manager of nasa’s Lunar Orbiter program, in interview with Seattle Times reporter Robert L. Twiss, expressed confidence that the Boeing-built spacecraft could help resolve many unanswered questions about the moon. With funding and nasa approval, Lunar Orbiters equipped with devices that could be deployed to the moon could be launched in 1969, yielding valuable scientific information, Scherer said. "We could gain substantial information about other areas of the moon than the site chosen for manned landing.” (Twiss, Seattle Times, 5/12/66)
President Johnson sent a telegram to Nikolay Podgorny, Chairman, Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, U.S.S.R., on the success of luna ix: "You and the people of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics are to be congratulated for the great success of Luna 9. Your accomplishment is one that can benefit all mankind. And all mankind applauds it. Your scientists have made a major contribution to man’s knowledge of the moon and of space.” (Pres. Doc., 2/7/66, 166)
NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Tracking and Data Acquisition, Gerald M. Truszynski, testified before the Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences: "To provide effective support of flight projects, NASA has established a worldwide network of tracking and data acquisition stations. . . . This network, at the present time, consists of ground stations which are operational or under construction at 28 locations. These stations are located in the United States and 16 foreign countries and territories. They represent a total capital investment of over $600 million and are operated by more than 2,500 highly trained NASA, contractor, and foreign national personnel. . ... "Many of the stations being used for Gemini support will also be used for Apollo. Capabilities are being added at these stations while other stations are being established. The network for support of Apollo missions . . . will consist of 10 fixed land stations with 30-foot antennas, three stations with 85-foot antennas, 1 transportable station, 5 instrumentation ships, and 8 instrumentation aircraft. In addition, three 85-foot antenna stations normally used for deep space missions will be used for support of Apollo. . . . "Our efforts are directed toward having the network fully qualified for lunar mission support in 1967.” (Testimony; NASA Auth. Hearings, 383, 387)
msfc Director Dr, Wernher von Braun named Dr. Jerry C. McCall to organize and manage the Experiments and Applications Office—msfc’s portion of Apollo Applications; Stan Reinartz would assist him. (msfc Release 65-307)
nasa’s Nimbus II meteorological satellite had made the first well-substantiated observation from space of a volcanic eruption when it recorded the eruption of Iceland’s Surtsey volcano in 1966, U.S. Geological Survey reported. “During August 1966, the Nimbus II satellite was in a near-polar orbit and passed over the island the day after the eruption began with its infrared sensing devices working. “The Surtsey eruption in its entirety was recorded as a minute black spot on infrared images during more than eight orbital sweeps of the Nimbus II satellite—first on August 20 and definitely identified as late as October 3.” Nimbus II was participating in a three-dimensional study of Surtsey by scientists from U.S. Geological Survey and afcrl using infrared survey techniques. Experiment marked first time volcanic heat had been monitored almost simultaneously from ground, aircraft, and space. Scientists believed the ability to measure heat radiation could be applied to studies of volcanoes on the earth, moon, and planets, (usgs Release, 7/30/67; Clark, NYT, 7/30/67, 41)
Second Saturn V booster’s 1st and 2nd stages were mechanically mated at ksc in preparation for AS-502 unmanned mission to test Apollo spacecraft’s reentry heat shield. Booster’s 3rd stage was added July 13; instrument unit, July 14. (ksc Proj Off; Marshall Star, 7/12/67, 1)
l/g Nikolay P. Kamanin, military commander of Soviet manned spaceflight program, hinted in Zemlya o Vselennaya that U.S.S.R. would use Soyuz-type spacecraft for manned lunar landing. He made no direct mention of Soyuz I spacecraft [see April 23-24]—believed to be heaviest Soviet space vehicle ever launched—but said “payloads of more than 15 tons have already been put into orbit.” These payloads, he said, could soft-land on moon from lunar orbit. (AP, B Sun, 5/10/67)
LaRC selected Northrop Ventura Co. to negotiate .|3-million contract to conduct research flight-test program using an all-flexible parawing. Experiments would be performed at various scales with remotely controlled unmanned vehicles to establish a body of parawing technology which could be potentially adapted to manned spacecraft recovery systems. NASA’s goal was to extend recovery capabilities for the AA Program command module (cm) to include land landings in the early 1970’s. Northrop, relying on design criteria gained in earlier LaRC parawing research programs, would evaluate parawings in the 200-600-lb and 5,000-lb payload capacities, including flight tests, before designing 15,000-lb payload system required for the Apollo cm. (nasa Release 67-134)
Planned launch of Apollo 4/Saturn V for Oct. 17 was postponed until early November, according to NASA spokesmen at etr, reported upi. Troubles with ground support equipment had stalled countdown rehearsal. Once rehearsal was finished, engineers would evaluate results and set date for unmanned launch, (upi, W Post, 10/11/67, A18)
msc awarded Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Co. a $3.4-million, costplusfixed-fee contract for development and testing of an improved fuel cell power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-33)
msc awarded Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. a $97,000, cost-plus-fixed-fee study contract to evaluate Beta fiber, a noncombustible fabric, for possible use in Apollo spacecraft and crew systems equipment, (nasa Release 67—90)
NASA’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was still functioning after transmitting over 11,000 photos to earth, jpl’s scientist Leonard Jaffe said in Cal Tech lecture. Surveyor I mission had been officially terminated July 21, 1966, after spacecraft’s battery suffered a sudden dip in voltage. (LA Herald-Examiner, 2/1/61)
nasa announced Boeing Co. had been awarded incentive fee of 81,811,611 for two missions—Lunar Orbiter IV, 81,061,111; Lunar Orbiter V, 8750,500—completing performance fee portions of Boeing contract and totaling 86,809,053 in such awards for all five Lunar Orbiters. Previous incentive awards—Lunar Orbiter 1, 81,995,312; Lunar Orbiter II, $1,948,725; Lunar Orbiter III, $1,053,405-—had been earned by Boeing. After initial goal to photograph potential moon landing sites had been achieved by first three Lunar Orbiters, NASA’s contract modification set a new goal of more advanced scientific missions for Lunar Orbiter IV and V; Boeing could earn through outstanding performance remaining award fees not earned on previous flights. Modified contract provisions still recognized amounts of original Lunar Orbiter IV and V award fees. nasa’s Incentive Award Fee Board for Lunar Orbiter noted that Lunar Orbiter IV had photographed moon’s “entire front,” and Lunar Orbiter V had completed photography of “opposite side.” (nasa Release 67285)
nasa awarded Carco Electronics Co. a $692,000 contract to design, fabricate, install, and check out a dynamic test stand for prototype Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) control moment gyro system. Installation at LaRC was scheduled for completion by spring 1968. (nasa Release 67-41)
ksc awarded General Electric Co. a $7.7-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract modification for additional Apollo engineering support services. Modification, effective through Sept. 30, 1967, increased total value of original contract to $49 million, (nasa Release 67-158)
Moscow Aviation Institute professor Feliks Zigel had called for a “joint effort of all the scientists of the world,” to determine the nature of unidentified flying objects (ufos), according to Soviet press agency Novosti. Group of which he was a member had had 200 reports of sightings, Zigel said. Typical of these was “a luminous orange-colored crescent flying with its outward bend forward. Its surface is only a little duller than that of the moon. The horns of the crescent throw out jets, sometimes with sparks. The outer contour of the crescent is sharp and the inner contour blurred and wavy.” The main task, Zigel asserted, was to organize a systematic study of the phenomena from astronomical and meteorological observatories to determine whether the objects were of protoplasmic or extraterrestrial origin. “Unfortunately, certain scientists both in . . . [U.S.S.R. and U.S.] deny the very existence of the problem instead of helping to solve it. . . . The U.F.o. phenomenon is a challenge to mankind. It is the duty of scientists to take up this challenge, to disclose the nature of the u.F.O. and to establish the scientific truth.” (Kamm, NYT, 12/10/67, 70)
President Johnson told White House news conference he was “very hopeful” of landing men on the moon by 1970, but did not think “there is any guarantee that we will at all.” The President noted that a manned lunar landing was “a very difficult undertaking. I think it has been a very close question since the original target date was set.” (PD, 3/13/67, 419)
nasa’s Surveyor I spacecraft, which softlanded on the moon June 2, 1966, was reactivated on the lunar surface for 12 hrs to transmit data on the motion of the moon. JPL said the new data would be used to help “refine the Moon’s distance from the Earth, its position in orbit at a given time, and other elements of its velocity and motion.” (SBD, 1/11/67, 42)
Water might have played an important role in shaping the lunar surface, Dr. Harold C. Urey, Univ. of California physicist, told National Academy of Sciences. As evidence to support his theory of the former existence of “lakes” on the lunar surface, Dr. Urey showed spacecraft photos of the moon’s surface in which material had filled in depressions as though it were free-flowing. He also cited carbon-rich meteorites which seemed to be fragments of ancient lake beds. Dr. Urey believed many, if not all, the stony meteorites were fragments dislodged from the moon by impacting objects such as iron meteorites. As further evidence of water action, he noted the presence of meteorites within which numerous founded fragments were embedded which appeared to have been shaped by frictional effects within flowing material. A body much smaller than the moon would not have had sufficient gravity for this flow effect, Dr. Urey argued. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/25/67,23)
New York Times commented on Apollo 204 Review Board’s final report on Jan. 27 flash fire: “Two months ago, on the basis of the incomplete evidence then available, we suggested that the Apollo catastrophe had taken place because ‘many men miscalculated—grossly.’ The official report . . . suggests that that conclusion was too kind . . . [since] the report convicts those in charge of Project Apollo of incompetence and negligence. “The core of the problem is indicated in the board’s fifth finding: ‘Those organizations responsible for the planning, conduct and safety of this test failed to identify it as being hazardous. Contingency preparations to permit escape or rescue of the crew from an internal command module fire were not made.’ “How could those in charge of the test have ‘failed to identify it as being hazardous?’ The three astronauts had been put into what even a high school chemistry student would know was a potential oxygen incendiary bomb, one needing only a spark to initiate catastrophe. . . . But at Cape Kennedy, in the report’s words, ‘No procedures for this type of emergency had been established either for the crew or for the spacecraft pad work team.’ “The incredible complacency thus revealed overshadows even the other disgraceful and disheartening findings of the review board. . . . And as the record of incompetence and careless work—devastating in its impact—is recited in the report, one wonders how many of the previous manned space flights succeeded rather than how the Apollo tragedy occurred. . . .” (AIT, 4/11/67, 44M)
House completed general debate on NASA FY 1968 authorization bill (H.R. 10340) and was scheduled to resume discussion of bill June 27 when amendments would be considered and final vote taken. During debate Rep. Delbert L. Latta (R-Ohio) criticized the $444.7 million recommended by Committee on Science and Astronautics for the Apollo Applications (aa) program: “. . . we could spend [that money] toward research and possible cure of cancer, stroke, and heart disease, rather than some nebulous undefined program that will take place when—and I emphasize this point—and after we get to the moon. This money is to be spent on hardware after we get to the moon. No one knows when we are going to get there . . . [and] if we spend this money perfecting these vehicles and this hardware today, it might be out of date when we get to the moon. . . .” Rep. Olin Teague (D-Tex.), Chairman of House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Subcommittee on Manned Space Flight, defended the 8444.7-million recommendation. “The manned space flight program—Apollo, Apollo applications and advanced manned missions—drives the Apollo effort into its final phases and begins the work of realizing benefits for man on earth. It supports national security, fosters national growth, expands knowledge, and retains options for the future at a cost the country can well afford. To delay this program is, in effect, to cancel it. Such a decision would put the space plum in the hands of the Soviet Union. . . .” (nasa lar V/68; OR, 6/22/67, H7782, H7797)
Bistatic radar detection—experimental technique for mapping celestial bodies by bouncing signals off them from an orbiting spacecraft—had been used successfully to map a portion of the lunar surface, Stanford Univ. Center for Radar Astronomy scientists Dr. G. L. Tyler, V. R. Eshleman, G. Fjeldbo, H. T. Howard, and A. M. Peterson reported in Science, Radar waves emitted Oct. 12, 1966, from an antenna on nasa’s Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft had reached earth as two signals: one directly, and one after being reflected by the moon. Both underwent different shifts in frequency. From a measurement made on the ground scientists were able to tell the direction from the spacecraft to the site on the moon. Other measurements related to the same site enabled them to triangulate the position. (Science, 1/Y4J61, 193-5)
The moon is not a dead body, but a living, breathing organism,” Tass reported following successful completion of lunar surface studies by U.S.S.R.’s Luna XIII. Prof. Nikolay Kozyrev’s 1964 claim that Aristarchus crater had smoke, gas, or dust rising from it had been confirmed by observations from earth of possible lunar volcanoes or eruptions of lunar dust; results of lunar-surface studies; a “special glow” discovered by Pulkovo Observatory near Kepler crater; and “manifestation of moon’s geological life,” recorded in 1966. (upi, NYT, 1/3/67, 10)
NASA’s Mariner IV, launched Nov. 28, 1964, after 1,014 days of flight, reached its closest approach to earth at 29.1 million mi (46.9 million km). (nasa Proj Off) commands to turn its transmitter to low power. Spacecraft telemetry indicated that all systems were operational. The Surveyor V midcourse correction was accomplished at 21:45 Edt Sept, 8, Immediately after the correction, the pressure in the helium supply tank was determined to be decreasing, indicating that the regulating valve did not make a positive closure. Correction of leak was not possible; a descent strategy was developed to overcome the resultant degradation of the vernier engine retrograde capability. Surveyor V softlanded on the moon at 20:46:38 edt on Sept. 10. The landing site was in the Sea of Tranquility at approximate coordinates 23.19°E, 1.52°N, some 18 mi from the target point. The spacecraft took 200- and 600-line pictures of the lunar surface and conducted an alpha backscattering experiment. At lunar sunset, 6:40 am edt, Sept. 24, 18,006 high-quality lunar photographs had been obtained (more than the combined totals from Surveyors / and III). The alpha-backscat-tering instrument had operated for 83 hours on the lunar surface, providing excellent data on the relative abundance of chemical elements in lunar material. To optimize the conditions for lunar-night survival, the spacecraft was operated for short periods at 2%-hr intervals, using compartment heaters, until the battery charge was down to 30 ampere hours, about 4-6 days after lunar sunset. The spacecraft then would be placed in hibernation for the remainder of the lunar night. The vernier engine erosion experiment was conducted at 01.38 edt on Sept, 13, to obtain information on effects of impingement of a high velocity jet-gas stream on the lunar surface. TV pictures were taken of the area under study before and after vernier engine firing. Initially no significant erosion was noted, but follow-on operations with low sun angle photographs and shadow progression studies revealed a crater-like depression under vernier engine number 3 which had not been visible at the higher sun elevations. Surveyor V accomplished all mission objectives. Before touchdown, radar reflectivity data were obtained; touchdown dynamics data were determined at landing time (bearing strength of lunar surface as the ultimate objective). Thermal data were obtained (accumulation of - data throughout the mission was the ultimate objective). The Surveyor program was managed by JPL under ossa direction. Hughes Aircraft Co., under contract to JPL, designed and built the Surveyor spacecraft. Tracking and communications were the responsibility of jPL-operated Deep Space Network, (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67—227; B Sun, 9/11/67; AP, W Star, 9/25/67; Hines, W Star, 9/29/67; W Post, 9/14/67; O’Toole, W Post, 9/30/67; Clark, NYT, 9/30/67)
First two Apollo spacesuits incorporating changes recommended by NASA’s Apollo 204 Review Board were scheduled to arrive at msc in early September for thermo-vacuum and compatibility testing. New suit, designated A-7L, was an improved version of the original A-6L suit. Changes, primarily replacing flammable materials with nonflammable or low-flammability materials, included substitution of: (1) Beta fabric, a nonflammable fiberglass cloth, for Nomex, a high-temperature nylon, in outside layer; (2) Nomex for a more flammable nylon inner layer; and (3) fire-resistant Kapton/Beta fiberglass insulation for aluminized Mylar-Dacron insulation. In addition to its greater fire-resistant properties, spacesuit, which was white rather than blue, was more comfortable and mobile than A-6L. It would be used in all manned Apollo missions during prelaunch and launch phases, and reentry. First production model of spacesuit, manufactured by International Latex Corp.’s Government and Industrial Div. under msc contract, was scheduled for mid-October delivery, (nasa Release 67—222)
msc selected naa’s Rocketdyne Div. to negotiate $5-million, costplusfixedfee contract for design, development, and qualification of a backup injector for Apollo Lunar Module (lm) ascent engine. Contract would provide initially for design feasibility and development testing with provision for delivery of four production injectors if required. Two of the injectors would be used in ground testing at wsmr and remaining two would be held for possible use in flight engines. NASA said present injector, which was being built by Bell Aerospace Corp., was causing unstable combustion in engine chamber and excessive erosion of ablative thrust chamber. Bell was attempting to correct the deficiencies, but “it was decided to develop an injector of a different design in the event the problems cannot be corrected.” (nasa Release 67—207)
Expanded memory units for tracking facility computers of the Apollo lunar landing program had been added by NASA as a modification to its fixed price contract with the Sperry-Rand Corp. The work would be performed at Sperry-Rand’s Univac Defense Systems Div., St. Paul, Minn., which would expand existing memory bank units for digital data processing systems from a storage capacity of 32,000 to 48,000 words. The systems would be installed in ground stations and aboard ships in the worldwide tracking network for Apollo flights. Work would be performed under the direction of gsfc. (nasa Release 67-246)
Injectors for Apollo Lunar Module’s ascent engine had performed in over 100 test firings at Rocketdyne Div.’s laboratory near Los Angeles, the company reported. Injectors had returned automatically to stable combustion after explosive charge was set off to deliberately create rough combustion in several tests. They were developed as backup to the original injectors after rough combustion was noted in test firings. Three designs would be continued through feasibility testing; then the best design would be chosen for development. (Rocketdyne Release)
Lunar Orbiter III, launched Feb. 4, had sent full photographic coverage of six primary Apollo sites west of 20° east longitude and partial coverage, including high-resolution photographs, of six remaining sites in east. One objective had been to photograph a landed Surveyor with sufficient resolution to detect the spacecraft. NASA-appointed study group established location of image on Lunar Orbiter photographs that fitted all Surveyor l identification criteria. (NASA Proj Off)
Technology Week editorial criticized Los Angeles Times editor Marvin Miles’ accusation that Jan. 27 Apollo accident was caused in large part by NASA’s shortsightedness and that NASA was trying to hide its negligence. “Mr. Miles discusses the hatch hazard and NASA’s failure to provide an explosive hatch and its failure to develop a fire suppression system. Then comes the ringing finale . . . ‘The nation should be told the whole truth.’ “It is our impression that the agency is trying valiantly to come up with just such information and we don’t understand the implication of a cover-up.” Editorial noted that in the past NASA had often been criticized for being too stringent and that despite all precautions, “something somewhere went wrong. . . . “We think the agency’s standard of conduct has been high. Its statement before Congress was a frank and honest appraisal of the fact that, despite very strong efforts, somehow it had failed to take the steps to 324-801 O—69----6	71 protect against the unlikely chain of circumstances that led to disaster.” (Coughlin, Tech Wk, 3/13/67, 50)
New York Times commented on congressional cuts in nasa’s FY 1968 budget: “The Senate, ignoring the most obvious of all opportunities to cut nonessential spending, has not only matched the $4.5 billion the House voted for space excursion but tacked on nearly $100 million more to start new programs after the first Americans land on the moon. The certainty that another huge space appropriation will come out of conference on Capitol Hill adds special interest to the fact that twice recently the leading space scientist of the Soviet Union, Prof. Leonid Sedov, has publicly stressed the importance of large-scale international cooperation for manned flights beyond the moon. . . . Now that Professor Sedov has opened the door, the Administration has an opportunity to begin diplomatic explorations to see if the Russians really are serious about replacing senseless rivalry in space with rational international cooperation.” {NYT, 10/7/67, 28) Launches of military espionage spacecraft dominated U.S. space program, Soviet scientists Dr. V. Denisov and F. Soluyanov charged in Krasnaya Zvezda. According to the scientists, of 455 U.S. spacecraft launched by mid-1967, 346 were military satellites which the Pentagon “proposed to use . . . for reconnaissance on a so-called real-time scale, followed by an immediate transmission of information.” Although U.S. “continues to persist that its aspirations are the peaceful utilization of space,” they said, officials “do not hide the fact that NASA builds the scientific-technological foundation for the development of military-space facilities . . . [while dod] finances and controls the planning ... of space armament.” (Miles, PInq, 10/8/67,13C)
President Johnson’s message to Congress on the FY 1968 budget said in part: “In 1961, this Nation resolved to send a manned expedition to the moon in this decade. Much hard work remains and many obstacles must still be overcome before that goal is met. Yet, in the last few years we have progressed far enough that we must now look beyond our original objective and set our course for the more distant future . . . we have no alternative unless we wish to abandon the manned space capability we have created. “This budget provides for the initiation of an effective follow-on to the manned lunar landing. We will explore the moon. We will learn to live in space for months at a time. Our astronauts will conduct scientific and engineering experiments in space to enhance man’s mastery of the environment. . . .” The President recommended that nasa proceed with the Voyager program for an unmanned landing on Mars in 1973 and continue “other unmanned investigations nearer the earth. . . . “These new ventures are the result of careful planning and selectivity,” Mr. Johnson said. “We are not doing everything in space that we are technologically capable of doing ... we are choosing those projects that give us the greatest return on our investment. . . .” (Text, CR, 1/24/67, S755)
NASA announced it had asked Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp. to deliver second Lunar Module {LM-2) in unmanned configuration, changing earlier plan for manned configuration. With the change, NASA could provide a backup for the Apollo V launch scheduled for early 1968 without a wait for modifications. If backup for LM-2 was not needed, manned launch would make use of LM-2 at later date, (nasa Release 67-266; Transcript)
At MSC the TRW Systems Group had received $10.7-million NASA contract extension to perform spacecraft analysis for Apollo, including studies, technical fact-finding, and investigations for systems in Command, Service, and Lunar Modules. Contract extension would carry through June 1968 and increased total cost of contract to $65.5 million, (msc Release 67-66)
Lunar Orbiter III continued transmitting photos of the lunar surface [see Feb. 8-28]. On March 2—during 149th orbit—final photographic readout was interrupted when film failed to advance in the camera system. Efforts to clear the jammed film and continue readout were unsuccessful. Photographic data had been received on all but 29 of 211 frames, including six of the 12 primary Apollo landing sites and 29 of 31 secondary areas, nasa Hq. program and project officials and LaRC engineers would make an on-site analysis of telemetry time histories and engineering tapes at jpl to determine exact cause of failure. (nasa Proj Off; NASA Release 67-46)
Univ. of Iowa professor Dr. James A. Van Allen, writing in Science, warned against “abandoning in situ study of the planets to the Soviet Union.” Citing important contributions made by unmanned planetary probes, he noted that intelligible telemetry signals had been received from Mariner IV from ranges as great as 320 million km and that the spacecraft was still operating properly 36 mo after launch. Entire Mariner V mission, he said, “was conducted with such precision and competence as to draw cheers from even the most hardened professionals.” Although successful Mariner missions had been accomplished at a cost of less than 2% of NASA budget, Congress had failed to provide for preparatory work for any specific planetary mission beyond Mariner Mars ’69, he said. “Even more devastating is the reluctance of NASA to forcefully request December IS: The Nuclear Rocket Development Station at Jackass Flats, Nevada, as the NEftVA nuclear rocket reactor, NRX-A6, is operated at or above design power of 1,100 m energy (55,000-lb thrust) for 60 min. adequate funding for such work . . . despite the existence of well-conceived programs of great scientific potential. . . . The basic technology is available, and a rich diversity of feasible experiments has been proposed. . . .” Despite evidence that U.S.S.R.’s planetary exploration plans were both ambitious and increasingly competent, he said, U.S, “is now allowing its own high competency in planetary exploration to decay. . .	(Science, 12/15/67) The New York Times later commented: “Professor Van Allen is en* tirely right in his complaint . . . that [U.S.] is spending a ridiculously small sum ... on planetary exploration by unmanned rockets. “. . . the cost-effectiveness in scientific terms of the nation’s planetary program is far greater than that of the Apollo program for a manned flight to the moon, the nearly bottomless well into which the vast majority of NASA’s funds are now going. The existing allocation of funds is scientifically irrational, explicable principally in terms of the propaganda and public relations returns envisaged from ‘winning’ the moon race.” (NYT, 12/19/67,46)
msfc awarded McDonnell Douglas Corp. a $496,024 contract to study advanced versions of Saturn S—IVB orbital workshop. Study would explore concepts for a follow-on workshop for the Uprated Saturn I and several more sophisticated versions for the Saturn V, with initial emphasis on uses of the stage in Apollo Applications (aa) program. (msfc Release 67-145) 324-801 0—69----14	199
The Nation’s press commented on photos transmitted by Lunar Orbiter V. New York Times: “Orbiter 5 is currently adding some enduring contributions to mankind’s cultural heritage as photographic by-products of the space effort. “Some of the close-up pictures of the moon have been among the wildest, most disordered and most surrealistic scenes ever viewed by human eyes. Yet its distant views of the far side of the moon convey a sense of desolate tranquillity, of peace achieved after many storms. “This new art form has been produced by machines hundreds of thousands and millions of miles away, in realms where men have never been. Yet many of these pictures have far more power to move than much of the output of contemporary artists. . . .” {NYT, 8/13/67,10E) Washington Evening Star: “The pictures of the moon we have been getting back from our assorted orbiting cameras have been fine and fascinating, but the most interesting of all has turned out to be the picture of the earth from the distance of the moon. “This is natural enough: self-portraits are always the best portraits, especially from the point of view of the sitter. “But the thing about this self-portrait is the inescapable conclusion that the earth is really a rather lovely place, when seen from 214,806 miles away____” (W Star, 8/18/67)
First aerial drop in test series to develop and qualify Earth Landing System (els) for heavier Block II Apollo spacecraft was conducted by Northrop Ventura at El Centro, Calif. Tests were studying the use of a two-stage reefing system for three main els chutes and larger diameter drogue parachutes for the els. Block I Apollo spacecraft used only a single-stage reefing. (NAA Skywriter, 7/21/67,1,2)
NASA’s Surveyor III spacecraft, resting on the moon, would not be reactivated until about May 23 despite the end of the two-week lunar night, nasa announced. Officials said they wanted spacecraft to warm up gradually before resuming communications, (upi, NYT, 5/18/67, 22)
Soviet scientists had compiled a structural and geological map of the lighted side of the moon to aid in selection of lunar landing sites, Tass announced. (Reuters, W Post, 12/29/67, D6)
JPL scientists continued efforts to reestablish contact with Surveyors V and VI resting on the moon. Surveyor V (launched Sept. 8) had responded immediately to turn-on commands during its fourth lunar day Dec. 14 and later transmitted 67 recognizable 200-line pictures. Following unsuccessful attempts to reposition the Antenna/Solar Panel Positioner on Dec. 16, transponder signals were lost, and complete loss of signal occurred. Surveyor VI (launched Nov. 7) had also responded to turnon commands Dec. 14, but telemetry lock-up was poor, and erratic signals were lost completely after 21/2 hrs. Attempts to reactivate both spacecraft for simultaneous communications and additional data would continue until end of lunar day Dec. 22. (NASA Proj Off; AP, NYT, 12/20/67, 29)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant stated that “the very important treaty governing the activities of states in outer space, on the moon and other celestial bodies, forged in the conference room of the United Nations, has reaffirmed the principle first stated in the General Assembly that outer space is the province of all mankind.” [Space law treaty signed Jan. 27 would go into effect Oct. 10.] (NYT, 10/5/67)
NASA reported success of Lunar Orbiter IV, launched May 4, noted that final readout of all photographs had been completed. Photographs would provide photo coverage of 99% of the moon’s front face and show high resolution photos of polar and limb areas with extensive geological detail. Report said convergent stereoscopic coverage had been obtained of entire Apollo zone of interest; photographic coverage obtained of the back side of the moon was still under review (nasa Proj
U.S.S.R.’s long-held superiority in large boosters had given it an advantage over U.S. in nuclear warhead protection, according to Pentagon sources. The advantage would become significant both offensively and defensively because of present developments in abm defenses—developments designed to destroy incoming warheads in outer space with intensive x-ray emissions. Soviet scientists could easily add more shielding to their warheads to halt x-ray bombardments from U.S. antimissile missiles, article noted, but U.S. was handicapped by weight limitations of its lower-thrust boosters. “Some officials,” article said, “are concerned that the hardness of Russian warheads will lessen seriously the protective capability of the Pentagon’s planned [abm systems] . . . [and] that U.S. offensive missiles now need more protection ... to survive Russian anti-missile explosions and reach their targets.” U.S. answer might lie in new lightweight composite materials under development; made by winding and inorganically bonding filaments of such materials as carbon, silica, and graphite, they would strengthen heat shield at little penalty in weight. (B Sun, 11/21/61, Al) November 27: In apparent sharp increase in testing, U.S.S.R. would launch fourth 1967 test series of “carrier rockets” into the Pacific between Nov. 28 and Dec. 30, according to Tass announcement. Aircraft and ships were warned not to enter either of two 129-km (80-mi) -wide target areas northwest and south of Midway Island, a U.S. possession, between noon and midnight local time each day, Tass said. UPI quoted observers on Soviet aims: to test new and bigger Soviet rockets needed to send a man to the moon and bring him back, and to expand recent Soviet experiments on the landing of space capsules at sea. upi said series would include launchings of 3,000-4,000 mi on down-range course from the Soviet Union, change from maximum of 6,000 mi for past launchings. Past announcements by U.S.S.R. on three 1967 “carrier-rocket” series had termed all three “successful.” (upi, W Star, 11/27/67, A5)
jpl announced that 24-hr efforts—begun May 23—to reactivate nasa’s Surveyor 111 spacecraft on the moon after two-week lunar night were continuing. Officials said they were not concerned about spacecraft’s temporary failure to respond, noting that it had taken seven days to reestablish contact with its predecessor Surveyor /. (upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 2)	_	_ On May 29, Cosmonaut Pavel Belyayev entered the Apollo spacecraft during a visit to the U.S. pavilion and discussed the instruments, levers, and buttons inside the spacecraft with Astronaut David Scott. Belyayev was first Soviet cosmonaut ever to have entered a U.S. spacecraft. On May 31, it was announced that two usaf rescue and recovery helicopters had left New York enroute to Paris, attempting to achieve the first nonstop helicopter crossing of the Atlantic. Helicopters would refuel in flight about eight times during flight, which was expected to take 28-32 hrs. usaf said purpose of the crossing was to demonstrate “the long-range capability of die HH—3E [helicopter] for employment in long range recovery of personnel who may be forced down at sea a great distance from land.” Helicopters landed safely at Le Bourget Airport June 1. (Long, NYT, 5/21/67, 88; upi, NYT, 5/27/67, 50M; W Post, 5/27/67, D20; W Post, 5/30/67, A1)
nasa had amended its contract with Bendix Corp. for the ApoUo Lunar Surface Experiments Package (alsep) to add a heat flow experiment substation. $2.4-million amendment increased total value of contract to $23.6 million, plus incentive fees. Heat flow subsystem woud measure net outward flux of heat from moon’s interior, providing a comparison of radioactive content of the moon’s interior and earth’s mantle, a thermal history of moon, a lunar temperature-depth profile, and thermal parameters of the first three meters of moon’s crust. (NASA Release 67-135)
News briefing on results of Lunar Module (lm) flammability tests, conducted as a result of Jan. 27 Apollo fire, was held at MSC. Using a full-scale boilerplate mockup of LM cabin interior fabricated specifically for the test program by Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., fires were deliberately set in 41 tests to investigate the flammability and propagation properties of all interior lm materials, contractor fire-hazard fixes, crew equipment and stowage areas, and apparent propagation paths. Although results indicated that most LM areas were adequately protected against propagation of an accidental fire, four materials which under specific conditions might act as flame propagation media were ordered replaced. In addition, beta cloth containers for food and flight data would be modified to enclose the stored items completely; flight data file and crew procedure notebooks would be redesigned to minimize their flammability; and procedures would be developed to control location and quantity of loose items and to combat onboard fire. Similar tests would be conducted in the Command Module (cm) . (Transcript; AP, B Sun, 12/1/61, A3)
msfc would design and build inhouse a multiple docking adapter (Mda) for use in Apollo Applications (AA) payload cluster scheduled for launch in 1968-69 [see Jan. 26]. Preliminary designs called for a 10-ft-dia, 15-ft-long cylinder surrounded by five 36-in-dia tunnels with docking collars and sealing hatches for orbital docking, (msfc Release 67-42)
nasa had agreed to fly four dod experiments on Apollo Applications (aa) missions to support USAf’s Manned Orbiting Laboratory (mol), Aviation Week reported; more would be added. Experiments selected to date included: study of an inflatable elastic air lock; use of alternate restraints to determine standard workshop technique in weightlessness; evaluation of suit donning and sleep stations; and integration of multipurpose equipment maintenance, (nasa Proj Off; Av Wk, 3/13/67, 18)
A correlation between earthquakes and the forces exerted on the earth by the sun and moon was reported by Dr. Alan Ryall, Director of Univ. of Nevada seismological station. Dr. Ryall said he could support with scientific data the theory that where the earth’s crust is fractured and weakened, all that is necessary to cause earthquakes might be the pulling force or gravity of the sun and moon. (W Post, 3/24/67)
The ceremonies in Washington, Moscow and London putting the space treaty into effect mark not only the first major East-West agreement since the nuclear test ban treaty of 1963 but a potential starting point for an even more momentous accord,” New York Times commented on space law treaty which went into effect Oct. 10. It added that “recent statements by the Soviet Union’s leading space scientist, Professor Leonid Sedov, indicate that the Russians too may be coming around to the conclusion that the costs of going it alone to the moon and beyond outweigh the dimming propaganda magic.” (NYT, 10/11/67)
Three-man crew for NASA’s first manned Apollo spaceflight (AS
Hugo Gernsback, an inventor, author, editor, and publisher who was often called the father of modern science fiction, died in New York at age 83. Gernsback described radar in 1911—35 yrs before communications experts bounced a radar signal off the moon. In 1927 he began pub324-801 o—69lishing Amazing Stories, one of the earliest magazines devoted entirely to science fiction. In 1928 he sponsored New York’s first television broadcasts: images only slightly larger than postage stamps were received on crude scanners owned by 2,000 amateurs. (NYT, 8/21/67, 29)
Launch of the first manned Apollo mission by March 31, 1968, “is a very difficult milestone to achieve, but it is possible,” George M. Low, Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program at msc, told the press at msc. All changes in the Apollo spacecraft necessitated by the Jan. 27 Apollo fire had been planned, he said, but until daily scheduling was completed, no date could be set for the mission. Low noted that Apollo parachute landing system might require requalification because design changes had increased spacecraft’s weight by 200-300 lbs, but he indicated that testing, if necessary, could be conducted in summer 1967 without seriously affecting the Apollo schedule. (Tech Wk, 6/12/67, 15; SBD, 6/8/67, 217)
NASA published the first extensive chart of the far side of the moon. Compiled by usaf Aeronautical Chart and Information Center using NASA-supplied photos, map covered more than 75% of the moon’s hidden side. Approximately 85% of the photos used were provided by NASA Lunar Orbiters I, II, III, and IV; remaining 15% were provided by Soviet Zond III. Map was released to assist astronomers at the International Astronomical Union, convening Aug. 22 in Prague, in naming features on moon’s far side, (nasa Release 67-220)
New York Times editorial praised success of nasa’s Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8: “If present indications are confirmed, Surveyor 5 has made one the fundamental scientific discoveries of the century . . . that earth’s natural satellite is made up of the same kind of material as is the earth. “Surveyor 5’s historic finding, if backed by later experiments, must force new consideration of the possibility that the moon was tom from the earth. . . . Certainly much more evidence is required . . . [but] Surveyor 5 has performed a notable feat. Moreover it has demonstrated again how much can be learned from instruments delivered by relatively inexpensive unmanned rockets without the great dangers and huge costs required to send a man to the moon and return him safely to earth.” (NYT, 10/1/67, 12E)
Lunar Orbiter V’s photographs had revealed flow patterns characteristic of hardened fluid material on the floor of the moon’s Tycho Crater, NASA announced [see Aug. 5-27]. Preliminary study of new photographs tended to confirm prevailing theory held by scientists that the big crater had been formed by a great meteoroid crashing into the visible side of the moon. Some scientists believed much of the fluid material ejected when the three-mile-deep crater was formed might have resulted from the intense heat generated by the meteoroid’s impact. They also suggested that the appearance of the dark halo resulted from the manner in which pulverized ejected material had been deposited. Material might have traveled outward from the impact point in a “base surge” close to the moon’s surface, giving a windswept appearance to the terrain. NASA photo afforded scientists first close-up view of the crater floor, providing new clues to its origin. Orbiter Vs high resolution telephoto picture showed fractures, flow markings, and protruding domelike hills with exposed layers. The Tycho region was one of the 36 areas of high scientific interest on the moon photographed by Lunar Orbiter V. (nasa Release 67-231)
NASA selected Martin Marietta Corp. to negotiate 27-mo, $25-million, costplus-incentive-award-fee contract for payload integration of experiments and experiment support equipment on Apollo Applications (aa) spacecraft. Tasks would be performed at NASA’s three manned spaceflight centers: (1) msfc work would involve the orbital workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) ; (2) msc work, the meteorological and earth resources payloads; and (3) KSC work, the test integration planning and support for launch operations. Selection of contractor followed competitive definition phase in which Martin Marietta Corp. and Lockheed Missiles and Space Co. studied aa payload integration under parallel, $2-million, fixed-price contracts, (nasa Release 67-199)
Haste might have contributed to the April 24 crash-landing of Soyuz 1 in which Cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov died, Edmund Stevens suggested in Washington Evening Star. He speculated that Soviet leaders, influenced by the goal of orbiting men around the moon by Nov. 7—50th anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution—had launched Soyuz I before it was fully man-rated. (Stevens, W Star, 5/1/67, Al, A6)
The five-out-of-five successful missions of $200-million Lunar Orbiter project to photograph moon to aid in selecting Surveyor and Apollo landing sites and to contribute to scientific knowledge of moon were reviewed at NASA Hq. press conference. Photographic data provided by Lunar Orbiter I, II, and III and Surveyor I resulted in selection of eight candidate sites. Lunar Orbiter IV provided basis for extending cartographic grid system for front-face mapping around to moon’s hidden side by photographing eastern limb areas. Lunar Orbiter V photographed scientifically interesting areas on moon’s front side, completed farside coverage, and provided supplementary photography of potential Apollo landing sites. Apollo Program Director, m/g Samuel C. Phillips, said that, when “approaching on a pretty flat trajectory at about 30 miles from the landing site . . . details of the topography and the radar return which is coupled into the automatic control and landing system [must be known].” In planning details of approach and landing maneuvers, Phillips said that “a very great deal” had been learned from Orbiter “about the rather unusual light conditions and; the effect of light reflections from the lunar surface under various angles.” Harold Masursky, usgs, explained Lunar Orbiter photographs showed that “apparently the earth and the Moon are very similar in their distribution of high and low ground.” He hoped that “by examination and comparison of ... geologic plot with the selenodetic information . . . [from] the Orbiter series, we will be able to plot the geopotential field . . . and tie it in with geology. ... By studying the Moon we know that it has a long, complex geologic history, that many of the same kinds of things that happen on the earth happen on the Moon. We can now play these two against each other, compare their simulari-ties, contrast their differences, and perhaps'be able to arrive at a greater understanding of the fundamental processes that affect the earth.” Strange moon features looking like watercourses might be dry-gulch arroyos, Harold Spradley said. Because watercourses had originated in volcanic craters and carried “fluidal materials,” volcano’s output— possibly slurry of ash and water—would exist long enough to cut its way through dry lunar surface material. Scientists agreed that orthodox existence of water on “the airless moon” was improbable. Clifford Nelson, LaRC Lunar Orbiter Project Manager, described results of experiments: “. . . density distribution [very nearly homogeneous] in the moon now seems to be resolved . . . center of mass of the moon is displaced toward the earth from the center of its geometrical figure, a situation which would have interesting scientific implications as to the stability of the moon and its origin and history.” Meteoroid penetration rate “in the region covered by lunar orbiter spacecraft is less than one-half the rate in the near earth environment. . . .’’ He said all 13 MSFN stations had successfully tracked and communicated with lunar orbiter, and “orbit determination programs ... in the initial stages of checkout. . . will continue with Lunar Orbiter V.” nasa Associate Administrator Dr. Homer E. Newell stressed overall significance of Lunar Orbiter program: “Before the first Lunar Orbiter mission this country had never placed spacecraft into orbit about any other celestial body other than the earth. In all five . . . missions, the spacecraft were not only placed into initial orbits as desired, but then the orbits were changed in accordance with a plan ... set up beforehand, in ... a precision type of operation. . . . Lunar Orbiter and its companion, Surveyor, have shown that we can use sophisticated technology in complicated spacecraft for automated missions to other bodies of the solar system. And it is this kind of capability that we will be using again and again as we continue the exploration of our solar system.” (Transcript)
Soviet Academy of Sciences, using results obtained from Luna III and Zond III probes, had handed over to International Commission on Lunar Nomenclature list of objects on other side of moon and their names—list containing 153 objects of invisible hemisphere and two areas of visible hemisphere. Names would honor great scientists of the past and renowned contemporaries from many countries of the world. For two areas of visible hemisphere, it was proposed to call region of first impact of Luna II (1959), the Bay of Lunik; and region of first nondestructive lunar landing of Luna IX apparatus (1966), Bay of Lunar Landing. (S/F, 2/67, 38-9)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight Dr. George E. Mueller outlined Apollo Applications (aa) program at aiaa meeting in Washington, D.C. Series of innovations would be made, he said, to permit sufficient reductions in unit costs: (1) reuse of Command Module (cm) ; (2) addition of land-landing capability which would facilitate CM reuse, permit increase in crew capacity, and, possibly, make use of naval recovery forces unnecessary; (3) “double use” of Uprated Saturn I’s 2nd stage as booster during launch phase and as Orbital Workshop in space; (4) repeated use of Orbital Workshop as an embryonic space station; (5) longer-duration flights of one year or more; and (6) use of Apollo flight hardware and physical plant and employment of Apollo program officials and industrial organizations as they become available. “. . . this is a program that provides for a detailed measurement of the utility of man in space at a relatively low cost. The measurement is obtained by doing useful things—astronomical observation, extended exploration of the moon and experiments with sensing equipment that can lead to benefits of enormous significance to all mankind.” (Text)
NASA announced incorporation of at least seven changes in Apollo Lunar Module (lm) program “to reduce the possibility of fire and to increase crew safety” in accordance with Apollo 204 Review Board findings [see April 9]. Changes, which would increase total weight by 25-125 lbs, included: (1) reassessing combustibility of all nonmetallic materials and substituting or redesigning where necessary; (2) reevaluating material acceptability by intentionally starting fires in lm mockup; (3)	modifying water hose and providing a hose nozzle to permit use of water as a fire extinguisher; (4) using a built-in handle, rather than a removable tool, to open hatches; (5) instituting more stringent standards and controls on electrical systems and wiring; (6) adding isolation switches to electrical systems to ensure that no connector is “hot” while being connected or disconnected; and (7) installing TV camera to monitor activity inside LM cabin during ground tests. Changes were being made at Bethpage, N.Y., plant of Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., lm prime contractor, (nasa Release 67-159)
NASA awarded Boeing Co. a $2.275-million cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for procurement of long-lead-time materials for two additional Saturn V launch vehicles. Contract, which would expire Jan. 1, 1968, was first Saturn V procurement in support of Apollo Applications (aa) program, (nasa Release 67-200)
Robert F. Thompson, Assistant Manager of MSc’s Apollo Applications Program Office since its establishment in July 1966, was appointed Manager of that program. Post had been vacant since April 1967 when MSC Deputy Director George M. Low, who had been Acting Manager, became Manager of the Apollo Spacecraft Program Office, (msc Release 67-73; msc Roundup, 12/22/67,1) Kurt Jung, member of West Germany’s Bundestag Defense Committee, said West Germany had allotted $25 million to purchase 220 F-4 Phantom jet aircraft from McDonnell Douglas Co., to replace ill-fated Lockheed F-104G Starfighter aircraft that had been worn out in use or lost in air crashes. (AP, B Sun, 12/9/67, 1)
Serious difficulties” had developed in Soviet program to land a man on the moon and it would take “no little time” to solve them, Cosmonaut Gherman Titov said in Aviatsiya i Kosmonavtika. (upi, NYT, 1/23/67, 2i)
jpl scientists abandoned attempts to contact Surveyor IV spacecraft resting on the moon [see July 14-16]. A jpl spokesman said both Canberra and Goldstone tracking stations had sent signals to the spacecraft July 17, but had received no response. A committee was attempting to determine whether Surveyor IV had softlanded on the moon as planned or crashed out of control. (AP, W Star, 7/18/67, A3; AP, NYT, 7/20/67, 11)	_
Evaluation of Apollo 4 mission data . . . continues to confirm initial reports that Spacecraft 017 met all flight objectives without problems,” NASA announced. Detailed systems analyses were still in process, but evidence to date indicated spacecraft systems operated properly during Nov. 9 mission and met all specifications. First Service Propulsion System (sps) burn had occurred as scheduled; second sps burn, however, was 13 sec longer than planned, because of a switchover to ground control after burn was started by onboard guidance and navigation system. Although review of the burn was still being conducted, NASA had already determined that there had been no failure in onboard systems involved. Because of the longer-than-planned SPS burn, spacecraft’s reentry velocity was 0.0058% higher than expected; actual velocity was 24,913 mph, compared with nominal 24,772 mph. Increased velocity caused higher Command Module (cm) maximum heat rate—620 BTUs per sq ft per sec instead of planned 586 BTUs. Maximum rate expected on' lunar return was 480 btus. Maximum g on reentry was 7.3, compared with expected 8.33 g, because of a shallower reentry flight-path angle. Cabin pressure remained between 5.6 and 5.8 psi during entire mission, indicating negligible leakage rate. Cabin air temperature remained stable at 60° F during orbit and increased to 70° F during reentry. Structural performance of the spacecraft and Lunar Test Article 10-R (a simulated lunar module) during launch and boost phase was satisfactory. Earth landing system functioned as planned; all parachutes inflated properly, and recovery aids deployed and operated normally. Heat shield performance was good; maximum char thickness was 34 in, and charring of crew compartment heat shield was less than expected. Fuel cell and cryogenic subsystems functioned normally, with fuel cells producing potable sterile water and demonstrating excellent load-sharing and thermal-control capability. CM and sm reaction-control systems, electrical power subsystem, and spacecraft sequential devices operated normally, with all functions occurring at scheduled times. Guidance and control system and the mission control programmer performed properly. Range-to-go at drogue parachute deployment calculated was 2.2 nm. Comparisons with measured landing point indicated better than predicted performance. All communications objectives were accomplished. Each MSFN station, Apollo tracking ship Vanguard, and at least two of the Apollo/Range Instrumentation Aircraft established two-way communications with the spacecraft as planned. (NASA Release 67-294; Hines, W Star, 12/3/67, A20; SBD, 12/5/67, 172-3)
msfc awarded $100,000 six-month contract to Bell Aerosystems Co. for flight testing of Bell’s “pogo stick” one-man flying vehicle at LaRc’s 1/6 gravity test facility. Pogo stick was being evaluated for Apollo lunar surface mission use. (msfc Release 67-12; Marshall Star, 1/25/67, 3) .
Second of three phases of tests to evaluate use of heavy-lift helicopters for Apollo crew and spacecraft recovery in ksc launch areas was being conducted by NASA and dod at Eglin afb. Tests would develop operational equipment, techniques, and procedures to be used at KSC where standard recovery equipment would he ineffective in case of a launch escape system abort during liftoff because of the surrounding marsh, beach, and surf, (msc Release 67-16)
Apollo 204 Review Board announced that completion of its final report on Jan. 27 fire would be delayed one week until April 8. Dr. Floyd L. Thompson, Director of LaRC and Chairman of the Board, issued another call for any information that might aid the probe. Board also announced that it had completed piece-by-piece disassembly of Apollo I spacecraft, although testing and analysis of spacecraft systems and parts were continuing, (upi, W Star, 3/25/67, A5; W Post, 3/25/67, A5)
Explorer XXXV, launched July 19, had completed 33 orbits of the moon. Results from gsfc’s magnetic field experiment aboard spacecraft indicated moon was not magnetized. Capture of interplanetary magnetic field lines by the moon and formation of lunar magnetosphere (theorized •by T. Gold in 1966) was not substantiated. A lunar bow shock wave had not yet been observed when moon was located in the interplanetary medium or the magnetosheath of the earth, (nasa Proj Off)
Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Director of Flight Operations at Msc, received Virginia Press Assn.’s (vpa) “Virginian of the Year” award at joint banquet of the vpa and National Newspaper Assn, (nna) during nna’s annual meeting in Richmond. Kraft said U.S. might miss 1970 target date to land the first man on the moon. “If we are lucky, and if everything works well, we can probably do it. But if we have a normal share of problems, as happens with any large research effort, then I don’t think we can.” (AP, W Star, 6/26/61, B5)
nasa awarded Boeing Co. net bonus of Si,895,312 in accordance with incentive contract provisions for superior performance of Lunar Orbiter I spacecraft. Boeing Co. was prime contractor for Lunar Orbiter I, launched by nasa Aug. 10, 1966, on mission to orbit the moon and 324—SOI O—69
NASA Surveyor V spacecraft on the moon responded to turn-on commands from Goldstone, Calif., station at beginning of its tourth lunar day. Spacecraft had operated during its second lunar day but had failed to respond during third. Battery was still functioning, and camera and alpha-scattering instrument were responding to commands, (nasa Proj Off; WNews, 12/15/67,5)
High probability of mission success for Saturn project was born of sound engineering, judgment built on extensive experience, and supported by modern analytical techniques, Special Assistant in Manufacturing Problems to MSC Apollo Spacecraft Program Mgr. (former msfc Deputy Director) Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees said in interview with Aerospace Management. He summarized the factors which had enhanced the probability: “Considering that one Saturn V, including the launching costs, amounts to over 150 million, it is not hard to see why the test launchings preceding manned flights must be limited to only a few. What this limitation has done then is to stress more than ever before the critical need for intensive engineering, almost a compulsive meticulousness in manufacturing assembly, quality control, and most extensive testing on the ground, such as component qualification testing, and subsystem and system testing.” (Rees, Aerospace Management, Fall/Winter 67, 23-27)	'
NASA revised designations for Apollo and aa missions: (1) all Apollo missions would be numbered sequentially in the order flown with the next Apollo mission to be designated Apollo 4, followed by Apollo 5, etc.; (2) AA missions would be designated sequentially as AAP—1, AAP—2, etc. Number designations would not differentiate between manned or unmanned Uprated Saturn I and Saturn V missions. (Text)
Early findings from Surveyor V, launched Sept. 8 and softlanded on moon Sept. 10, were summarized in Science by jpl scientists Leonard D. Jaffe and Robert H. Steinbacher. The 18,006 TV pictures taken Sept. 11—24 included views of interior of crater in which Surveyor V landed, level surface surrounding crater, star and planet sightings for attitude reference, and solar-corona sequence after local sunset. Alpha-scattering instrument produced data on lunar surface chemical composition— oxygen, silicon, and aluminum identified in preliminary evaluation— and showed general chemical composition to be “similar to that of a silicate of a basaltic type.” “Material of basaltic composition at the Surveyor V landing site implies that differentiation has occurred in the moon,” which summary attributed to “internal sources of heat.” Early findings were consistent with hypothesis that “extensive volcanic flows have been responsible for flooding and filling the mare [sea] basins.” Erosion experiment, spacecraft landing effects, and other observations indicated soil had significant amounts of fine-grained material and measurable cohesion. Surveyor V had provided first direct chemical analysis of lunar surface. Lunar magnet experiment produced results, that “are most similar to a terrestrial plateau basalt with no addition of free iron.” (Science, 11/3/67, 631-52)
Announcement of major breakthrough in Soviet space program—probably an orbiting manned space platform—was imminent according to unidentified U.S. scientist recently returned from two weeks in U.S.S.R., Marquis Childs reported in Washington Post: “The likelihood of a dramatic new Soviet achievement takes on particular weight in view of the tragedy to the three American astronauts at Cape Kennedy. It will dramatize the degree to which the Soviets are ahead in heavy boosters essential to carry out a landing on the moon. Repeated denials from both sides that this is not a race to the moon are all very well. The fact remains that the first power to land men on that silver orb will gain enormous prestige.” (Childs, W Post, 2/1/67)
NASA-sponsored research on equipment used for surviving hard landing on the moon and planets had been conducted by Cal Tech-JPL engineers in simulated operations. Split-second jpl impact tests, which used powerful compressed air guns and a giant slingshot, hurtled equipment against solid backstops at speeds up to 500 feet per second (340 mph). JPl’s engineer, Stan Taylor, explained: “During the brief instant that the test specimen is experiencing the 10,000 g shock, every part of it behaves as though it weighed 10,000 times its normal weight. The bolts supporting a one pound test item have to be good for about five tons.” The experiments had proved that intricate, delicate components required in sophisticated unmanned spacecraft of today and tomorrow could be protected to withstand shocks of 10,000 g. (jpl Release)
msc Director Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, in welcoming address at msc’s twoday Gemini Summary Conference, urged space scientists to avoid “second-guessing” Apollo 204 Review Board because undue speculation on the Jan. 27 accident was a disservice both to the Nation and the Board, (msc Roundup, 2/3/67, 8; W Post, 2/2/61, A2)
Soviet astronomers from Ukrainian Academy of Sciences had produced a lunar astronomical almanac containing data on the locations of stars as seen from the moon, Science Service reported. Star charts of the sky from earth become outdated after several years, but a star chart for the lunar sky had to be revised after only several days. Precession of earth’s axis causes each pole to complete a cone on the celestial sphere every 26,000 yrs; moon’s axis has only an 18.6-yr precessional period which makes construction of a star chart of the lunar sky extremely difficult. (SciServ, NYT, 3/28/67)
Sen. Mark 0. Hatfield (R-Ore.), addressing ieee Region Six Conference in Portland, criticized order of priorities by which “survival” was superseded by “our desire to explore new technological frontiers. . . . We must rationally decide if our goal of promoting the well-being of man is better served through huge expenditures to beat the Russians to the moon or through developing methods to feed a hungry world. It is a very black mark on our sense of values and a contradiction of man’s quest for progress when one part of the world competes for the moon while the other part competes for a loaf of bread.” (Text)
Apollo 7 spacecraft and launch vehicle were electrically mated at ksc Launch Complex 34. (NASA Apollo Status Summary, 9/4/68)
NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, in statement before House Committee on Science and Astronautics’ Manned Space Flight Subcommittee, stressed urgency of funding Apollo Applications and advanced missions programs in continuing “this country’s position as a space pioneer.” These programs, he said, “are an investment in our national posture and the future of manned space flight . . . [and provide] the opportunity to stabilize the manned space flight program so that it can effectively and efficiently respond to the challenges of the next decade. We have the resources, the facilities, the people, and the knowledge of Apollo upon which to build, and the crucial question posed by this minimum request for Apollo Applications is whether we are going to pursue the manned exploration of space. . . . Man will prevail in space. On that there can be no serious question. The only question is whether they will be Americans.” (Testimony)
In This Week, Erik Bergaust discussed improvements in safety made by nasa since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Though nasa leaders in Washington and at MSC believed this was “doing the job, other experts in and out of NASA privately are expressing their doubts,” he said. They felt “NASA had been slow to correct [and] ... its solutions have been more political than practical.” Experts insisted, “that while progress has been made, there have been very few significant improvements in NASA’s own management. . . . reports circulating in Washington [since] the accident indicated the conditions that led to the Apollo fire may not have been corrected.” (This Week, W Star, 9/22/68, 7)
Dr. Dinsmore Alter, astronomer, first to provide evidence that moon was not as inactive as had been thought, died in Oakland, Calif., at age 80. He had been director of Griffith Planetarium in Los Angeles from 1935 until his retirement in 1958. On Oct. 26, 1956, from Mt. Wilson, Calif., he had seen apparent mistiness at bottom of crater which later led to re-evaluation of concepts of moon. (NYT, 9/24/68, 47)
U.S.S.R. would probably launch several spacecraft, possibly containing dogs, on circumlunar missions and return them to earth before launching manned lunar spacecraft, Cosmonaut Valery Bykovsky said in Hungarian Army newspaper interview. Quoted in Nephadsreg, he said that first Soviet passengers around moon might be offspring of space dog Laika. Manned spacecraft would not be launched until necessary experience had been gained. (AP, B Sun, 2/26/68, A3)
nasa awarded Allis-Chalmers $3,500,000 contract to flight-qualify Multimission Fuel Cell Assembly, an improved fuel cell electrical power system for Apollo Applications (aa) program. System had been developed under three previous NASA contracts since 1962. Allis-Chalmers would produce two assemblies for use in qualification program and two for delivery to msc. (NASA Procurement Off; MCS Roundup, 12/6/68,
Commercial irradiation of foods by gamma rays for protection against spoilage had begun, at Nuclear Materials Equipment Corp. (numec), Apollo, Pa. Bacon would be processed initially, although FDA had also approved irradiation for potatoes, wheat, and wheat flour. Bacon would be treated by exposure to 4.5 million rads of gamma rays to destroy all bacteria; product could be stored indefinitely without refrigeration. Neither texture nor wholesomeness would be affected, according to aec and Army tests conducted over past 15 yr. (NYT, 1/2/67, 58)
Apollo 7 prime crew successfully completed water egress training in Gulf of Mexico, (nasa Apollo Status Summary, 8/7/68)
NASA outlined six steps which would lead to final decision during week of Nov. 11 on next Apollo manned mission. Apollo 8, scheduled for December, was planned as manned earth-orbital mission on Saturn V vehicle. Because of Apollo 7 success, nasa was considering alternative mission possibilities: earth-orbital mission deeper into space, circumlunar flyby, and lunar orbit. Steps—laid out by Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, and Apollo Program Director, l/g Samuel C. Phillips—were: detailed analysis and review of Apollo 7 results to determine any necessary spacecraft changes; final certification of solutions to Apollo 6 problems; certification of strengthened Saturn V 2nd and 3rd stage fuel lines and elimination of pogo in 1st stage; completion of ground tests before Apollo 8 command and service module (csm) certification for lunar flight; completion of flight computer programs for deep space and lunar missions; rehearsal of CSM operations tests with mathematical models and delivery of Apollo 8 cm computer program; and completion of design certification reviews of launch vehicle and spacecraft subsystems. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, said, “The final decision on whether to send Apollo 8 around the Moon will be made after a thorough assessment of the total risks involved and the total gains to be realized in this next step toward a manned lunar landing. We will fly the most advanced mission for which we are fully prepared that does not unduly risk the safety of the crew.” (NASA Release 68-190; upi, NYT, 10/29/68,14)
MSFC announced award to Harvard Univ. of $1,942,300 supplementary contract for development of UV scanning spectrometer to be flown as solar experiment on first launch of Apollo Telescope Mount. Award increased total value to $6,458,544 for experiments for use with manned solar observatories, (msfc Release 68-68; SBD, 4/8/68, 210)
Dr. Kurt Debus, Director of ksc, said Saturn IB Launch Complexes 34 and 37 would be put on standby basis until beginning of Apollo Applications program in late 1970, with reduction of 1,315 personnel. Shutdown, forced by space budget cuts, would save nasa $20 million. Some 10% of 2,400 contract work force would be affected, with 1,000 engineers and technicians continuing to work in other areas. Complexes were to have been maintained in event Saturn V launch vehicle encountered serious development problems, but Dr. Debus said this insurance was no longer needed, (ksc Release 463-68; AP, B Sun, 10/16/68, A7)
nasa and dod would spend estimated $1,406 billion during next decade for parachutes, aerodynamic decelerators, aerial recovery systems, planetary landing devices, and spacecraft escape systems, according to Frank A. Burnham in Aerospace Technology. Technology was marked by rapid growth and widespread applications, including drogue chutes for supersonic aircraft; personnel parachutes capable of being “flown” to spot landings; recovery systems for Apollo, mol, military spacecraft, drones, and test missiles; systems to drop cargo from altitude and deposit it on ground from aircraft in flight; and air “snatch” rescue systems. (Aero Tech, 6/3/68, 26)
In Paris Match, Raymond Cartier said, “With Apollo 8 the summit is human daring is attained.” (Paris Match, 12/28/68, 37)
ARC reported that 90 U.S. scientists at ARC working group sessions had agreed electromagnetic systems would provide best data on moon’s interior and recommended three techniques, magnetometer systems, radio-frequency systems, and radar. Magnetometer systems could measure blocking of fluctuating solar magnetic field borne by solar wind by using network of emplacements on moon’s surface. Highly conductive hot lunar core would cut off field completely, while cold core would let most of field pass through. Magnetometer on lunar crawler could make similar measurements to find highly conductive masses of water, lava, or ore. Radio-frequency probes could make inexpensive subsurface surveys through spacecraft radio signals which would penetrate moon’s surface and bounce back to be measured as to wave characteristics. Wave-change data could help define ore, ice deposits, or permafrost. High-frequency radar systems could study lunar surface through radar bounced off moon from earth with return signal received by earth antennas, or beamed from spacecraft in lunar orbit or from lunar crawler at lunar surface, with return signals received by spacecraft or crawler, (arc Release 68—9)
Proposal for four additional basic Block II Apollo spacecraft command and service modules would be made by nar Space Div. in accordance with NASA request. Action would bring total purchase to 19 for flights on Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles. Delivery would start in 1970. (nasa Release 68—12)
New York Times commented on Apollo 8 flight: “Space contains more than enough opportunity for fruitful application of the energies that all mankind can devote to its exploration, development and eventual settlement. There is no need here for wasteful rivalry deriving from earthbound nationalistic and political ambitions. In the face of the most breathtaking challenge humanity has ever faced, the only rational response is cooperation to make space an arena of unity and international brotherhood. Man’s hopes and prayers ride with the pre-Christmas voyagers. After them must come ships bearing the United Nations flag, each carrying men of different citizenship, language, political and religious convictions and color.” (NYT, 12/22/68, E10)
In Moscow interview with Turin, Italy, newspaper La Stampa, Soviet space scientist Prof. Leonid I. Sedov said U.S.S.R. was concentrating on perfecting unmanned spaceships for exploration of celestial bodies deeper in space than moon. “There does not exist at present a similar project [to Apollo 8] in our program. In the near future we will not send a man around the moon. We start from the principle that certain problems can he resolved with the use of automatic soundings.” Sedov hailed Apollo 8 mission as “a great scientific conquest.” (upi, W Post, 12/29/68, A4)
usaf awarded Big Three Industrial Gas and Equipment Co. $1,156,845 fixed-price contract for production of propellant nitrogen to support Project Apollo at ksc. (dod Release 183—68)
msfc announced Boeing Co. had been issued $239,000 contract for 10mo study defining two-stage derivative of Saturn V launch vehicle. With 1st (S—IC) and 3rd (S—IVB) stages and instrument unit of Saturn V, vehicle could place up to 158,000 lb in low earth orbit. Varying the number of F—1 engines in S—IC could tailor vehicle to specific missions. Five-engine configuration could put into orbit Saturn I Workshop with airlock and multiple docking adapter, plus Apollo Telescope Mount and Apollo CSM and three-man crew. Three Saturn IB vehicles would be required to do same job. Vehicle could resupply space stations and could be used for synchronous orbits and unmanned lunar and planetary flights at major savings over three-stage Saturn V. Two-stage version was called “Intermediate 20.” With Centaur 3rd stage, vehicle could send about 15,000 lb to Jupiter or Saturn. msfc also had signed $22,826,736 contract modification with North American Rockwell Corp.’s Rocketdyne Div. for continued production support of J—2 engines used on Saturn IB and Saturn V boosters. Modifications would improve engines’ versatility, (msfc Releases 68-264, 68-266)
Apollo 6 (launched April 4) was adjudged unsuccessful by nasa. Although three of five primary mission objectives had been fully accomplished and two partially accomplished, overall mission was not a success. Apollo 6 had entered elliptical parking orbit instead of planned circular orbit when 2nd stage engines shut down prematurely and 3rd stage failed to reignite on command. (NASA Proj Off)
msfc issued report on preliminary results of April 4 Apollo 6 flight. Although “basic source of the difficulties” had not yet been determined, scientists and engineers speculated that wires carrying cutoff commands to the malfunctioning engines were interchanged. First stage had performed as planned and stage thrust was near predicted during first portion of flight. Second stage had performed satisfactorily through 1st-stage boost, 2nd-stage ignition, and early portion of 2nd-stage powered flight. First indications of anomaly were decreasing temperatures on main oxidizer valve and its control line on fifth engine and steady decrease in second engine’s yaw actuator pressure. Third stage performed satisfactorily through first bum and orbital coast. Although engine and stage prestart conditions appeared normal, engine received start signal, and valves opened properly, engine did not restart. Initial data suggested that leak in one of two propellant lines to engine’s augmented spark igniter might have caused insufficient or inadequately mixed propellant for proper start condition. Investigations were continuing on longitudinal oscillation of vehicle. Guidance and other instrumentation functions, telemetry performance, and onboard TV camera operation were satisfactory, (msfc Release 68—74; AP, NYT, 4/12/68, 20)
Apollo 8 launch crew began lengthy countdown on time at ksc at 7:00 pm est, for launch scheduled for 7:51 am est Dec. 21. (W Post, 12/16/68, A12; W Star, 12/16/68, A5; W News, 12/16/68, 3)
Press conference on preliminary scientific results from NASA’s Surveyor VII, which landed on moon Jan. 9, revealed spacecraft could make safe landing in highland area with “major ejecta blanket” (rim of debris ejected from center of crater). Data indicated Tycho region of moon’s surface contained larger rocks, fewer craters, and thinner debris layer than did maria. Fine particles and rocks near Tycho crater had higher albedo, or lighter color. Iron content was lower, accounting for lower density. In Tycho region, where iron group of elements was less concentrated, reflection of light from moon’s surface was greater than from area where iron group elements existed in greater concentration. Low iron content was “probably strongest direct evidence” that moon had undergone chemical fractionation, suggesting it “has been hot, has been melted at least partially, and has been differentiated into different types of rock.” (Transcript; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 2/29/68, A8; W News, 3/21/68)
aec and U.S. Geological Survey experiments had shown that neutrons from man-made californium-252 hitting gold and silver atoms excited atoms to radioactive state; atoms then emitted characteristic gamma rays by which they were identified. With californium, irradiation equipment for technique already known could he reduced about 200,000 times, making it ideal for sea bottom probes and for devices to analyze materials on moon’s surface as well as for mining and industrial purposes. Geological Survey was working with GSFC on use for study of moon, (nea, W News, 8/8/68)
Washington Daily News editorial commented on statement by physicist Dr. Ralph E. Lapp warning of possible dangers in Apollo 8 mission [see Dec. 14] : “There are perhaps sound reasons involving national prestige for trying to be the first nation to send men into a moon orbit. But surely no such reasons are compelling enough to cut corners on safety. The technical arguments advanced by Dr. Lapp are far too complex to be resolved by laymen. But after the tragic fire that took the lives of three of our Apollo spacemen two years ago it should not be necessary to urge that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration exercise all due prudence—even at the risk of losing the race around the moon.” (W News, 12/10/68, 24)
In Apollo/Saturn 503 program, Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages were being modified to correct radar lock-on problem in rendezvous radar subsystem. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages were mated, with pogo suppressor modification kits on 1st stage being verified. Third-stage propulsion subsystem checks were in progress. In South Atlantic Anomaly Probe, computer analysis had confirmed radiation levels presented no hazard to low-altitude manned Apollo orbital flights. (Text)
Sen. Margaret C. Smith (R-Me.), ranking member of Senate Committee on Aeronautical and Space Sciences, on Senate floor presented General Accounting Office review of source selection and award of major subcontract by NASA and its prime contractor, Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp., for development of landing and rendezvous radar equipment for Apollo lunar module, compiled at her request. Sen. Smith explained that although another electronics firm had expressed interest in performing under fixed-price contract, rca had received contract because of agreement between Grumman and RCA “before the requirements and specifications for the radar components had been defined.” Noting that rca estimated cost of $23.4 million had now increased to about $112 million, she suggested that if Grumman radar subcontract was illustrative of how NASA “maintains surveillance over its appropriated funds, it would appear that substantial savings could be realized merely by strengthening the agency’s contracting practices.” (nasa LAR VII/36; CR, 4/17/68, S4138-46; AP, B Sun, 4/23/68, A5)
Republican Presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon said in TV program to viewers in Texas, New Mexico, Arkansas, and Oklahoma, Republican administration would strive to make U.S. “first in space.” “I don’t want the Soviet Union or any other nation to be ahead of the United States. . . . Let’s emphasize the moon shot and others where we can make a direct break-through.” (W Star, 10/12/68, Al)
Neither Peking Radio nor New China News Agency covered Apollo 8 Mission. (N Va Sun, 12/28/68, 1)
New York Times editorial on Apollo 6 mission: “What was illustrated . . . was the extraordinary difficulty of assuring that every one of the literally millions of components in such an extremely complicated system as the Saturn 5 works perfectly. But the complexity of the total Apollo mechanism for the planned manned voyage to the moon ... is even greater. . . . This fact argues for a slow but sure approach to future Apollo tests, rather than an adventuresome policy aimed primarily at completing the job by the end of 1969. “Regrettable as were Saturn 5’s deficiencies as demonstrated in this week’s test, they provide a useful warning against renewed overconfidence and the costs it could again impose.” (NYT, 4/6/68, 36)
Flammability characteristics of mixed gas atmosphere (60% oxygen and 40% nitrogen at 16 psi) in Apollo command module had been evaluated by msc in 24 “enriched air” tests, with “all but two ignition points” showing self-extinguishing characteristics. Two ignition points on circuit breaker panels exhibited what msc termed “moderate fire propagation” because fire spread “beyond the point of self extinguishment.” Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, retained three major options for “mixed gas” for Apollo launch phase: regular air, enriched air using oxygen and nitrogen, or pure oxygen. (Aero Tech, 1/29/68, 10)
Surveyor VII, launched Jan. 7 for softlanding on moon. Jan. 9, photographed crescent earth from lunar surface Jan. 20 and recorded two laser beams (.arrow) aimed toward landing site from earth. Spacecraft kies last in NASA’s Surveyor prograjn. cording to utc manager Douglas D. Ordahl, engine had performed well during five-minute flight over Eglin AFB, Fla., aerial test range and “proved for the first time that hybrids are practical and can fly.” {W Post, 1/7/68, A7; Wilford, NYT, 1/8/68,3)
NASA issued request for quotations for design, development, fabrication, test, qualification, and delivery of actuator system for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), calling for completion within nine months. System, expected to weigh 20 lb, would be contained in cylinder 18 in long and 1 ft in dia. It would be used to deploy solar panels of ATM which would be placed in orbit and docked with Saturn I workshop, (msfc Release 68-178)
msfc reported “all mission objectives were met” by Saturn IB launch vehicle used in first unmanned Bight test of Apollo lunar module, Jan. 22, Flight was fourth consecutive success for Saturn IB and 15th out of 15 for msfc-developed Saturn launch vehicles. Flight events had been “exactly on time or within a few hundredths of a second until second stage but still within tolerance limits.’’ Trajectories of both stages had been within expected tolerances, and orbit insertion conditions had been met satisfactorily, (msfc Release 68-17)
One out of every four persons on earth—nearly one billion people in 64 countries-—heard Christmas Eve reading of Genesis by moon orbiting Apollo 8 crew either on radio or TV, according to TV Guide. Delayed broadcasts same day reached 30 additional countries. “The fantastic success of TV on that flight echoed around the world.” {TV Guide, 5/10-16/69, 9)
Analysis of Luna IX (launched Jan. 31, 1966) TV photos showed lunar mass was decreasing because of micrometeoroid bombardment, Soviet scientist A. A. Gurshteyn reported. He explained that speed of particles dislodged by falling micrometeoroids often exceeded second escape velocity for moon of only 2.4 km per sec. (SBD, 3/12/68, 61)
Shipment of LM—2, second Apollo lunar module, and associated Saturn IB launch vehicle to ksc had been postponed pending further evaluation of Apollo 5 mission results [see Jan. 27 and 30]. Initial evaluations of first lm flight, Jan. 22—23, had indicated that second unmanned flight might not be required to qualify spacecraft for manned flight. NASA announced that further “detailed review of Apollo 5 flight data and deliberations by a [nasa] design certification review board in March will determine the final decision.” (nasa Release 68-21).
Atmospheric scientists at Jpl and Ohio State Univ. announced successful high-altitude test of balloon-borne spectrometer to measure atmospheric radiation emitted in four-micron region. Data, obtained on flight from National Center for Atmospheric Research and Information station at Palestine, Tex., indicated sunlight reflected from earth would pose no significant obstacle to continuous effective operation of radiation sensors on spacecraft in earth orbit. Researchers concluded satellite-borne instrument could probe earth’s lower atmosphere for global weather prediction. Test marked step in NASA program to define experiments for manned earth-orbiting missions in Apollo Applications program. (NASA Release 68—176; Pasadena Star-News, 10/17/68)
Editorial comment on Soviet space achievements, including successful orbiting of Luna XIV and docking of Cosmos CCXII and CCXIII, urged U.S. to acknowledge challenge: “The Soviet Union’s sense of purpose in space is apparently as steady and unwavering as it ever was. The U.S. . . . after coming up fast from behind in a wave of feverish anxiety and enthusiasm, now seems to have lost interest. That could be a dangerous—even fatal— tendency in an age where space is of key importance to the security of the Nation. It should be reversed, before great harm is done.” (P lnq, 4/17/68) “If we muff what now looks like a good chance to beat the Russians to the moon with manned space ships, the prestige loss to this nation will probably be immeasurable. And if our space people aren’t paying at least as much attention as the Russians to the military possibilities of space, then we are in grave danger and growing more so. All of which adds up . . . to a whole string of dire warnings to Congress not to be stingy about space projects of any description.” (NY News, 4/17/68)
Data collected for 17 mo by five Lunar Orbiters indicated rate of penetration of 0.025-mm beryllium copper surface of pressurized cells by meteoroids in near-lunar environment was approximately half the rate in near-earth environment as measured by similar detectors aboard Explorer XVI and Explorer XXIII. Each experiment used 20 pressur-ized-cell detectors with total exposed area of 0.186 sq m, carried aboard spacecraft in both equatorial and polar orbits at altitudes between 18.6 and 3,852.5 mi (30 and 6,200 km). Estimates of hazard near moon had ranged from less to much greater than hazard near earth. Major uncertainty had been contribution by secondary meteoroids created by impacts of primary meteoroids on moon, according to report by NASA LaRC scientists C. A. Gurtler and Gary W. Grew. Data showed no evidence of increase in hazard from such “backsplash.” (Science, 8/2/68, 462-4)	_
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on scheduled December launch of Apollo 8:	. this promises to be one Christmas when the thoughts of all . . . will contain more than visions of sugarplums, of laden stockings, of gifts about to be received and bills about to come due. It is, in fact, just possible that NASA will succeed in putting that missing ingredient back into the yule season, and that more prayers will be offered this Christmas than at any time in the past 2,000 years.” (W Star, 11/14/68, A14)
Apollo 7 prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—held news conference at MSC. Crew saw no reason to delay Apollo 7 launch beyond scheduled lift-off on Oct. 11 but results of flight readiness test following week would determine definite plans. Questioned about safety, mission commander Schirra said, “when we go over the sill for launch day, we will consider that all those risks that are appropriate for this type of mission are either understood by us or that they are low enough that we have a very, very high probability. . . . We would like 10.8 days and we will do our best to do it. . . . We’ve had a goal that is rather a hard one to achieve, particularly one that we have to follow on when we lost three of our compatriots, and we don’t want any mistakes ... to happen again. We have not been the ‘kid-around’ types that we might have been in the past, we’re much more serious about it, because this is a much more complicated machine and there are many, many more people involved in it. ... I think you will find that you will see a good performance out of this total crew and we have tried very hard to make this machine work just the way it should. We have basically lived with it at the plant [and] at the Cape . . . and if somebody even takes a small component off it, we become furious and say, ‘Why did you remove it?’ We expect answers immediately . . . that is the way we are working.” In answer to question, Schirra said it had taken 1 min 5 sec for all three to exit from spacecraft to white room in simulated emergency, while still being careful not to damage equipment. In real emergency, crew could probably exit in 45 sec. (Transcript)
Apollo 6 mission, second flight of Apollo/Saturn V space vehicle, would be launched from etr on or after April 3, NASA announced. Primary mission objective would be qualification of launch vehicle for future manned flights; spacecraft objectives, including recovery, would be secondary. (nasa Release 68—54)
msfc awarded Ball Brothers Research Corp. $134,500 contract for six solar sensor systems, including one prototype and five flight units, for Apollo Telescope Mount pointing control system, (msfc Release 68-76)
Business Week editorial: “. . . since the tragedy on the launch pad . . . [ Jan. 27, 1967] NASA and its thousands of supporting companies have done a tremendous job in rebuilding the spacecraft and in perfecting the safety and reliability of the entire Apollo system. The clear message of Apollo 7 is that NASA now has a spacecraft that can take men to the moon and back safely. This is a triumph for NASA and for U.S. science, engineering, and management. (Bus Wk, 10/26/68) Tass later announced that during first revolution Soyuz III “approached” to within 200 m (656 ft) of unmanned Soyuz II (launched Oct. 25), initially by “an automatic system”; subsequent operations were performed manually by Beregovoy. On Oct. 27, Tass said, Beregovoy “independently oriented the ship in space and switched on the motor,” to alter spacecraft’s orbit; continued conducting scientific, technical, medical, and biological experiments and research; transmitted TV pictures of cabin interior; and approached Soyuz II for second time before it reentered Oct. 28. Soyuz III remained in orbit until Oct. 30, completing 94 hrs 51 min and 64 orbits, before it softlanded “with the use of aerodynamics,” in a preset area in Soviet territory. (Lannan, W Star, 10/27/68, Al; O’Toole, W Post, 10/27/68, Al; Kamm, NYT, 10/27/68; SBD, 10/28/68, 279; 10/31/68, 297; AP, W Post, 10/28/68, Al; gsfc SSR, 10/31/68)
NASA would negotiate $3.5-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with General Electric Co.’s Apollo Systems Div. for Apollo Applications engineering support. GE, under direction of NASA Hq. Apollo Applications Program Office, would provide engineering support in areas of quality and reliability, configuration and data management, test, and checkout, (nasa Release 68—61)
Apollo 8 lunar flight was voted top news story of 1968 in Dec. 24 repolling of editors of Associated Press member newspapers, radio, and TV stations. Previous poll, completed before Dec. 21—27 mission, had selected assassinations of Sen. Robert F. Kennedy and Rev. Martin Luther King as No. 1 and No. 2 stories of year. (W Star, 12/26/68, A8)
New York Times said of Apollo 8 telecast of earth: “. . . the drama and interest of yesterday’s view of earth from space transcended any prosaic considerations of practical utility. Rather the excitement these pictures aroused among millions of stay-at-homes flowed from the visual evidence they provided of man’s successful entrance into a completely new realm, one which poses challenges, opportunities and dangers such as the human species has never before faced. And yesterday’s pictures provided a sobering perspective on man’s puny earthly works and rivalries, reminding all humanity that nature is the basic antagonist, not other men.” (NYT, 12/24/68, 22)
New York Times editiorial, “After the Lunar Landing,” said first priority would probably go to study of moon’s surface and resources. “Beyond this exploration, the moon—once accessible to men—will immediately become a laboratory world for expanding knowledge in astronomy, physics, chemistry, geology and a host of other sciences. For both purposes ... it will be desirable to create one or more permanent manned communities on the moon as soon as possible. ... As the pioneers in space, the United States and the Soviet Union have the responsibility now to begin organization of the vast international effort that must follow the coming triumph of human courage and human ingenuity. And the United Nations, of course, is the body whose flag must fly over future lunar settlements.” (NYT, 11/13/68, 40)
Tests to evaluate propellant lines for J—2 engine had been successfully conducted in vacuum chamber at Arnold Engineering and Development Center, B. J. Richey reported in Huntsville Times. Engineers had discovered that frosting which enveloped lines and provided extra protection when engine was fired at ground temperatures failed to form in vacuum or simulated vacuum, so lines burned through. Lines leading to engine’s augmented spark indicator, believed to have caused engine shutdowns and restart failure during Apollo 6 flight April 4, had been redesigned and strengthened without affecting engine performance. (Richey, Huntsville Times, 6/17/68)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 space vehicle Flight Readiness Test was under way at ksc, with prime crew—Astronauts Walter M. Schirra, Jr., Donn F. Eisele, and R. Walter Cunningham—to participate without spacesuits and with hatch open. Apollo 8 manned altitude runs had been successfully completed, with prime crew spending 13]/2 hr in its spacecraft Sept. 20 and backup crew spending 101/2 hr Sept. 22. (Text)
President Johnson nominated b/g Edmund F. O’Connor (usaf) , msfc Director of Industrial Operations, for promotion to Major General. Assigned to NASA through special nasa—DOD personnel exchange agreement in 1964, Gen. O’Connor had been responsible for technical and administrative management of Saturn IB and Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 68-33)
First Lady, Mrs. Lyndon B. Johnson, and daughter Mrs. Lynda Robb paid their first visit to KSC and participated in simulated moon landing in lunar landing module replica. Dr. Thomas 0. Paine, nasa Acting Administrator, presented model of Apollo lunar landing module for display in Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library. He said model would bear plaque listing “a few of the many contributions to our space program of Lyndon B. Johnson—as Senate Majority Leader, as Chairman of the Senate Aeronautics and Space Sciences Committee, as Chairman of the National Aeronautics and Space Council when he was Vice President, and then as President of the United States.” Dr. Paine told Mrs. Johnson, “We trust that this model of the lunar landing module will signify to the many visitors . . . the President’s vision and leadership that has carried this nation outward into the new ocean of space.” (ksc Release ksc—500-68; Shelton, W Star, 11/25/68, E3; Blair, NYT, 11/24/68, 41)
In bbc TV interview Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, Sir Bernard Lovell, said U.S. Apollo 8 plan for manned lunar orbit was, “On a scientific basis . . . wasteful and silly. . . . We’ve reached the stage with automatic landings when it’s not necessary to risk human life to get information about the moon. Within a few years this information could be obtained by automatic, unmanned instruments.” Sir Bernard said he was full of admiration for project but added, there was “a dangerous element of deadline beating in it.” NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller, commented, “The purpose is not scientific but to take an important step in developing the capability of landing men on the moon.” In telephone interview from Huntsville, Ala., he said, “We are taking no undue risks.” Apollo 8 crewman William A. Anders told news conference at KSC, “We are flying primarily an operational mission and we strongly feel that a manned platform in lunar orbit with the operational equipment we have can add significant bits and pieces to scientific knowledge. . . . We think it will be a real boon for future Apollo flights to have the photographic, navigation, tracking, mapping, and other knowledge we’ll bring back.” (AP, B Sun, 11/21/68, 1; NYT, 11/21/68, 19; O’Toole, W Post, 11/21/68, A3)
Apollo 8 crew, wearing their spacesuits, participated in final 2 hr 45 min of countdown rehearsal for Dec. 21 launch. Spacecraft had completed four-day rehearsal fully fueled Dec. 10. (AP, B Sun, 12/11/68, A9; UPl, W Star, 12/11/68, C4)
International Flat Earth Society said in London that earth was definitely flat despite pictures from Apollo 8. Society Secretary Samuel Shenton said moon was circular but there was no proof it was a globe. (Reuters, BSim, 12/30/68)
msc had awarded $2-million contract extension to mit’s Div. of Sponsored Research for design and developmental support of Apollo guidance and navigation systems, including flight test and operational support for Apollo command and service modules. Contract extension brought total estimated value of mit contract since April 1965 to $48.7 million, (nasa Release 68-15)
Apollo 7 mission (Oct. 11—22) was adjudged successful by nasa. All launch vehicle systems had performed satisfactorily throughout expected lifetime and spacecraft systems functioned with few minor anomalies, which were countered, preventing loss of systems support. Splashdown occurred within one mile of guidance system target point and recovery of flight crew and CM was successful. All test objectives had been successfully accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
NASA announced end of Lunar Orbiter project. Lunar Orbiter V, launched Aug. 1, 1967, had obeyed spacecraft controllers and crashed on lunar surface after 1,200 orbits. Final operation of spacecraft had consisted of 18.9-sec burn of velocity control engine at apolune to decrease speed by 64 mph for orbit decay. Impact occurred at 2:58.5 am, est, near equator on moon’s western limb. Destruction of Lunar Orbiter V had become necessary because its supply of attitude control gas was nearly depleted. In concentrating on 36 areas of moon’s face, spacecraft had completed coverage necessary for full photographic survey of moon’s hidden side, photographing and transmitting 212 telephoto and 212 wide-angle pictures of lunar surface. Spacecraft had also been used to provide tracking target to msfn stations and for crew training and computer program verification. Lunar Orbiters I, II, and III had been crashed on Oct. 29, 1966, Oct. 11, 1967, and Oct. 9, 1967, as their control gas became exhausted. Communications were lost with Lunar Orbiter IV, and it had apparently crashed on lunar surface. During Lunar Orbiter project, since first launch Aug. 10, 1966, 6,034 orbits of moon had been completed and more than 99% of lunar surface had been photographed by orbiting cameras to provide data for selection of eight candidate landing sites for Apollo project. Lunar Orbiter program was directed by ossa and managed by LaRC. Boeing Co. was prime spacecraft contractor, (nasa Proj Off; nasa Release 68-23)
nasa issued Apollo Status Summary: Apollo 7 spacecraft had been moved from altitude chamber at ksc. During week it would be mated with lunar module adapter and prepared for mechanical mate with Saturn IB launch vehicle. In Apollo Saturn 503 project, radar lock-on problem in Lunar Module 3 ascent and descent stages’ rendezvous radar subsystem was being isolated. Saturn V launch vehicle 1st and 2nd stages had been mated. Last in series of seven water impact tests in support of first manned Apollo mission was scheduled for Aug. 13. (Text)
George Alexander reviewed in Washington Post Erik Bergaust’s Murder on Pad 34, story of Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire. Book was “characterized by sloppy errors of omission and commission, innuendo and pointlessness,” Alexander said. “It was good fortune, nothing else, that the various mechanical flaws and human faults that occurred in the . . . Mercury and Gemini programs did not coincide ... as they did inside Apollo-one. Foresight tries to prevent such coincidence, but . . . not all possible coincidence can be foreseen. . . . Accidents . . . will happen. And the searching investigation conducted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into Apollo-one could find no evidence that the fatal fire was anything but an accident.” (Book World, W Post, 7/14/68,4-5)
Washington Evening Star editorial: “The Russians are going to the moon just as fast as their technology will carry them. ... It is, of course, impossible to judge what lies ahead or guess what problems either nation may encounter before the lunar landings are carried out. But if all goes well it looks as though both nations might be ready to go in about a year. We would have no objection at all if a way could be found to ‘fix’ the race, and an agreement reached to make the landings literally simultaneous. It would be one way of assuring that neither nation would pursue the goal of national prestige to the point of tragedy.” (W Star, 10/25/68, A10)
Mathematical tools used to predict lunar motions were so imprecise that they hampered evaluation of lunar flights and use of moon as timepiece, according to two articles in Science by group of JPL scientists. Amplifying report, Dr. J. Derral Mulholland, JPL scientist in charge of revision of methods of prediction, said errors seemed to derive largely from inadequate emphasis on gravital influence of other planets, particularly Jupiter and Venus. JPL was preparing computer program to prediet lunar position for future space flights. (Science, 5/24/68, 874-8; Sullivan, NYT, 5/24/68,47)
In Apollo spacecraft loading tests, drogue parachutes would be tested within several days at Naval Air Facility, with 13,000-lb test vehicle dropped from aircraft at 46,000-ft altitude, subjecting parachutes to “ultimate loads” in reefed condition before they opened fully. Drop, repeat of previous test which failed, was to 'complete verification test series which had begun in 1967. (Text)
Under Administrator James E. Webb’s leadership, Don Kirkman commented in Washington Daily News, NASA had “put John Glenn in orbit in the Mercury capsule, brought back all the Gemini spacemen without mishap, and intended to put U.S. astronauts on the moon before the 1960s ended.” Unmanned spaceships had photographed moon and Mars and probed Venus host of weather, communications, and navigation satellites had been launched. But since Jan. 27, 1967, Apollo fire and with needs of Vietnam war, “every new budget brought new blows.” ( W News, 9/17/68, 9)
In Pravda, Prof. Boris Petrov, Soviet guidance mechanisms specialist, said U.S.S.R. preferred not to send men to moon at this point, though unmanned Zond V and Zond VI “were adapted for piloted flight.” (Reuters, W Post, 12/31/68, A3)
Washington Post editorial on Apollo 12 launch: “Through the peculiarities of our time, we are all about to become participants, albeit vicariously, in the kind of research and exploration that has been carried out previously by lonely scientists almost in isolation. Radio and television make it possible for us to watch and to hear two explorers as they go about the somewhat mundane business of making and recording observations, picking up rocks, and setting up equipment. As these flights roll on through the next few years, we will watch the slow process of exploration proceed. In a way, it will be like being there when Darwin traveled around the world and made the observations that resulted in his theory of evolution or when Lewis and Clark explored the Northwest. Not too much should be expected from any one trip or any one set of experiments. It is the totality of knowledge, not its fragments, that counts.” (W Post, 11/15/69, A20)
New York Times said Dr. Carlos Varsavsky, Director of Argentine Radio Astronomy Institute at La Plata, and 23 team members engaged in international research in radioastronomy faced dismissal for joining general strike May 10 in defiance of Argentine government. They had received notifications of termination of appointment. (NYT, 6/15/69, 24) lated lunar landings in third lunar landing training vehicle (lltv) at Ellington afb, Tex, Armstrong piloted lltv to 100- and 300-ft altitude and practiced touchdown maneuvers in preparation for lunar landing during Apollo 11 mission, to be launched July 16. Armstrong told newsmen lLtv did “excellent job in simulating the landing characteristics of the lunar module.” Flights were first for Armstrong since crash of second lltv Dec. 8, 1968. First lltv, piloted by Armstrong, had crashed May 6, 1968. (upi, NYT, 6/16/69, 1; msc Release 69—49; W Star, 6/17/69, A5)
Dr. George E. Mueller, NASA Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, spoke before student seminar at California Museum of Science and Technology in Los Angeles: “Besides serving as a subject of scientific exploration for its own secrets, the moon may be an important base for outward looking space science programs of the future.” It might eventually support large optical telescopes. There was strong evidence “that the most ideal location for large radio telescopes will eventually be the far side of the moon. This may be the only place within our convenient reach where the earth, which will become increasingly noisy as a radio source, may be completely screened out. In addition, the lunar surface presents us with a very large stable base, with only 1/6 gravity, no wind disturbance and no atmosphere absorption at any wave length. . . . Another attractive possibility is to use stations on both the moon and earth as a radio interferometer baseline for highly precise directional radio astronomy.” (Text)
At Salzburg news conference preceding celebration of his 75th birthday, German rocketry pioneer Prof. Hermann Oberth proposed that man extract usable raw materials from moon and store them suspended in gravity-free zone between moon and earth. Materials could then be retrieved from area and brought to earth. He suggested erection of giant concave “space mirrors” to gather celestial light and reflect it on earth as heat to melt polar caps and improve earth’s climate. He predicted development of electrically propelled spacecraft and electromagnetic catapults to launch spacecraft without consuming fuel. During celebration, sponsored by Hermann Oberth Society of Nuremberg, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said Oberth’s ideas on rocketry published in 1923 remained valid to date. (NYT, 6/29/69, 3)
Apollo 11 flight was public relations man’s and reporter’s dream, James Clayton said in Washington Post. NASA had kept “very little, if anything” from hundreds of U.S. and foreign press. More than 3,500 sets of press credentials had been issued at msc and Cape Kennedy. Most went to Americans, but 55 foreign countries were represented, including Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, and Romania. There were 111 newsmen representing Japan among 800 foreign newsmen, several of whom had been waiting in Houston since Apollo 10 flight May 18—26. Voice of America joined in transmitting news abroad. At peak, Apollo 11 story was going out in 22 languages to every world area except some Communist countries. “Even those had the radio beams directed at them.” (W Post, 7/27/69, B6)
Five segments of Apollo 9’s 6,500,000-lb “stack” remained in space, making total 1,613 objects floating in earth orbit after Apollo 9, said James J. Haggerty, Jr., in Armed Forces Journal. Descent stage of lm, in eccentric low orbit, would soon be captured by earth gravity and burn on reentry; ascent stage might remain in high orbit 20 yrs, along with lm adapter [gsfc reported later that LM descent stage had reentered March 22; ascent stage was still in orbit], S—IVB 3rd stage mated to instrument unit was directed into solar orbit. Of 1,613 orbiting objects listed by norad, 356 were payloads, both active and expired. Remaining 1,257 pieces were debris. Items in solar orbit included 3rd-stage and instrument-unit combinations from Apollo 8 and 9, four U.S. Pioneers and Mariner VI still sending useful data, and U.S. and U.S.S.R. planetary explorers launched before 1969. About 20 solar orbiting objects would remain in space a long time, along with 28 spacecraft which had crashed on other celestial bodies, including'U.S.S.R.’s Venus III and IV on Venus, 9 Soviet Lunas, 5 U.S. Rangers, 7 Surveyors, and 5 Lunar Orbiters. (AFI, 3/22/69, 15; gsfc SSR, 3/31/69)
U.S.S.R. launched Luna XV unmanned spacecraft from Baikonur into selenocentric orbit to conduct “further scientific studies of the moon and near lunar space,” Tass announced. Spacecraft was expected to reach moon late July 16—scheduled date of launch of NASA’s Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. There was speculation that Luna XV was Soviet attempt to land spacecraft on moon and return it to earth with sample of lunar soil before U.S. landed. (W Post, 7/14/69, Al; SBD, 7/18/69, 22; B Sun, 7/14/69, Al; gsfc SSR, 7/15/69)
Gloom and embarrassment over Apollo 11 success and crash of Luna XV on moon had caused controversy among Soviet leaders, including Communist Party Secretary Leonid I. Brezhnev and President Nikolay V. Podgorny, at July 21—23 meeting of Eastern European leaders in Warsaw, New York Times said. Reports of enthusiastic public response to Apollo feat across Eastern Europe had been interpreted as sign of lingering and latent sympathy for U.S. It was strongest in technologically advanced East Germany and Czechoslovakia, but had been noted as well in Poland, Hungary, and Romania. (Hofmann, NYT, 7/28/69, 7)
Delegation of 10 Soviet scientists visited Brookhaven National Laboratory at Upton, N.Y. During luncheon they peered through microscope at 12-gm piece of lunar matter brought back by Apollo 11 for study at laboratory’s nuclear research facilities. Scientists were on two-week tour arranged through memorandum of cooperation on peaceful uses of atomic energy. Group of U.S. scientists would pay reciprocal visit to U.S.S.R. early in 1970. (Kaufman, NYT, 11/20/69, 45)
Washington Post published letter from John M. Raymond, Jr., of Washington, D.C., which praised decision of Florida Legislature to ask for return of original name “Canaveral” to Cape Kennedy [see June 6]. “It is for us today a thrilling thought that men will leap to the moon from a cape discovered by Spanish adventurers early in the 16th century—a cape with one of the very earliest American place names to be retained to the present day. Or almost to the present day. Let the NASA center bear the name Kennedy. It is an appropriate tribute to the man who set us on the course to the moon. But let us restore to the cape the proud name it carried for 400 years.” (W Post, 6/14/69, A24)
Apollo 10 mission (May 18—26), first lunar orbital mission with complete Apollo spacecraft, was adjudged successful by NASA. Mission had achieved all objectives; systems had performed according to plan with only minor anomalies and crew had acquired major quantities of photographic training materials for subsequent Apollo missions. (nasa Proj Off)
Expectation of one million tourists to witness Apollo 11 launch had led to extraordinary precautions at Cocoa Beach, Fla., Washington Post said. Tank truck would be stationed at City Hall to fuel police cars; airboats would stand by to rush casualties to hospital if ambulances could not penetrate automobile traffic; and officials were concerned about scores of aircraft circling overhead to glimpse spacecraft. (Greider, W Post, 7/14/69, Al)
Apollo 11 lunar landing had been selected number one foreign news story of year by Japan’s Kyodo news service, Associated Press said. Second was President Nixon’s decision to reduce U.S. troops in Vietnam; third was Communist China’s ninth party congress in Peking. {St. Louis G-D, 12/8/69)
NASA released “Debrief: Apollo 8,” 28-min, 16-mm color film showing first manned lunar orbit. (NASA PAO; Nelson, Science, 1/24/69, 371)
Retiring Chief Justice of Supreme Court Earl Warren said at Lincoln Univ. commencement in Oxford, Pa., “We’re going to be on the moon —perhaps by July, they tell us. But it would be better if our universities taught us how to live in our great cities.” (AP, W Post, 6/3/69, A9)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory examined several large, dust-covered, crystalline rocks from first box of Apollo 12 lunar samples. Largest rock weighed 3—4 lbs and was 5 in long and 4^2 in thick. (Rossiter, W Star, 11/27/69, A4)
Apollo 9 mission to prove capability of LM to operate in space (March 3—13) was adjudged successful by NASA. Overall performance of launch vehicle, spacecraft, flight crew, ground support and control facilities, and personnel was satisfactory and all primary mission objectives were accomplished. (NASA Proj Off)
Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said during Moscow interview with Soyuz cosmonauts there were “some advantages” to joint space experiments with U.S. “We have no objection in principle,” he said, “and the setting of this type of goal has some merit. Even now the two countries participate in a number of international programs.” He added, “One would have to think, and choose this kind of joint program carefully. Maybe one of the flights to a planet in the future, or maybe around the earth also could be interesting. It is difficult to say exactly what I would like to see.” Keldysh said Soviet scientists had not received special technical data on Apollo 8 flight from U.S. However, “Certainly the success of such an outstanding flight, even if it does not produce any concrete new data, still gives something to all mankind.” (Winters, B Sun, 1/25/69, A2; Shabad, NYT, 1/25/69, 6)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II—8) was successfully captive-fired at Mississippi Test Facility for 385 secs, with only four outboard engines functioning for final 86 secs. Center engine was intentionally cut off early to evaluate early cutoff as suppressor of longitudinal oscillations (pogo effect) which had occurred on Apollo 8 and 9 flights. If test data were satisfactory, center engine might be cut off early during Apollo 10 mission in May. (msfc Release 69—107)
Newsiveek’s 42nd space age cover story since October 1957 contained comments from “opinion makers” on Apollo 11 mission. Dr. Robert Jastrow, Director of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, said scientific basis for mission was to discover secret of earth’s past through study of lunar rocks. Resolution of “cold moon” versus “hot moon” theory controversy—whether moon was formed cold, or cooled off shortly after its birth, or whether it was like earth molten or partly molten inside with volcanic surface—“may ride with Apollo 11.” Southern Christian Leadership Conference President, the Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy, said: “A society that can resolve to conquer space; to put man in a place where in ages past it was considered only God could reach; to appropriate vast billions; to systematically set about to discover the necessary scientific knowledge; that society deserves both acclaim and our contempt . . . acclaim for achievement and contempt for bizarre social values. For though it has the capacity to meet extraordinary challenges, it has failed to use its ability to rid itself of the scourges of racism, poverty and war, all of which were brutally scarring the nation even as it mobilized for the assault on the solar system.” Anthropologist Dr. Margaret Mead said: “This can be a first step, not into space alone, but into the disciplined and courageous use of enhanced human powers for man, ennobled as he is today, as the first men step on the moon.” Philosopher Lewis Mumford said: “Space exploration . . . is strictly a military by-product; and without pressure from the Pentagon and the Kremlin it would never have found a place in any national budget.” Best hope was “that this colossal perversion of energy, thought and other precious human resources may awaken a spontaneous collective reaction sufficient to bring us down to earth again. Any square mile of inhabited earth has more significance for man’s future than all the planets in our solar system.” (Newsweek, 6/7/69, S, 60—1)
Lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey said in lecture at Univ. of California at San Diego that new evidence had been uncovered during Apollo 11 mission that moon had been formed by collision process begun about 4.5	billion yrs ago. Water might have been present on moon temporarily and might still be beneath lunar surface. Information was to be made public by NASA in January 1970. (upi, W Post, 10/10/69, A5)
Washington Daily News reported song called “The Wondrous Telephone,” by Thomas P. Westendorf, had been published in 1877 with cover showing group of men talking by telephone to man in the moon. (W News, 11/20/69, 52)
Cross-country ceremonies for Apollo 11 astronauts constituted “probably the single greatest peacetime celebration in the nation’s history,” New York Times editorial said. “It was more than a tribute to three courageous and able men; it was also an act of homage to the hundreds of thousands of workers, engineers, technicians and scientists whose hard work over almost a decade made the moon landing possible. At the most fundamental level, perhaps, the outpouring of national rejoicing stemmed from the renewed sense of purpose the Apollo’s incredible feat had brought to a nation long torn and depressed by military travail abroad and racial and generational antagonisms at home. The essence of that sentiment was well stated by Mr. Armstrong when he declared at the United Nations that ‘we citizens of earth who can solve the problem of leaving earth can also solve the problems of staying on earth.’ ” (NYT, 8/14/69)
msfc announced it had awarded $1,954,999 cost-plus-incentive-fee contract to IBM Federal Systems Div.' for designing, developing, and building five general-purpose digital computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, (msfc Release 69—71)
Apollo program after lunar landing was discussed by nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Fight, Dr. George E. Mueller, before House Committee on Science and Astronautics hearing on NASA FY 1970 appropriations: “A thorough exploration plan has been evolved by the scientific community which will be initiated with the remainder of the fifteen Saturn V launch vehicles and Apollo spacecraft available under the Apollo program. Three initial phases of lunar exploration have been defined. The first phase will consist of landings that sample and observe the major classes of regions on the moon. To establish these norms, it will be necessary to land, carry out geological prospecting, and obtain rock and soil samples for return to earth from four separate sites. . . . “The second phase would include the investigation of the major classes of lunar anomalies . . . volcanic types, sinuous riverlike channel-ways, fracture zones and impact craters. Six additional sites have been identified as the minimum ... to provide answers to basic questions about the moon and to evaluate locations of potential resources, building materials or underground shelter openings. The third phase would be to tie together this information from 10 or more sites by making a remote sensing survey of the moon from lunar orbit.” Apollo Applications FY 1970 budget provided for “continuation of flight hardware development and for integration of modified subsystems into hardware for a set of five earth-orbital flights.” Their completion in 1972 “terminates the manned flight activity until other manned flight programs are established.” (Testimony)
There appears to be much more to be squeezed from Apollo than just the incalculable value of national prestige or scientific discovery,” Michael Getler wrote in Space/Aeronautics. “The ability to mine these supporting talents, to judge their value outside manned space flight and disseminate and apply them may well prove the most telling and measurable argument in the debate which is bound to continue over Apollo’s real value.” Apollo had combined “much of what we have with what we do best. Though complex, it was manageable. It had clear goals, was well funded, enjoyed fairly widespread public support, and dangled the element of competition in front of our involuntary reflex. Most importantly, it tapped an industrial base and an enthusiasm for gadgetry that are unmatched anywhere. . . . Because many of today’s challenges confront human nature and not technology, Apollo can be made to seem irrelevant. In fact, however, we are not left alone with our behavioral troubles. There is still an economy to keep sound, industry and commerce to be kept competitive, and a government to be made more efficient. Failure to take this extraordinary project apart, piece by piece, and examine its usefulness in these areas would indeed be wasteful.” (S/A, 9/69, 42—53)
Apollo 11 countdown began at ksc at 8:00 pm EDT in preparation for launch toward moon at 9:32 am EDT July 16. (Apollo 11 Status Rpt)
m/g Edmund F. O’Connor, Director of Program Management at msfc, would return to duty with usaf after Apollo 11 mission, msfc Deputy Director, Technical, Dr. Eberhard F. M. Rees, announced. Maj. O’Connor would be replaced by Lee B. James, Manager of Saturn Program Office, (msfc Release 69—155)
Apollo 11 lunar samples would not be first moon material to reach earth and to undergo scientific examination, Los Angeles Times quoted Dr. Dean R. Chapman, Chief of arc Thermo- and Gas-Dynamics Div., as saying in interview. Tektites—molten pieces of lunar surface in form of chunks of black glass—had fallen to earth when meteorites struck moon with tremendous force. Most recent tektite shower had occurred 700.000	yrs ago. While tektites’ origin was matter of scientific dispute, Dr. Chapman believed most commonly held theory—lunar origin. In working out shower’s trajectory, he had determined tektites came from Tycho crater on moon’s southern hemisphere. He believed Tycho to be 700.000	yrs old and that crusts of earth and of moon were intimately related. (Getze, LA Times, 7/7/69)
Visiting U.S.S.R. Cosmonauts Georgy T. Beregovoy and Konstantin P. Feoktistov went on “Flight to the Moon” ride at Disneyland, Calif., during U.S. tour. They received Mickey Mouse watches and caps from employees dressed as cartoon characters in spacesuits. Beregovoy said, “Now we are admitted to this particular society.” (upi, NYT, 10/25/69, 3)
Australian Civil Aviation Minister Reginald Swartz said passengers on transpacific Qantas Airlines flight would see Apollo 11 reentry July 24 when command module would parallel their aircraft for four minutes during descent near Gilbert and Ellice Islands. (Reuters, W Post, 7/23/69, A12)
Svenska Dagbladet, Stockholm, Sweden, welcomed Apollo 11 launch: “One of the greatest adventures of human history begins today. . . . Studies of the moon will to a great degree enrich our knowledge of both the earth and space. Among other things it will be possible to make comparisons which will propel science by leaps in various disciplines. . . . While we can predict much that may result from conquest of the moon, there will in all likelihood be many results which we cannot even imagine now. All great discoveries and bold undertakings have brought advances which no one could have foreseen from the outset.” Arbetet, Malmo, Sweden: “There is an irrational element in these feats of discovery which fortunately dominates the prosaic calculation of gains. Then one can regret that man’s fantasy seems incapable of being fired for such a tremendous task as eliminating starvation from our earth, or for bringing peace to Biafra or for eliminating the U.S. Negro ghettos. . . . Three men will be lifted to world acclaim today on the crest of mankind’s greatest ever coordinated effort. . . .” (Am Embassy, Stockholm)
In Huntsville interview, Dr. Wernher von Braun, msfc Director, said accomplishment of first lunar landing would not necessarily mean U.S. was first in space race. “. . . whether the Russians have this particular objective in their program, I just don’t know.” It was no longer possible to decide in simple terms who was ahead. “. . . today the space program has so many facets that it may be impossible for all eternity from now on to be ahead of them in all fields. And . . . impossible for them to be ahead of us in all fields.” It was still possible for U.S.S.R. to reach moon first if July launching date for Apollo 11 was delayed. Russians now had rocket more powerful than Saturn V, which would allow direct lunar flight. “If this rocket is flown in the very near future—which it might—they may still have a chance of landing a man on the moon in the latter part of 1969.” As for Soviet unmanned lunar landing, Dr. von Braun said, “I think the Russians very definitely have the capability as far as their equipment is concerned to soft land enough payload on the moon to take a sample of lunar soil and fly it back to earth.” (upi, NYT, 6/6/69, 18)
Pope Paul VI hailed Apollo 10 flight and said man’s presence in cosmos was sign of God’s presence “in our world and our life.” Pope told 30,000 persons at St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome, “Even more than the face of the moon, the face of man shines before us; no other being known to us, no animal, even the strongest and most perfect in its vital instincts, can be compared to the prodigious beings we men are.” (NYT, 5/22/69)
Board of Investigation which probed Feb. 17 death of Sealab III Aquanaut Berry L. Cannon had concluded probable cause was carbon dioxide poisoning due to faulty diving gear, usn announced. Gear had lacked substance for filtering carbon dioxide from exhaled breath. Associated Press said Sealab III project had been “shelved” because of insufficient funds for FY 1970 and quoted USN spokesman as saying it would be continued later. Project had been suspended since Cannon death, (dod Release 794-69; W Star, 9/24/69, A9) *	Shawbury, England, innkeeper Jack Warner had asked U.S. Government for license to open first pub on moon, Associated Press said. He would call it “The Space Inn” or “The Lunatic Tavern.” (W Star, 9/24/69, A16)
Washington Evening Star editorial said of success of Dec. 21—27, ,1968, Apollo 8 mission: “Modern science undercut man’s bland belief that he was the center of the universe, and modern philosophy reduced him to a trivial atom of matter in the larger cosmos. To be able to sail around at will in that vast cosmos may give man back some of the confidence he once had, not the arrogance of thinking that he understands the whole pattern, but the quiet sense that he will not flinch from what he may yet learn.” (W Star, 1/1/69, A15)
Sen. Robert J. Dole (R-Kans.) introduced S.R. 167 “providing for the display in the Capitol Building of a portion of the moon.” Resolution was referred to Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. {CR, 12/9/69, S16142)
Second largest lunar sample shown to public to date—67.7-gm moon rock—went on display at usia “Education—U.S.A.” exhibit at Sekoniki Park in Moscow. One of 14 moon rocks thus far released by NASA for publicity tours, rock later would travel with usia exhibit to Tashkent, Baku, and Novosibirsk, where it would become first U.S. exhibit ever shown in Siberia. Other moon rocks had been scheduled for showing at 30 U.S. museums. Largest lunar sample—Smithsonian Institution’s 478.8-gm rock—was expected to be only permanent display. NASA also had approved display of samples entrusted to U.S. scientists who wished to show them in their home towns. (Lardner, W Post, 11/24/69, Al; usia pio)
U.S. newspaper editorials hailed Apollo 11 launch. Miami News: “All America, represented by three lonely men in space, is on its way to the moon. In fact, this is a people’s effort, arousing the interest and participation of all the people of this country. This is evidenced by the more than one million persons on hand at Cape Kennedy . . . for the start of the moon voyage and by the many millions who join in the adventure by television. Today’s magnificent launch, and the elan stirred in our people by it, makes this one of America’s most splendid hours.” (Miami News, 7/17/69, A16) Washington Evening Star: countdown which culminated in Apollo 11 liftoff, “regardless of NASA’s official records,” had begun, “when primitive man first looked up into the night sky to gaze at the moon, and to feel the first stirring of wonder.” (W Star, 7/16/69, A22) Huntsville Times: Manhattan Project had climaxed with July 16, 1945, explosion of world’s first successful atomic bomb. “Men, it seems, can only pray that the consequences of the quest of the planets may be better than those born in the irreversible explosion on a New Mexico desert 24 years ago.” (Huntsville Times, 7/16/69) Chicago Sun-Times: “Man has always looked upward to the stars, first in fear and awe, then in need to know. Today the first great step to the firmament will be taken. If it is successful man will stand on the threshold of outer space—and standing there will reach outward.” (C Sun-Times, 7/16/69)
Analysis of lunar surface would provide key to earth’s history by indicating whether moon’s origin was catastrophic or noncatastrophic, Dr. H. Alfven and Dr. G. Arrhenius of Univ. of California at San Diego said in Science. Radiometric dating of igneous lunar rocks might provide information on time of their solidification. If catastrophic alternative was correct, rocks should date to less than 4.5 eons, minimum age of moon, and predominant age should be approximately 0.7 eon, with major surface and subsurface features less than 0.7 eon. If noncatastrophic alternative proved correct, predominant age of lunar rocks should exceed 4 eons, at least, since it was likely moon predated earth. {Science, 7/4/69, 11-7)
Scientists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory opened last box of Apollo 11 lunar samples containing charcoal-gray dust and assorted rocks ranging from gravel to size of orange. NASA geologist Dr. Jeffrey L.	Warner described rocks as “different from anything we have on earth.” Some of rocks had flat faces and appeared to have been broken off larger chunks of material. Rocks in first box of samples had been rounded. Some rocks contained unidentified crystals that sparkled; others had “an unusual smattering of what appeared to be metallics,” possibly ilmenite (iron-titanium mineral oxide), important source of titanium, (upi, W Post, 8/5/69, A6; AP, B Sun, 8/5/69, Al)
Moon was twin planet of earth, formed from same whirling gas cloud, in early view of two lrl scientists studying Apollo 11 samples. Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Astri National Univ., Canberra, Australia, said, “Moon’s composition is unlike the earth’s. But it is not outside our experience. It is like the material you would expect if the earth and moon were formed as a double planet.” He thought moon was younger twin, while Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of State Univ. of New York thought it might be equally old. Age of two lunar rocks had been estimated at 3.1 billion yrs, “give or take . . . 200 million years,” by measuring proportion of argon 40 to potassium in rocks, Dr. Schaeffer said. Lunar highlands might be 4.5	billion yrs old. Moon, he thought, never grew big enough to melt internally and produce geologic activity to change lunar surface and leave younger rocks. Dr. Taylor’s studies had shown unusually high amounts of refractory material and absence or low concentration of volatile materials, implying volatile material had boiled away in melting process. He inferred rock chemistry was different from deep mantle of earth and from cosmic abundances—distribution of elements that would be expected in distant, more primitive planet captured by earth. (Cohn, W Post, 8/28/69, Al)
erc Director James C. Elms discussed NASA’s role in computer R&D at Spring Joint Computer Conference in Boston. While Apollo guidance computer was best known among major computer activities undertaken by NASA in its first decade, other onboard computer developments “of considerable technical challenge” had been pursued. Versatile test-bed multiprocessor exam was oriented toward use of “hierarchy of memories” to increase capability to evaluate advanced technology for very large bulk-storage systems, particularly for spaceborne computers. trim—for Transformation of Imagery—was experimental tool for advancing state of art in imagery processing; computer-driven flying-spot scanner with color capability had auxiliary display terminal permitting man-machine-interactive operation, sofix—for Software Fix—was coordinated university research program on problems in developing computer software at same pace as hardware. (Text)
Every scientist-astronaut except one—geologist Harrison Schmitt—had been removed from NASA’s lunar landing training list, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Report was later denied by nasa. Cohn said remaining scientists had been assigned to train for iong-duration, earth-orbiting Apollo Applications missions beginning in 1972. {W Post, 8/21/69, Al; 8/22/69, A18)
Biggest engineering problem facing 108-yr-old mit at close of 1960s was one of identity, Eric Wentworth said in Washington Post, “namely the increasingly disputed place of war-related research within its academic confines.” mit ranked first among U.S. universities in receipt of dod funding, which in 1968 accounted for almost half of Institute’s $17-million budget. Since March 4 day-long work stoppage by students and young faculty members protesting mit’s heavy military involvement, President Howard W. Johnson and other mit leaders had moved to reassess mit’s role. They had declared temporary halt on accepting new contracts for classified research at Instrumentation Laboratory and Lincoln Laboratory and established commission to review laboratories’ role. Commission had recommended continuing basic dod research but avoiding advanced development of weaponry, reducing secrecy, and shifting efforts toward meeting domestic and social needs. Meanwhile, Instrumentation Laboratory had already “come to the end of an era.” Its founder and head, Dr. Charles S. Draper, had been “eased out of his job as director although he may continue in other capacities.” His accomplishments with laboratory had included onboard guidance navigation systems “that took Apollo 11 spacemen to the moon last summer.” (W Post, 11/10/69, 2)
Hughes Aircraft Co. executive team held press conference aboard private yacht near Cape Kennedy, Fla., to announce company President Howard R. Hughes’ intention to rename Surveyor 111 “Hughes Automated Lunar Observer” (halo). Hughes’ assistant, Peter Maheuson, said Hughes was understood to have asked NASA to use acronym in all air-to-groUnd communications. Hughes Aircraft Co. had manufactured Surveyor III, which landed on moon April 19, 1967. Pieces of unmanned spacecraft were to be returned by Apollo 12 for examination at lrl. (Lannan, W Star, 11/12/69, Al)
Rep. George A. Goodling (R-Pa.) introduced H.R. 13838 “to provide for the distribution to the several States, for display to the public . . . samples of the lunar rocks and other lunar materials brought back by the Apollo 11 mission.” {CR, 9/17/69, H8098)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 12 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (AP, W Star, 11/26/69, A2)
Observers on earth would have two opportunities to see Apollo 12 after launch Nov. 14, NASA announced. During first opportunity, 57 min after liftoff, oxygen release from Saturn V 3rd stage (S—IVB) would be visible on east coasts of North and South America and western Europe and Africa. During second opportunity, about 15 hrs after liftoff, spacecraft would be visible during translunar coast through telescopes in U.S., Mexico, Central America, South America, Europe, and western Africa, (nasa Release 69—148C)
Space Business Daily said poll of 1,400 U.S. adults conducted after Apollo 10 splashdown by A. Singlinger & Co. had found 51.3% in favor of lunar exploration program. Of those polled, 39% disapproved of program and 9.7% had no opinion. (SBD, 6/10/69, 174)
Australian marathon runner Bill Emmerton left Houston, Tex., on 1,034-mi jog to Cape Kennedy, Fla., where he would watch Apollo 11 launch. He would travel on foot approximately 40 mi per day, arriving morning of July 16. Purpose of run was to publicize benefits of physical conditioning, pay tribute to fitness of lunar crew, and commemorate Apollo 11 flight. (Spaceland News, 6/69, 11; pmr Release 916—69)
NASA said Soviet Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin had rejected U.S. invitation to watch Apollo 11 launch. U.S.S.R. originally had accepted, but Soviet Embassy in Washington said Dobrynin would be out of the country. (AP, W Star, 7/13/69, A9)
Apollo 12 spacecraft was lashed by 40-mph winds during second day of countdown demonstration test (cddt) at KSC. Officials said exercise proceeded without difficulty. (W Post, 10/25/69, A9; upi, NYT, 10/25/69)	'
Apollo 9 prime crew—Astronauts James A. McDivitt (commander), David R. Scott (cm pilot), and Russell L. Schweickart (lm pilot)—held press briefing at Grumman Aircraft Engineering Corp.’s Bethpage, N.Y., plant. Describing 10-day mission scheduled to begin Feb. 28 as primarily engineering evaluation of lunar module, McDivitt said: “. . . we will be giving the . . . lm hardware a very close scrutiny. We don’t expect to find anything, but our job is to go up there and look for it. Now after we have discovered that the lm is a good vehicle, we have ... to prove the joint operations techniques that we’ve tried to develop on the ground over the last 3 years. It’s one thing to fly one spacecraft in orbit, and have it controlled by the ground, but when you get 2 of them up there, they are trying to look at 2 vehicles simultaneously so that . . . you find the ground talking to 2 spacecraft and 2 spacecraft talking back to each other and also to the ground, and it becomes a rather unwieldly communications effort.” He added reminder that “only one of these vehicles has the capability to land— safely, I guess I should add. They both have the capability of landing. We only have one set of parachutes and one heat shield.” He described lm as “a tissue paper spacecraft,” explaining it did not have to reenter earth’s atmosphere and there was no atmosphere on moon. Scott said they now had “a new vehicle ... a command module lm combination ... a particularly unique situation, in that ... we have to do the lunar orbit insertion [in lunar mission] with the two vehicles joined together with a very large mass on the end of the command module, so it’s a completely new guidance task” to be checked out. McDivitt explained separation of lm from cm on rendezvous day, with two vehicles pulling away from each other and performing maneuvers, moving up to 100 mi apart: “The object ... is to evaluate our systems from a propulsion standpoint, electrical standpoint, the staging sequence, all of the components that we can and still get back safely to the command module.” In response to question on relation of Apollo program to life on earth, McDivitt replied: “. . . if you’re not moving forward ... the rest of the world is and they’re going to pass you by. We’re gaining something and we’re gaining knowledge. . . . We’re going to move forward on all fronts, we’re not moving forward on just the space front. . . . Any organized system of intelligence moves forward in all directions, and . . . that is what we are doing.” (Transcript) 0 Nike-Cajun sounding rocket launched by NASA from Kiruna, Sweden, carried Swedish Space Research Committee (ssrc) and British Science Research Council payload to 73.3-mi (118-km) altitude to obtain atmospheric data by detonating grenades and recording their sound arrivals on ground. Flight, last in series of four [see Jan. 23], was successful; 24 of 25 grenades detonated and were recorded, (nasa Rpt srl)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 11 samples and expressed surprise at discovery of tiny glasslike crystals in lunar dust. Analyses had revealed samples were crystalline, igneous, fragmented, scoriaceous, and vesicular. They confirmed theory based on Surveyor V data that lunar material contained titanium and indicated presence of number of minerals. Columbia Univ. scientist Dr. Paul Gast said, “The most exciting discovery to date has been that of the glass. There is something going on on the moon far different than on the earth.” He said scientists speculated impact of meteoroids on moon had vaporized lunar material and caused it to rain back on surface in small drops which formed tiny yellow, brown, and clear pieces of glass few tenths of millimeter in diameter. (Lyons, NYT, 7/29/69, 1; Sehlstedt, B Sun, 7/29/69, Al)
William Hines in Washington Sunday Star said time was “ripe” for NASA reorganization, “not merely the firing, promoting and transferring of officials, but the functional restructuring of the agency as well.” There was some suspicion that no place existed for Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Administrator, who was “not only a Johnson-administration holdover, but a card-carrying Democrat as well.” Some observers believed Apollo 8 Astronaut Frank Borman, “the President’s current darling and space confidant,” might be next NASA Administrator. “The idea of putting astronauts in charge of the space program may seem incongruous, but it is clearly not beyond the realm of possibility in the image-conscious Nixon regime.” Paine’s fate would determine that of Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight, Dr. George E. Mueller. With lunar landing, Apollo had changed from developmental to operational effort. Christopher C. Kraft, Director of Flight Operations at msc, would likely transfer to Washington as Apollo Program Manager—possibly “controlling all space missions for NASA.” Hines saw possibility of Apollo Program Director, George H. Hage’s moving into position being vacated by l/g Samuel C. Phillips, Apollo Program Director, who was rejoining usaf. “George M. Low, Apollo chief at Houston, may replace the Houston Center director, Robert R. Gilruth, if Gilruth can be prevailed upon to retire.” There was talk about moving msfc Director Dr. Wernher von Braun to Washington “to do what he does best: charm money out of Congress.” Dr. Kurt H. Debus, ksc Director, “may retire to make way for Rocco Petrone. . . .” (W Star, 8/10/69, G4)
Washington Evening Star special supplement, “Voyage to the Moon,” commented: “Hanging in the sky, attracting man’s attention for untold generations, the moon has been the reputed home of gods and goddesses of all religions, primitive and modern. If all these deities lived there at any one time, the reasons for its battle-scarred appearance would be obvious. But assuming that none did . . . that pock-marked face still poses more questions than it answers.” (W Star, 7/14/69)
Trans World Airlines filed first application with Civil Aeronautics Board for routes between earth and moon. Airline said it had received 1,200 reservations during final four days of Apollo 11 mission, (twa Release)
Apollo 8 mission (Dec. 21—27, 1968) was adjudged successful by NASA. All objectives of manned circumlunar mission were attained, as well as four detailed test objectives not originally planned, (nasa Proj Off)
Special message to Apollo 10 crew from five Soviet cosmonauts was released by Soviet Embassy: “We Soviet cosmonauts followed your difficult work very closely. We sincerely admire the high accuracy with which you carried out all the maneuvers planned, your excellent preparedness and courage.” Message was signed by Cosmonauts Gherman S. Titov, Andrian G. Nikolayev, Aleksey Leonov, Georgy Beregovoy, and Vladimir Shatalov. (upi, W Post, 5/28/69, A13)
Apollo 11 might signal end to KSC area’s economic boom, Wall Street Journal said. NASA had announced slack in Apollo launchings and cut in ksc employment from 23,500 to 18,500 persons. Brevard County (site of ksc) housing construction had fallen some 40%, from 3,438 units in 1967 to 2,080 in 1968, and was currently down another 40%. (Prugh, WSJ, 7/3/69, 28)
Preliminary investigation had revealed leak in small fuel line on Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—II) No. 3 engine had caused June 26 fire, msfc announced. Board had been convened to conduct further investigations and recommend preventive measures. Stage’s No. 3 and No. 5 engines would be replaced; other three engines received minor damage and would be repaired in place. Accident would not affect launch preparations for Apollo 11 mission; inspection of Apollo 11 vehicle SA—506 had confirmed that its high-pressure fuel lines were in good condition. (msfc Release 69—156)
New York Times editorial asked: “Why should lunar research be limited to what this country can afford? Even if the Soviet Union is unwilling to cooperate, there are very substantial human and material resources in Western Europe, Japan and other areas that could be mobilized for the task of lunar exploration and settlement that lies ahead. President Nixon could demonstrate high statesmanship by offering to turn the National Aeronautics and Space Administration into the International Aeronautics and Space Administration if others will join to help carry the burdens of the effort and provide additional talents for the job. And if NASA became IASA, even Moscow—after its recent space disappointments—might see advantages in joining the common effort to make the moon a lever for uniting mankind.” (NYT, 11/18/69)
nas—nrc Space Science Board published Lunar Exploration: Strategy for Research 1969—1975. Best use of manned lunar-landing capability in lunar exploration would entail shift of emphasis from technological development to exploitation of existing Apollo technology for scientific objectives. Board recommended: immediately focusing lunar program on optimizing returns on investment already made in Apollo through maximum use of existing Apollo technology; giving priority to current Apollo lunar-exploration phase should choice be necessary in early 1970s between funding major new manned exploration technology and funding extensions of Apollo lunar technology; periodic reevaluation of NASA’s proposed lunar landing sites; earliest possible extensions of Apollo technology to increase scientific returns and increasing interval up to six months between missions to allow incorporation of improvements; early provision of roving vehicle to transport astronauts at least 3.1—6.2 mi (5—10 km) from LM; inclusion in Apollo 16 to 20 time frame, in high-inclination orbit, of experiments in gravimetry by satellite-to-satellite tracking technique, altimetry, magnetometry, x-ray and gamma-ray spectrometry, and medium- and high-resolution photography; and increase in supporting research in orbital sensing techniques, both active and passive. Board also recommended high-priority consideration for long-distance, remotely controlled, traversing vehicle for later missions; careful review of Apollo program management structure to increase role of scientists in influencing basic policy and mission hardware; specific support to lunar experiment definition as integral part of Apollo program and more substantial investment in developing experiment packages easily modified and interchanged even shortly before flight; and high-priority attention to management, handling, distribution, and analysis of lunar samples brought to earth. (Text; nrc Release)
Worldwide program to provide widest display possible of Apollo 11 lunar samples was announced by NASA. Of 15 moon rocks weighing between % and 2% oz, 8 were for U.S. display and 7 had been released to usia for overseas showing. In addition to Smithsonian Institution display, exhibits would include rock traveling with Apollo 11 cm on tour of 50 state capitals and two-month showings in 30 museums and planetariums during year, usia would show six stones on world tour, and seventh at Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan, (nasa Release 69—155)
Two boxes of lunar samples from Apollo 11 arrived at Lunar Receiving Laboratory in Houston, where they would be examined and used in experiments. (Wilford, NYT, 7/26/69, 1)
In his fourth reference to Apollo 11 within week, Pope Paul VI said at summer palace, Castel Gondolfo, Italy: “Catholic faith, not only does not fear this powerful confrontation of its humble doctrine with the wonderful riches of modern scientific thought, but it desires it . . . because truth although diverse on various levels ... is one and because such a confrontation is of mutual advantage to faith and to study in every field.” (AP, W Post, 7/24/69, A15)
Americans had generated only “scant enthusiasm” for Apollo 12 launch, New York Times said. In contrast to Apollo 11, July 16, “television sets in bars and business offices drew only small, languid crowds. . . .” Collective sense of anticlimax was “perhaps predictable considering the intense national emotion spent on the first moon landing four months ago.” Contributing to indifference might have been “the mounting preoccupation with the war in Vietnam, the peace rallies, the controversy surrounding Vice President Agnew and earthly social problems.” However, “there were no reports of the kind of demonstrations that protested the Apollo 11 flight.” Marchers in antiwar protests had appeared “to show little interest” in Apollo 12. (Reinhold, NYT, 11/15/69)	_
Completion of multimillion-dollar electron microscope, twice as powerful as any previously existing, at Laboratory of Electronic Optics in Toulouse, France, opened question “Will we ever be able to look into the very heart of things?” Walter Sullivan said in New York Times. Instrument, without its accelerator, weighed 22 tons and stood 10 ft tall. Interviews with U.S., French, and U.K. scientists had revealed wide feeling that “before long it may be possible ... to see individual atoms and ‘read’ the genetic message in a strand of dna (deoxyribonucleic acid).” Univ. of Chicago biophysicist Dr. Humberto Fernandez-Moran had said when that stage was reached, it might be possible not only to predict, but also to design life at the molecular level. {NYT, 11/30/69, E9) During November: It was “no government secret” that NASA, “preoccupied with putting men on the moon,” had neglected aeronautics in favor of space, C. V. Glines said in Armed Forces Management. But pressures generated by “airways crisis of 1st year, an ever-growing divergence between civilian and military aeronautical R&D requirements and applications and concern for loss of U.S. preeminence in aeronautics are demanding that attention be given to national aeronautical research and development policies.” Effects of Nixon Administration “study timetable” for long-range NASA—DOT civil R&D program would affect dot—FAA 1972 budgets. Meanwhile, “quiet gains are being made in the aeronautics side of the NASA house.” NASA aircraft technology budget would increase from $94.9 million in FY 1969 to over $100 million in FY 1970, with further increase in FY 1971 and new high in FY 1972, “when the long-range study gives new directions for aeronautical research.” (Armed Forces Management, 11/69, 34-8)
Leading lunar scientist Dr. Harold C. Urey told conference on nuclear energy at Argonne National Laboratory near Chicago he was “pleased” at discovery that age of lunar rocks might range between 3 billion and 4.5 billion yrs [see Aug. 23] and had “expected this for a long time. . . . But I’m not making any more bets on the moon’s origin.” He was “puzzled” by once-molten iunar sea material; it might have been formed by huge meteor or asteroid impacts rather than volcanism and moon might have originated out of cluster of such aster-oidal debris. (Cohn, W Post, 8/29/69, A3)
msc announced award of $4.1-million modification to IBM Corp. contract for design, development, implementation, maintenance, and operation of real-time computer complex (rttc) which supported Apollo lunar landing missions. Modification definitized requirements to support Apollo lunar surface experiments package (alsep) and continued work under multi-inventive arrangement covering cost, performance, schedule, and equipment management, (msc Release 69—69)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on Apollo 12’s man-made lunar quake: “It seems that when the lunar lander was sent rocketing down to crash on the Ocean of Storms, it left the moon ‘ringing like a gong’ for some 30 minutes. This, in the words of one ecstatic scientist, constitutes ‘a major discovery . . . quite beyond the range of our experience.’ ” Scientific curiosity “is a good thing—provided it’s kept within reasonable limits. ... Just suppose that their first reading was right, and that the moon really is some sort of celestial gong. Remember what happened when people got too enthusiastic with the Liberty Bell.” (W Star, 11/24/69, A12)
Emperor Haile Selassie of Ethiopia toured msc during five-day visit to U.S. (Reuters, W Post, 7/10/69, A23; Apollo Status Rpt; NASA pao)
Post Office Dept, announced delay in delivery of moon landing stamp first day covers because of “unprecedented number of requests.” Processing crew of 100—more than twice number normally employed— were working longer shifts with more special canceling equipment than ever before to handle “response from people all over the world.” (PO Dept. Philatelic Release 50)
Teletype from German ship Vegesack reported numerous pieces of Saturn V	launch vehicle from Apollo 11 were sighted dropping into sea around ship. Vegesack had been at position some 375 mi east-northeast of Cape Kennedy when Apollo 11 lifted off toward moon July 16. (W News, 2/3/70)
Scientists monitoring seismometer left on lunar surface by Apollo 11 astronauts told press at msc five-minute event recorded July 22 was either meteoroid strike or moonquake similar to mild California earthquake recorded on East Coast, mit geologist, Dr. Frank Press, said tremor would have magnitude of four or five according to Richter scale, on which major earthquake registered seven or eight. Seismic reading was strong indication that moon was layered with outer crust and inner mantle like earth and supported theories that moon was formed near or torn from earth. Layering, he said, “would imply that at one time there was enough heat so that the heavier rocks went to the interior and the lighter ones to the surface.” (McGehan, B Sun, 7/24/69, Al; Lyons, NYT, 7/24/69, 1)
nasa established 14-member Apollo Orbital Science Photographic Team to provide scientific guidance in design, operation, and data utilization of photographic systems for Apollo lunar orbital science program. Chairman was Frederick J. Doyle of U.S. Geological Survey. (Apollo Prog Off)
As part of NASA and Washington National Gallery of Art program, Eyewitness to Space, group of artists attended Apollo 11 launch to paint facets of mission. Program originated in 1963 when artists were invited to cover Mercury 9 mission. Among those commissioned to record Apollo 11 were Peter Hurd, Robert Rauschenberg, Lamar Dodd, and James B. Wyeth. Since program started, 25 artists had produced more than 500 sketches and paintings. (Casey, W Post, 7/13/69, Gl; Hicks, NYT, 7/15/69, 33; W Star, 7/17/69, A12)
At state dinner in Manila, Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos exchanged toasts with President Nixon and commented on Apollo 11: “. . . we participate in the celebration of this achievement as man aspires for the steers, the stars outside of this world and the stars within himself and within his spirit. It is the hope of humanity, as it is the hope of the Philippines, that this vision and this genius, this courage and this ingenuity shall be utilized for the solution of man’s problems.” {PD, 8/4/69, 1036-7)
Paul Haney, described by press as “Voice of Apollo,” announced resignation after 10 yrs with NASA following NASA Hq. discussion of his April 22 appointment as assistant to Associate Administrator for Public Affairs Julian Scheer. Haney said decision to resign resulted from personal differences with Scheer, who told press he had tried to persuade Haney to remain with agency. (AP, NYT, 4/26/69, 2; O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3)
NASA announced withdrawal of three Apollo range instrumentation ships —usns Redstone, Mercury, and Huntsville—from tracking network supporting Apollo flights. Remaining tracking ship, usns Vanguard, would be continued on station in Atlantic about 1,000 mi southeast of Bermuda. NASA said reduction of Apollo ship support was based on high success of Apollo missions, particularly their excellent “launch on time” record, (nasa Release 69-133)
msfc announced $7,384,543 modification to contract with Chrysler Corp. Space Div. for assembly of two boosters for Saturn IB rockets 2l3 and 214 for use in Apollo Applications program, (msfc Release 69—93)
Soviet scientist Nikolay A. Kozyrev told Soviet Committee for Inventions and Discoveries he had discovered active volcano on moon. He had detected glowing rocks in Aristarchus crater in 1955 and obtained spectrogram of crater’s gas in 1958. Comparing spectrogram with others obtained from active volcanos in Soviet Far East, he had found them similar, (upi, W News, 12/31/69, 9)
In Science, JPL scientist Dr. Leonard D. Jaffe said despite successful landing of seven unmanned spacecraft on moon controversy over density of lunar surface material continued. Further analysis of data showed relation of density of lunar surface layer to depth was best determined from spacecraft measurements of bearing capacity as function of depth. Comparison of these values with laboratory measurements of bearing capacity of low-cohesion particulate materials as a function of percentage of solid indicated bulk density at lunar surface was approximately 1.1 gr per cc at depth of 5 cm. (Science, 6/27/69, 1514-6)
Apollo 10 mission would be launched May 18, one day later than originally planned, nasa announced. Change from first to second day of launch window would permit observation and collection of data on Apollo landing site 2, as area of primary interest, and observation of site 3 after sunrise on moon. Final decision on specific nature of mission would be made after review of Apollo 9 mission. (NASA Release 69-41)
President Nixon telephoned Apollo 12 Commander Charles Conrad, Jr., to wish crew good luck on eve of launch. {PD, 11/17/69, 1604)
Original equipment of field-sequential color TV system which would be used by Apollo 11 to transmit pictures from moon [see April 5] was presented to Smithsonian Institution by inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, President of cbs Laboratories. Apollo 11 would carry three-pound miniaturization of system in Westinghouse camera. (Schaden, W Star, 7/8/69, Bl)
nasa announced Apollo 12 lm guidance-system targeting for Site 7 landing point on moon’s Ocean of Storms had been changed to improve crew’s ability to observe landing point during late portion of descent. Crew would attempt to land close to Surveyor 111 spacecraft at 2.990 south latitude by 23.204 west longitude. Original aiming point was 2.982 south latitude by 23.392 west longitude—1,118 ft northeast of Surveyor 111. (nasa Release 69—148B)
Several thousand gallons of fuel escaped from prevalves in Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC) while it was being prepared for Apollo 10 countdown demonstration test (cddt) at ksc. Prevalves opened while leak was being repaired in nitrogen pressurization system on mobile launcher, cddt, scheduled to begin April 28, was delayed 24 hrs while vehicle was examined for damage. (O’Toole, W Post, 4/29/69, A3; Marshall Star, 4/30/69, 1)
nasa awarded Grumann Aircraft Engineering Corp. $3,438,400 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lunar module contract. Modifications—to documentation and reporting procedures for lm test and checkout, to flight and ground test hardware, to test and effect analyses, and to crew safety hardware—brought total value of contract to $1.6 billion since January 1963. (msc Release 69—14)
Tom Wicker commented in New York Times on suggested detonation of nuclear device on moon [see Dec. 15]. “Aside from the obvious questions about the effects of nuclear fallout in the moon’s atmosphere, what might be the total environmental consequences of such an explosion— for the moon itself, for those who will be visiting it from earth, for other objects in the solar system?” Past performances had indicated “some unexpected and probably unwelcome result.” Indus and Ganges River irrigation systems had contaminated soil in India with salt that rose from earth with water and Aswan Dam was spreading disease with irrigation waters in Egypt and damaging fertile Nile delta by interfering with ancient silting process. In U.S., oil leaks from ocean floor set off by scientific drilling techniques had ruined Santa Barbara, Calif., coast. “Monstrous engines” of Boeing 747, Concorde supersonic airliner, C—5A Galaxy jet, and sst would “spew their poisons on mankind.” Could man master anything that really mattered? “Certainly not nature, and least of all himself; rather it is altogether likely that if the Biblical flood someday engulfs the earth, it will flow from seeded clouds. That might even be a fitting end.” (NYT, 12/18/69, 46) December 19: Results of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface [see Aug. 18] were reported in Science by originator Dr. Johannes Geiss and Univ. of Berne, Switzerland, team. Helium-4 solar wind flux during Apollo 11 excursion was 5.1 million to 7.5 million atoms per sq cm per sec. Solar wind direction and energy were essentially not perturbed by moon. Evidence for solar wind albedo had been found. (Science, 12/19/69, 1502—3)
NASA announced it was proceeding with plans and preparations for launch of Apollo 18 manned lunar landing mission to Fra Mauro on March 12, 1970. Decision was based on review of photos taken of Fra Mauro area and successful demonstration of pinpoint landing techniques by Apollo 12. Fra Mauro was flat, vast highland area about 110 mi east of Apollo 12 landing point on Ocean of Storms, (nasa Release 69—162)
Washington Post published letter from Irene S. Rubin in Lampang, Thailand. Real impact of Apollo 11 success in Thailand had been “on the group of educated men who have some effect on government. Their primary reaction was not one of shared accomplishment but of shame in the gap thus dramatized between themselves and the developed countries.” Though U.S. could not hide technological capacity, “I think we should be more aware of the context into which news of the Apollo mission is received. Far from bringing the world closer together with such performances, we may be arousing bitterness and obstinacy in the misallocation of development funds.” (W Post, 8/21/69, A18)
Soviet academician Anatoly A. Blagonravov said in Moscow interview: “Exploration of moon and planets is a most noble task and our generation can rightly be proud it has opened the space era. Any scientific achievement accomplished in any country in die long run becomes an achievement of world science. Space efforts of the United States and the USSR sometimes complement one another.” (upi, P Bull, 6/22/69)
While there was some “feeling of dejavu” at Cocoa Beach, near Apollo 12 launch site, some residents, especially local business men, believed interest in Apollo 12 was “just as keen as in any other launching,” New York Times said. Manager Hal Saunders of Cape Kennedy Hilton Hotel had said, while pace seemed calmer and more organized, people were no less excited than before. He felt there were more tourists at Cape Kennedy this week than in July bcause “fewer were scared by press reports . . . that all facilities would be jammed.” Many were seeing launch for first time “and it is still a thoroughly thrilling experience.” (Blakeslee, NYT, 11/14/69, 33)
Jack C. Swearingen, former Chief of Program Control in msfc Apollo Applications Program Office, became Assistant Director in Science and Engineering. (Marshall Star, 11/12/69, 1)
Apollo 12 countdown demonstration test (cddt) began at KSC in preparation for launch to moon Nov. 14. (upi, NYT, 10/25/69)
Montreal, Canada, Gazette commented on Apollo 11 mission: “Lyndon Johnson, more than any other man, is responsible for meeting the moon-shot deadline this week. . . .” (Am Consul, Montreal)
msfc announced award of $1,712,000 contract change to Bendix Corp. for construction of three additional control computers for Apollo Telescope Mount project, to be delivered from April 1970 through July 1970. (msfc Release 69-141)
Moon was gray and colorless, rather than orange from oxidation of ferrous oxide in rocks by photolytically liberated oxygen, ucla geophysicist Dr. Willard F. Libby noted in Science. He suggested reason “lies in the solar wind’s bringing in atomic hydrogen to replace that lost by the photolytic decomposition of water vapor.” (Science, 12/12/69, 1437-8)
In Look, science writer Arthur C. Clarke, Nobel Prize nuclear physicist Dr. Isidor I. Rabi, novelist C. P. Snow, and Catholic theologian Prof. Leslie Dewart wrote personal reactions to Apollo 8 mission. Clarke said: “The Apollo 8 mission marks one of those rare turning points in human history after which nothing will ever be the same again. The immense technical achievement is already obvious to every one and has been universally praised; yet the psychological impact may be even more important and will take some time to make itself fully felt. We no longer live in the world which existed before Christmas 1968. It has passed away as irrevocably as the earth-centered universe of the Middle Ages.” Dr. Rabi said: “It would be misleading to talk of the events that led to the journey of Apollo 8 in terms of the vast sums of money that are involved, even though it cost several times as much as the development of the first atomic bomb. What is more important and more impressive is that Apollo 8 represents the cooperation of hundreds of thousands of people over a period of years in a gigantic effort with no clearly set practical goals, except perhaps the profound desire of mankind to prove to itself that it had the knowledge and the ability to overcome its earthbound limitations.” Prof. Dewart said: “Man has taken his first, halting steps into the cosmos beyond that earthly world in which he was born and within which he had always lived. The impact of Apollo 8 in other areas of human experience is obvious; in religion, it is much less immediately evident. And yet, in the end, it may be more significant for the development of man’s religious consciousness.” {Look, 2/4/69, 72—8)
London Times published four-page space supplement On the Edge of the Moon. Man had been traveling to moon for centuries in transport which was “romantic, ingenious, foolish and brilliant: chariots of swans, giant guns, artificial clouds and enormous metal springs; even rockets.” Journeys, “dreams that ranged between ludicrous fantasy and prophetic imagination,” had not been recorded much before second century A.D. “But later, as writers discovered science fiction and the appetite men had for it, the stories proliferated.” At times, either by luck, reasoning, knowledge of science, or uncanny inspiration, they foresaw details of voyages like Apollo 10’s and that planned for next month.” Article traced 1,800 yrs of space travel “from dream to reality.” Supplement also described stage sequences planned for NASA’s lunar landing, specifications of lunar module and its achievements, data which scientists hoped to extract from lunar explorations, and possible construction of lunar observatory. Costs of observatory would be justified “only as part of a space programme much larger than what is envisaged for the immediate future, and too large, perhaps, for the resources of any one nation.” (London Times, 6/3/69, I—IV) June 3—5: NASA held Spacemobile Conference in Washington, D.C., to familiarize all personnel with Vice President’s Summer Space Education Program for the Cities conducted by NASA in cooperation with President’s Council on Youth Opportunity. (Program)
New York weathermen were being deluged with calls blaming 10 days of rain and overcast weather in northeastern U.S. on Apollo 11, Associated Press said, wcbs radio news meteorologist Dr. Robert Harris had said, “We’ve had an abundance of calls from all sorts of people who are absolutely certain, through their Bible studies, that the Lord has taken the sun away from us.” (AP, B Sun, 7/30/69, A6)
Aquanauts Dr. Larry Hallanger, Dr. David Youngblood, Wally Jenkins, and Richard A. Waller had successfully completed two-day experiment in first self-contained undersea laboratory 50 ft below Atlantic near Riviera Beach, Fla., Associated Press reported. Hydro-Lab, 16 ft long and 8 ft in diameter, supplied its own electricity from fuel cell similar to cell used for power in Apollo spacecraft. It was built by Perry Oceanographies, Inc. (W Star, 10/20/69, A3)
Christian Science Monitor editorial asked, “Would it not he possible, as America’s eventual space aim, to see the moon treated much as Antarctica today is treated?” That is “as a ‘continent’ where nationality does not play a significant role. There could be a research station on the moon, manned the year around—not merely by Americans but by invitation to the scientists and technicians of other interested nations.” (■CSM, 1/7/69)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna XV (launched July 13) had landed on moon at 6:45 pm Moscow time (11:45 am EDT) and had ended its work, Tass announced. Spacecraft had “reached the moon’s surface in the preset area” after 52 revolutions around moon and 86 communications sessions during which “the work of the new systems of the station was checked, the parameters of the trajectory of the movement was measured, and scientific research was conducted.” Tass said Luna XV had demonstrated capability to land on various areas of lunar surface by changing selenocentric orbit and that mission had yielded important data on spacecraft systems. Sir Bernard Lovell, Jodrell Bank Experimental Station Director, said signals from spacecraft had ended suddenly and estimated craft might have landed in Sea of Crises, about 500 mi from Sea of Tranquility. “If we don’t get any more signals, we will assume it crash-landed. But we don’t make that assumption at the moment.” (Gwertz-man, NYT, 7/22/69, 1, 29)
Pride Inc. Operations Director Marion Barry called on black community to work during July 21 National Day of Participation declared by President Nixon in honor of Apollo 11 lunar landing. During Washington press conference he said, “Why should blacks rejoice when two white Americans land on the moon when white America’s money and technology have not even reached” the inner city? “Why should blacks celebrate Monday . . . when President Nixon didn’t feel that Dr. Martin Luther King’s assassination deserved to he observed?” (Paka, W Post, 7/19/69, A9)
Geologists at Lunar Receiving Laboratory held press conference on Apollo 12 lunar samples and expressed surprise at samples’ differences from rocks retrieved by Apollo 11. Preliminary examination of samples showed they were crystalline and larger than anticipated. Dr. Jeffrey L. Warner, MSC geologist, said rocks returned by Apollo 11 contained up to 12% titanium oxide, but those from Apollo 12 contained only about 2%—amount consistent with terrestrial rocks. He said geologists were very puzzled by absence of breccia rocks in Apollo 12 samples because 75% of rocks from Apollo 11 were breccia. Crystalline rocks were similar to volcanic rocks found by Apollo 11, but some of Apollo 12 rocks were coated with glass and had protruding crystals up to 2% in long. (Rossiter, W Post, 11/29/69, A3; W Star, 11/29/69, Al)
Univ. of Iowa astronomers Dr. James A. Van Allen and Dr. Richard S. Yeh reported in Science that abstract measurements made by lunar orbiting Explorer XXXV during 1967—68 showed it unlikely that alpha-particle emissivity of moon was greater than 0.064 per square cm per sec per steradian. And it was extremely unlikely it was greater than 0.128. (Values were 0.1 and 0.2 of 1966 provisional estimates by H. W. Kraner and others.) Result implied abundance of uranium-238 in outer crust of moon was much less than typical of earth’s lithosphere, though it was consistent with abundance of uranium-238 in terrestrial basalt cr in chondritic meteorites. (Science, 10/17/69,
Excited U.S. residents called air control towers, police departments, and newspapers to report citing NASA’s Apollo 10 spacecraft circling moon. Weather Bureau explained bright object actually was planet Jupiter, which was approaching its nearest distance to earth. (W Star, 5/26/69, A7)
Motion picture footage of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission would be released for sale to commercial producers after quarantine period, NASA announced. Two 600-ft rolls would be made available initially: one would include prelaunch, launch, and recovery operations; other would include all usable onboard footage, (nasa Release 69-83L)
Dr. Thomas O. Paine, NASA Acting Administrator, presented Public Service Group Achievement Award Certificates to 12 representatives of communications organizations which had supported Apollo 8 mission. Award to Apollo 8 Communications Network cited “the dedication and skill of the leaders and all personnel in these organizations in maintaining reliable communications which insured the success of the first manned lunar orbit mission.” British External Telecommunication Executive and Hawaiian Telephone Co. had received same award. (nasa Release 69—20)
Some observers on earth might be able to see moon-bound Apollo 11 on two occasions, NASA announced. At 2:44:18 GET, exhaust plumes from S—IVB firing in parking orbit over Gilbert Islands in South Pacific would be visible to naked eye for several minutes over large part of sky. For several hours after translunar injection burn, csm/lm, S—IVB, and four spacecraft-lunar-module-adapter (sla) panels would be visible through telescope to observers in U.S., Mexico, Central and South America, and western Africa, (nasa Special Release)
Apollo 11 and current nationwide water shortage were “two illustrations of man’s efficiency in achieving the thrills of life and man’s inefficiency in not achieving the necessities of life,’’.Drew Pearson said in Washington Post. “At Cape Kennedy, the United States is about to launch the most carefully rehearsed, most expensive, most unnecessary project of this century by which man will reach a piece of drab, radioactive, lava-like real estate hitherto romantic because of distance—the moon. The launching will succeed because a vast amount of money and the best scientific brains in America over a period of seven years have been lavished on this moon shot. Meanwhile, up the Atlantic Coast, the Capital which voted the $20 billion to reach the moon is desperately short of the second essential to man’s life—water—all because of lack of planning, lack of foresight, and lack of money—the same ingredients which have put the moon shot on the verge of success.” (W Post, 7/10/69, Fll)
Following publication Nov. 29 by Pravda of article describing U.S. moon rock exhibit in Moscow, crowd of “thousands,” eager to see display, smashed glass door and nearly demolished room in which Apollo films were shown. (Clarity, NYT, 12/1/69, 14)
Washington Sunday Star commented on display of moon rocks at Smithsonian Institution: “The lunar chunk does indeed look like something that, if it turned up in a Bethesda [Md.] backyard, would not draw a second glance. And yet it is something that, until two months ago, no man had seen before. ... It is a promise of unimagined things to come.” Judging by crowds queued up, “Smithsonian has booked its best act since the Mona Lisa came to town six years ago.” (W Star, 9/21/69, Cl)
usn reported eight-ship Soviet Naval fleet was heading south 25 mi eastsoutheast of Miami, Fla., on course that could provide view of Apollo 11 launch. U.S. carrier aircraft and destroyer escort Gary shadowed squadron, officially en route to Havana for July 26 commemoration of Cuhan revolution. (Homan, W Post, 7/12/69, Al; AP, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
In Washington Sunday Star, David Van Praagh discussed President Nixon’s planned Asian tour, to follow mid-Pacific recovery of Apollo 11 crew: Nixon would find “the problems of this planet’s most populous continent present a striking contrast. They are not subject to quick, rational, scientific or dramatic solutions. Usually they can not even be tackled through modern communications. The vast majority of Indians and Pakistanis for example, can’t read or write and do not own a tiny transistor radio or TV set to monitor the Pacific splashdown. They live in a rather backward age and most of them are hungry.” (W Star, 7/6/69, D14)
Swiss physicist Dr. Johannes Geiss, originator of Apollo 11 experiment to trap atomic particles from solar wind on lunar surface, would use “deliberate speed” in assaying results, New York Times reported. NASA courier had delivered square foot of aluminum foil exposed on moon for an hour to catch particles emitted by sun. Dr. Geiss and associates in Berne Univ.’s Physics Institute had devised plan for dual study of foil in Berne and at Federal Polytechnic at Zurich. Analyses, determining components by spectrometer, would require several weeks. NASA would not release remaining three square feet of foil to him until 1970. {NYT, 8/18/69, 34)
faa said preliminary figures showed its 27 air route traffic control centers handled 19.5 million aircraft in 1968, an increase of 17% over 1967. Chicago, New York, and Cleveland each logged 1.5 million operations —first time any center had reached this mark, (faa Release 69-15) During January: jpl Senior Staff Scientist Albert R. Hibbs summarized results of NASA’s Surveyor program in Astronautics and Aeronautics. Experiments on five Surveyor spacecraft which successfully landed on moon between May 30, 1966, and Jan. 7, 1968, indicated surface material was granular and very fine with 10 3 dynes/cm2 cohesion. Slightly deeper material had lower normal albedo than undisturbed surface. Chemical composition of surface material was similar to basaltic rocks on earth; mare material contained more iron elements than highland material; and highland material had higher albedo than mare material. Chemical analyses indicated material did not resemble chondritic meteorites. From observed data scientists concluded that moon had undergone significant chemical differentiation during its history and had been subjected to basaltic lava flows; surface was continually being “churned and pulverized” by meteoroid impacts; some undefined process lightened optical surface and darkened buried material; and mare areas were “surprisingly similar and offer numerous safe-landing zones for future lunar missions.” (A&A, 1/69, 50—63)
Apollo 12 countdown began at KSC at 12:00 pm EST for launch toward moon at 11:22 am est Nov. 14. Countdown, originally scheduled to begin at 7:00 pm est Nov. 8, had been started early to reduce costs by eliminating overtime that would have been paid to launch crews. (upi, NYT, 11/8/69, 20)
Joint U.S.—U.S.S.R. moon flight was, again, advocated by Jess Gorkin in Parade. Magazine had proposed cooperative space venture Jan. 9, 1966. “The idea had international appeal. Residents of Moscow spoke warmly of the concept. Letters of approval poured in from all over the United States as well as Europe and Asia. The proposal was supported by newspapers around the world.” NASA had “been sharing the country’s space knowledge with other nations for years.” U.S. scientists had worked closely with scientists from nations whose scientific payloads were launched aboard U.S. rockets. (Parade, 11/9/69)
New York Times editorial: “This is the week of the moon. The countdown is on at Cape Kennedy and, if all goes well, a week from today a manned vehicle will for the first time alight on another celestial body. ... all mankind will share in the exhilaration of discovery. Ever since man evolved he has been exploring, extending his domain over all parts of his planet. Now that insatiable curiosity is bursting its terrestrial bounds to provide our first personal knowledge of the nearest neighbor in the cosmos. It is an inspiring adventure, a testimony not only to man’s imagination in amassing knowledge of nature, but to his courage, his perseverance and his indomitable spirit.” {NYT, 7/13/69)
Apollo 10 spacecraft, atop Saturn V launch vehicle, rolled out of Vehicle Assembly Building at ksc to Launch Complex 39, Pad B, for May liftoff to lunar orbit. (AP, NYT, 3/12/69, 14; UPl, Huntsville News, 3/12/69)
Soviet space scientist Dr. Oleg G. Gazenko said at news conference during meeting of International Academy of Astronautics at Cloudcroft, N.Mex., it would be desirable and technically feasible for cosmonaut to be member of future Apollo moon-landing crew. (AP, B Sun, 10/2/69, A15)
Press commented on Apollo 10 mission: Washington Post editorial: “The mission of Messrs. Cernan, Stafford and Young, as dramatic and daring as it is, is only an interim step between the first trip to the moon and the first landing on the moon. It is, however, a crucial step since any major problems in this mission or any major unanticipated discoveries about the moon’s gravity might well delay the ultimate landing. Because it is both so crucial and so risky, the Nation will wait with special concern when they disappear behind the moon for the first time this afternoon and when the lunar landing craft breaks away from the mother ship tomorrow afternoon for its descent toward the moon’s surface. The hope hardly needs to be expressed that these maneuvers, like those in the other Apollo flights,
Christian Science Monitor congratulated “Gumdrop, Spider, and their gallant crew” for successful Apollo 9 mission to date: “In a series of smoothly executed maneuvers, they have opened the way for landing on the moon. They have removed any doubt that the machinery and tactics designed to set men down and recover them safely can indeed do the job.” Spectacular view from space symbolized “men’s ability to surmount human and natural obstacles to reach the most difficult goals when they want to. It bespeaks a spirit running counter to the rivalries, hatreds, and selfishness that often seem to prevent a similar attack on tough human problems on earth. The spirit now has brought the moon within mankind’s grasp. It could bring a better life on earth within their grasp, too.” (csm, 3/8-10/69)
Stacked spacecraft and Saturn V launch vehicle for Apollo 11, first lunar landing mission, rolled out to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, at KSC. (ksc Hist Off; McGehan, B Sun, 5/21/69)
Commentary in West Berlin’s independent Tagesspiegel: “Some people take off for the moon while others try to learn to operate a farm tractor. Our culture will depend on mastering this schizophrenic situation.” (Atlas, 7/69, 16)
NASA announced it had signed $2,919,000 supplemental agreement with Div. of Sponsored Research of mit for fabrication and delivery of 40 inertial reference integrating gyros (irigs) for Apollo guidance and navigation system, bringing total contract to $81,000,000. (nasa Release 69—11)
International comment on NASA’s Apollo 10 mission: U.N. Secretary General U Thant said flight was “a thrilling compound of great skill, boundless courage and fabulous technology, as impressive for its perfection as for its informality and its great humor. ... It is refreshing to have been able to turn for a moment from all our troubles on earth to this magnificent spectacle of man’s extraordinary capacity for achievement and peaceful quest.” Sir Bernard Lovell, Director of U.K.’s Jodrell Bank Experimental Station, said mission represented almost miraculous achievement attainable only by finest technology and engineering in world: “Every part of the Apollo 10 concept now appears to have been performed perfectly. . . . We are nearly about to enter an epoch when men and materials can be transferred to other planets in the solar system.” U.K. Prime Minister Harold Wilson termed flight “a great triumph in both human and technical terms.” Soviet space scientist, Dr. Vassily V. Parin, called mission “big event in the history of cosmonautics,” impressive because of “the accuracy of all its maneuvers.” Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India, said of Apollo 10 crew, “These men who could have come back with moon dust on their feet are leaving that for others in the true spirit of detachment of great pioneers.” Heinrich Luebke, President of West Germany, said mission “brings the United States to the brink of an historical high point—the landing of the first man on the moon.” (NYT, 5/27/69, 29; AP, B Sun, 5/27/69, Al)	__	'
With Apollo 11 launch “minus-23 days” MSFC Director, Dr. Wernher von Braun, visited 3,000-yr-old temple of Apollo at Delphi, Greece. After consultation with oracle, Dr. von Braun said, “I am convinced that we will succeed because no other space operation was ever so well prepared in advance.” Oracle, he said, “was ambiguous, as usual.” {Time, 7/4/69, 35; AP, W Post, 6/25/69)
Gravity at Apollo 11 lunar landing site had been determined to be 162,821,680 milligals from data telemetered to earth by lm on lunar surface, msc scientist Richard L. Nance reported in Science. Gravity was measured with pulsed integrating pendulous accelerometer. Measurement could suggest order of magnitude of other anomalies, provide guide for future surveys, and indicate degree of homogeneity of moon. Radius of moon at an observation point could be determined independently of other methods of measurement. (Science, 10/17/69, 384-5)
Pittsfield, Mass., Berkshire Eagle editorial said: “It subtracts nothing from the extraordinary human and technical achievement represented by Apollo 11 to say that the projected lunar landing is an occasion not only for awe and pride but also for a thoughtful reappraisal of our whole approach to the new frontier of space.” (B Eagle, 7/19/69)
President Nixon addressed U.S. Embassy staff in Paris before departure for visit with Pope Paul VI at Vatican and return to U.S. after goodwill tour:	. . the success of a policy depends upon thousands of people around, in an embassy like this and an establishment like this, and millions around this world,” in same way that success of Apollo 8
Terminal countdown for Apollo 9 mission, scheduled for launch March 3, began at 10:00 pm EST. (NASA Proj Off)
Romanian President Nicolae Ceausescu met President and Mrs. Nixon on arrival at Otopeni Airport, Bucharest. President Nixon replied to welcome: “. . . this significant moment in the history of relations between our two countries coincides with a great moment in the history of the human race. Mankind has landed on the moon. We have established a foothold in outer space. But there are goals we have not reached here on earth. We are still building a just peace in the world. This is a work that requires the same cooperation and patience and perseverance from men of good will that it took to launch that vehicle to the moon.” (PD, 8/4/69, 1065)
During CBS TV interview at Cape Kennedy following Apollo 11 launch, former President Lyndon B. Johnson said, “If our industrial people, these great managers of industry, the laboring people of the country, the government, the scientists, all with the help of Congress, can get together and do a job like this there’s just nothing we can’t do.” To world’s ills, “we must apply some of the great talent that we’ve applied to space.” There wasn’t “a single thing that our country does, that our government does, that our people do, that has greater potential for peace than the space effort.” (upi, NYT, 7/17/69, 20)
In Washington Evening Star, Judith Randal said world’s first successful heart transplant and Apollo 8 mission made 1968 year “of spectacular scientific achievement” but that critics of both events had charged that technology “was being exploited at the expense of basic research and social worth.” It did no harm, she said, to celebrate heart transplants and voyages to moon, “but, with the advent of a new administration, it also is worth reflecting what the price may be— when so much else needs doing—of deciding to climb Mount Everest just because Mount Everest is there and we have learned how to climb it.” (W'Star, 1/2/69, A14)
George Gallup released results of first poll of President Nixon’s popularity since Apollo 11 success. Poll showed 65% of U.S. public approved his performance in office. Poll July 11—14, before Apollo 11 mission, had shown 58% approval. (W Post, 8/11/69, A2)
msfc announced selection of Bendix Corp. and Boeing Co. for further competitive negotiations on cost-plus-incentive-fee contract for design, development, test, and delivery of four manned lunar roving vehicles for flight to lunar surface aboard descent stage of Apollo lm [see July 11]. First operational vehicle would be delivered in early 1971 for launch late that year. msfc also had awarded $238,400 contract to Bryson Construction and $224,888 contract to Miller and Berry for construction of two clean rooms for Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) assembly and test and had called for bids for checkout station construction. Bids were due Oct. 21. (msfc Releases 69-220; 69-221)
South Korea dedicated its first superhighway, linking Seoul with Inchon. It was named Apollo in honor of U.S. moon landing. (AP, W Post, 7/23/69, C5)
msfc announced it had extended contract with Mason-Rust for continued support services at Michoud Assembly Facility for six months. Contract modification amounted to $3,786,203. (msfc Release 69—46) February 27: NASA postponed Apollo 9 earth-orbital mission, scheduled for launch Feb. 28, after intensive medical examinations of prime crew revealed viral infections. (W Star, 2/27/69, Al)
nasa adoption of field sequential color TV system to relay pictures from moon on future Apollo flights was “solace” to inventor Dr. Peter C. Goldmark, president of CBS Laboratories, New York Times said. System, employing small revolving filter disc to inject primary colors in front of camera, had been rejected by industry and FCC some 15 yrs earlier in favor of all-electronic compatible system now in worldwide use. Advantage of Goldmark system on moon flights was ability to pick up usable color images under exceptionally low levels of light intensity—important where stars might be major illumination source. Images received from space would then be converted through compatible system for home reception. Dr. Goldmark said system might be “first technological breakthrough that is 28 years old.” (NYT, 4/5/69, 30)
NASA was combining Apollo 11 spectacular with “bit of spectacular lobbying,” Washington Evening Star said. It had invited all 533 members of House and Senate to fly at NASA’s expense to witness Apollo 11 launch from Cape Kennedy. Total bill could come to nearly $28,000. (W Star, 6/21/69, A3)
msfc announced contract awards: McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co. was awarded $97,340,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract to provide for two Saturn V Workshops—one for launch in 1972 and second for backup. McDonnell Douglas also received $87,450,000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee contract modification for continued work on two airlock modules for Apollo Applications (aa) program cluster, including tests, checkout, documentation, and logistics support. Boeing Co. received $25,130,376 contract modification extending period for completion of Saturn V 1st stage (S—IC—15) from June 30, 1970, to June 30,1971. (msfc Releases 69—199, 69—200, 69—201)
Lunar Receiving Laboratory scientists told press at msc rocks retrieved from moon by Apollo 12 crew were younger, lower in titanium, and higher in nickel than those retrieved by Apollo 11 and showed no signs of bacteria or toxicity. Dr. Oliver A. Schaeffer of New York State Univ. at Stony Brook said Apollo 12 samples seemed to be 2.2 billion to 2.5 billion yrs old, compared to 3.8 billion to 4.6 billion yrs old for Apollo 11 samples. “The younger age means the . . . activity, whether volcanic or meteorite impact, took place over an extended period of time, not on a short time scale.” Dr. S. Ross Taylor of Australian National Univ. said chemistry of Apollo 12 and Apollo 11 samples was basically similar but had many interesting differences. “The surface is not completely homogeneous across the moon. There are differences in chemistry probably reflecting in the underlying rock. ... it looks as though we could have two extremes of differences.” Apollo 12 samples from Ocean of Storms had about half titanium content found in Apollo 11 samples from Sea of Tranquility. They had few refractory elements and fewer volatile elements. (Wilford, NYT, 12/13/69, 20; Cohn, W Post, 12/13/69, A10)
First stage of Saturn V (SA—508) launch vehicle, to be used on Apollo 13, reached ksc. Second stage, scheduled to leave mtf June 25, would reach ksc June 30. Third stage had arrived at ksc June 13. Instrument unit would be flown from mtf to ksc July 7. (msfc Release 69—148)
Apollo 9 press briefing was held at NASA Hq. Countdown would begin Feb. 22, for launch from ETR at 11 am EST Feb. 28. Ten-day earth-orbital mission would demonstrate lm manned crew performance for first time and carry out intervehicular activities between spacecraft, through-docking-tunnel activities, and eva. Number of small aluminum-alloy brackets and fittings had been replaced or reinforced in LM—3 and LM—4 because they were sensitive to stress or corrosion. Both vehicles were ready for flight. Apollo Program Director George H. Hage said number of activities would be performed on Apollo 9 that had not been done before “in the sense of wringing out the spacecraft.” NASA was “working the hardware launch readiness of Apollo 10 to a late April date” so that “if we have difficulty on Apollo 9 and need to repeat some element or all of the D mission, we can get that mission off as early as possible.” If Apollo 9 was successful Apollo 10 could be launched as early as May 17 on lunar landing mission. (Transcript)
Moon landing would change human lives, British novelist and scientist C. P. Snow said in Look. “I am afraid that in the long run, perhaps a generation, perhaps longer, it will have a bad effect. It will give us the feeling, and the perfectly justified feeling, that our world has finally closed in. This is forever the end of the mortal frontier.” Space enthusiasts thought lunar landing would liberate human imagination but “I believe . . . that human imagination is going to be restricted—as to an extent it was when the last spots on the globe had been visited, the South Pole and the summit of Everest. Nowhere on earth for adventurous man to go. Very soon, there will be no place in the universe for adventurous man to go.” {Look, 8/26/69, 68—72)
Moon “loomed large in Chinese tradition,” but 700 million people of Communist China had not been told of Apollo 12 lunar landing, Christian Science Monitor said. Though “elite hierarchy in Peking . . . learned of Intrepid’s touchdown as fast as the Soviets,” story of Apollo 12 had not passed beyond select group of leaders. “Indeed the Chinese people have yet to be told by their government-controlled press and radio of the flight of Apollo 11. . . .” Some might hear of flight from foreign radio broadcast, but many were jammed by Peking. VOA report to Hong Kong on Intrepid’s lunar landing had been “curiously overlaid with martial music from a Chinese Communist radio station on the mainland.” (Hughes, CSM, 11/20/69)
At televised news conference in Moscow on Soyuz VI, VII, and VIII mission [see Oct. 12—18], Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, said U.S.S.R. hoped to have permanent space station in earth orbit “certainly” within 10 yrs “and I think less than five years.” Station plans did not rule out manned lunar exploration but, he said, “I can only say such operations are not planned for the coming months. Shall we study the universe with the help of automatic (unmanned) spacecraft? We shall. Shall we fly to the moon and the other planets of the solar system in the future? I think we shall because such travel is one of the further aims of mankind in conquering outer space.” (Gwertzman, NYT, 11/5/69, 16)
Atlas published translation of article in L’Espresso, Rome, by Italian novelist Alberto Moravia on implications of Apollo 11. “In Columbus’s days, men were offered finite goals, like the discovery of America; or they were offered spiritual aims, like the search for goodness, truth and beauty. At that time, no one could have guessed that Columbus’s discovery was only a beginning. That other discoveries would follow, a second America, a third, a fourth, and so on through millions of years and billions of kilometers. But today that is happening. Compared to our new set of goals, the aims of Marx and communism are pure imagination. For the first time the real and the rational are about to become one. We are now at the end of history—and post-history is just beginning.” (Atlas, 9/69, 40—3)
Czechoslovakian Communist Party Central Committee’s weekly Tribuna said of Apollo 11 landing: “It would be premature today to try to attempt a detailed evaluation of the historical significance of this act. Surely its influence will be no smaller than that of Columbus’ travels many centuries ago.” (Am Embassy, Prague)
Countdown for Apollo 12 lunar landing mission continued at ksc despite discovery of leak in fuel tank. Officials said launch crews would have ample time to replace tank and check out replacement without delaying liftoff Nov. 14. (O’Toole, W Post, 11/13/69, Al)
Poor People’s Campaign” Director, the Rev. Hosea Williams of Southern Christian Leadership Conference, said “hungry” people from five southern states would demonstrate at Cape Kennedy July 15 on eve of Apollo 11 launch and would try to get “as close as possible” to launch site with mules and wagons. “We’re not against things like the space shot, but there’s been a miscalculation in priorities.” (Reuters, W Post, 7/13/69, A5)
National and international press continued comment on Apollo 11 lunar Philadelphia Inquirer; “Will this magnificent accomplishment serve as inspiration, urging Americans and all mankind on to a genuine ‘giant leap’ forward, not merely into the infinite reaches of space but into the infinite possibilities of achievement on earth where the space age has recorded many more failures than successes? Or will the inspiration be abandoned before the veiled censure of those who seem to suggest the solution of all human dilemmas lies in turning away from space to other priorities?” Cutbacks at hour of triumph would be only waste of investment in technology which could be helped in solving earth problems. “This is no time to falter, our astronauts should come home to a world and nation determined to fulfill the prophecy in Commander Armstrong’s words.” (P Inq, 7/22/69) W.ashington Post: It was foolish “to leap from this historic moment to eager expectations of the day when men will live and work in space, when colonies will be established, food raised and industrial products built on heavenly bodies other than the earth. These things will doubtless come in their own good time. But this is not the occasion on which to make a new national commitment in space that would keep NASA’s program going at the frantic pace which fulfilled President Kennedy’s great promise for the moon. Now is the occasion, rather, to establish a steady program of space development, one removed from the political debate <Jver national priorities, which will ensure that we establish a firm base for future generations to build upon while creating at home ... a kind of society which will allow them to use fully the new opportunities opened up by the three new American heroes and the tens of thousands of other people who made their flight possible.” (W Post, 7/22/69, A24) Handels Och Sjofartstidning, Goteborg, Sweden: “This is a small step for a man, but a great one for humanity. Neil Armstrong’s commentary when he stepped down onto the surface of the moon has every prospect of becoming one of those winged expressions which generations of school children will commit to memory. ... Now should be the time to replace the extraordinarily costly space race with cooperation between the Soviet and the U.S.A.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Stockholm Expressen: “The ‘moonshot’ . . . was imposing. But it also gives a horrible feeling to think that the U.S.A. can handle tremendous technical problems with such ease while it is considerably more difficult to cope with those of a complicated social, political and human nature.” (Am Embassy, Stockholm) Canadian Montreal Star: “The scientific information which results from Apollo 11 is an extra dividend from an enterprise which has produced its own benefits for the human spirit and, perhaps, for human solidarity.” (Am Consul, Montreal)	,
Apollo 11 CSM and LM were mated with Saturn V (SA—506) launch vehicle at ksc in preparation for July 16 lunar landing mission. (SBD, 4/15/69, 209)
NASA published Lunar Orbiter I Preliminary Results (SP—197), including assessment of lunar terrain and results of secondary experiments in selenodesy, micrometeoroids, and radiation. Launched Aug. 10, 1966, spacecraft had been first U.S. vehicle to orbit moon, first to obtain detailed photographic coverage of near and far sides of moon, and first to photograph earth from moon’s vicinity. Photos showed fractured and faulted lunar crust with mass-wasting where large boulders had tumbled into craters. Moon appeared to have been highly dynamic and affected by volcanic activity, but despite overall roughness, some photos showed regions of relative smoothness. Surface of far side appeared much rougher than near side with higher terra-to-mare ratio. Meteoroid sensors registered no impacts during mission, indicating meteor activity near moon was no greater than that near earth. Radiation dose rate during transit to moon corresponded to that produced by galactic cosmic rays, but dose rates as high as 70 mrad per hr and 7 rad per hr were experienced during solar flares Aug. 26 and Sept. 2, 1966. (Text)
U.K.’s first lunar samples—3 oz of moon dust in 16 contamination-proof boxes—arrived in London and were shown to scientists and press at Science Research Council. Dr. S. O. Agrell of Cambridge Univ. and Dr. P. E. Clegg of London Univ. had flown to MSC to collect them. They would be examined by 14 British research teams. (AP, Kansas City Times, 9/20/69)
New York Times—while urging precautions against contamination on Apollo 11 lunar landing mission—praised Apollo 10 mission as “triumphant scientific climax” of Apollo effort: “The breathtaking virtuosity of Apollo 10’s equipment and crew leaves little doubt that similar apparatus can deposit properly trained men on the moon and bring them back safely to earth—always barring the possibility of unexpected mechanical or other malfunction. At the cost of more than $20 billion the United States has acquired the capability of manned travel to the moon. Whatever the wisdom of concentrating such vast resources on the space race, the accomplishment is brilliant and merits awed congratulations for all those whose work and talent made it possible.” (NYT, 5/25/69, E16)
Vial containing 2.3 g (0.07 oz) of Apollo 11 lunar material disappeared from display at charity dinner in Los Angeles, Calif. Julian Scheer, NASA Assistant Administrator for Public Affairs, later said sample, one of 100 issued to scientists in U.S., had been lent to Cal Tech scientist for research. Use of sample at fund-raising affair was violation of NASA regulations. (Rosenbaum, NYT, 3/2/70,26)
Medical experience in Apollo 7 through 11 was summarized by Dr. Charles A. Berry, msc Director of Medical Research and Operations, in Aerospace Medicine: “The 3105 hours of exposing man to spaceflight during the Apollo program have added greatly to knowledge of man’s response to space travel.” Spacecraft cabin environment had been “suitably maintained”; radiation environment had been “benign,” with no solar flares occurring; crews had adapted well to weightlessness; and improvements had been made in inflight food. Body-weight losses which continued to occur were not entirely due to body fluid loss. Supplying potable water had been effective and “great strides have been made in removing gas bubbles in the water. Work-sleep cycles had been improved and bioinstrumentation had continued to function well. “Although a preflight preventative medicine program has been difficult to conduct, it has been effective in the later Apollo missions in reducing pre-, in-, and postflight illnesses, which had occurred in all flight phases and were usually viral upper respiratory and gastrointestinal infections.” Although crews had adapted to motion environment, “this area will require continuing attention.” Cardiovascular deconditioning had been identified after flight, along with “significant decrement in work capacity in immediate postflight period.” Postflight neutrophilia had been observed after crew recovery. Loss of red cell mass observed in Gemini program had reoccurred only during Apollo 9, indicating that hyperoxia was responsible. Even small amount of nitrogen in atmosphere might protect red cells from lytic action of oxygen. Microbiological studies had shown that organisms transferred between crewmembers and that organism’s growth was favored by shifts, eva on lunar surface during Apollo 11 was conducted within expected energy costs, at average of 1200 btu per hour. It appeared lunar surface time could be extended safely. (Aero Med, 5/70, 500-18)
Chicago Daily News editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “Compared to the feverish reach for the moon in the Sixties, the plans. . .seem almost pedestrian. Not until men take off for Mars—at the earliest in 1983—will there be anything like the excitement of the first trip to the moon. Yet it is a practical timetable NASA has developed, one that promises the maximum in scientific research within a budget reflecting a lowered priority for space. Exploration of space is by no means being abandoned, but urgent needs on Earth clearly come first.” (CDaily News, 3/13/70)
Map of portion of Venus larger than Asiatic continent made by using 64.0-m (210-ft) dish antenna at Goldstone Tracking Station was described in Science by jpl astronomers Dr. Richard M. Goldstein and H. Rumsey, Jr.: Map covered planet from 90° west longitude to 30° east longitude and from 45° south latitude to 35° north latitude. Area extended 13 700 km (8500 mi) at Venus equator and was up to 7400 km (4600 mi) wide. Resolution was “about two times as good as the moon can be seen with the naked eye” and was “best definition of Venus yet obtained.” (Science, 9/4/70, 975-7; jpl Release 561)
Bruce Biossat discussed Apollo 13 in Washington Daily News: “Our greatest hangup is the dreams we cling to on earth. And no one is more guilty of fostering and perpetuating these than the men who today are assailing our space undertaking as costly distraction.... What we have long needed, as historian Dr. Daniel Boorstin suggests, is to forget about fixing and fulfilling some great national purpose. We will do better in small human clusters, working with dedication and fuller knowledge, in assaults on an ever-changing roster of important but quite specialized goals. Far from adding to crippling illusion, our men in space have shown us—in a very cruel laboratory—that such hard goals can be attained.” (W News, 4/22/70, 19)
msc announced award of $4.5-million, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to Fairchild Camera and Instrument Corp. for three-inch-focal-length mapping camera, stellar reference camera, and timing device for precision mapping of moon on future Apollo missions. Mapping camera would provide 114-mm-sq (4.5-in-sq) photos with precise geometric controls. Stellar reference camera, used with timing device and laser altimeter—being produced under separate NASA contract with rca—would provide spacecraft attitude, time, and altitude at which each photo was taken, (msc Release 70-40)
NASA announced publication of Apollo 12: Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235), 227-page book containing extensive black-and-white photos, charts, and initial scientific findings of Apollo 12 mission. (nasa Special Release)
NASA announced issuance of Analysis of Apollo 8 Photography and Visual Observations (NASA SP-201). Book contained black-and-white photos taken on 1968 mission to furnish data on approach topography and landmarks for early Apollo landings, on scientific merit and roughness of areas for possible follow-on Apollo landings and on broad structure and characteristics of lunar surface. (NASA Special Release)
Distribution of 13 kg (28.6 lbs) of Apollo 12 lunar material to 139 U.S. scientists and 54 scientists from 16 foreign countries had begun at msc, NASA announced. Domestic analysis would be performed in 139 university, industrial, and government laboratories in 25 states and District of Columbia. Foreign investigators represented Australia, Belgium, Canada, Czechoslovakia, Finland, West Germany, Japan, Korea, Spain, Switzerland, U.K., South Africa, Italy, France, Norway, and India. Preliminary investigation at lrl had revealed Apollo 12 samples were similar in characteristics to Apollo 11 samples. Principal investigators would report findings at MSC Lunar Science Conference in January 1971. (NASA Release 70-19)
Univ. of California physicist and lunar expert Dr. Harold C. Urey pleaded for reinstatement of Apollo missions canceled by NASA because of lack of funds in letter to Washington Post: “We scientific people in great numbers are working on many aspects of this problem. We wish that we could talk more about our conclusions. A bag of rocks requires much, study and much other evidence must be carefully considered. The remaining Apollo missions are needed to secure an understanding of the moon which may be the only planetary object with the very ancient history recorded in its surface rocks.” (WPost, 9/17/70, A23)
Apollo 13 Review Board accident report was released by NASA at Hq. news conference. LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Review Board, said accident “was not the result of a chance malfunction in a statistical sense but, rather, it was the result of an unusual combination of mistakes coupled with a somewhat deficient and unforgiving design.” After assembly and acceptance testing, oxygen tank No, 2 that flew on Apollo 13 had been shipped from Beech Aircraft Corp. to NR in apparently satisfactory condition. “It is now known, however, that the tank contained two protective thermostatic switches on the heater assembly which were inadequate and would subsequently fail during ground test operations. ... In addition, it is probable that the tank contained a loosely fitting fill tube assembly. . .which was loose when it left the plant. . .[and] was subsequently displaced during handling. . .[and] led to the use of improvised detanking procedures. . .which almost certainly set the stage for the accident.” Special detanking procedures at KSC subjected tank to extended heater operation. “These procedures had not been used before and the tank had not been qualified by test for the conditions experienced. However the procedures did not violate the specifications which governed the operation of the heaters. ... In reviewing these procedures before the flight, officials. . .did not recognize the possibility of damage due to overheating. “The thermostatic switch discrepancy was not detected. . . . Nor did tests identify the incompatibility of the switches with the ground support equipment at KSC. ... As shown by subsequent tests, failure of the thermostatic switches probably permitted the temperature of the heater tube assembly to reach as much as 1000 degrees Fahrenheit [810 K] in spots during the continuous eight-hour period of heater operation. From that time on the oxygen tank. . .was in a hazardous condition when filled with oxygen and electrically powered. “However it was not until nearly 56 hours into the mission that the fan motor wiring possibly moved by the fan stirring of the fluid contents of the tank short circuited and ignited the wiring insulation by means of an electric arc. The resulting combustion in the oxygen tank probably overheated and failed the wiring conduit where it enters the tank and possibly a portion of the tank itself. The rapid expulsion of high pressure oxygen which followed possibly augmented by combustion of insulation in the space surrounding the tank blew off the outer panel. . .of the service module, caused a leak in the high pressure system of Oxygen Tank Number 1, damaged the high gain antenna, caused other miscellaneous damage and aborted the mission.” Board recommended that cryogenic oxygen storage system be modified to minimize use of combustible materials and remove materials that might short-circuit from contact with potential ignition sources and that system be rigorously requalified; onboard warning systems be reviewed and modified; consumables and emergency equipment be reviewed to determine whether potential for use in “lifeboat” mode should be enhanced; msc continue special tests and analyses under way to understand better the accident details; standard procedures require “presentation of all prior anomalies” whenever significant anomalies occurred in critical subsystems during final preparations for launch; NASA thoroughly reexamine all spacecraft, launch vehicles, and ground systems to identify and evaluate potential combustion hazards and conduct additional research on materials compatibility, ignition, and combustion in strong oxidizers at various g levels; and msc reassess all Apollo spacecraft subsystems and engineering organizations responsible for them to ensure adequate understanding of subsystems at subcontractor and vendor level. Cortright said thermostatic switch discrepancy and incompatibility of switches with ksc ground support equipment was “a serious oversight in which all parties [NASA, NR, and Beech] shared. . .. The accident is judged to have been nearly catastrophic. Only outstanding performance on the part of the crew, Mission Control and other members of the team which supported the operations successfully returned the crew to earth.” (Transcript; text)
Apollo 12 lunar samples were presented in Bonn to Science and Education Ministry’s Parliamentary State Secretary Klaus von Dohnan-yi by U.S. Ambassador to West Germany Kenneth Rush. Samples would be investigated at Max-Planck Institute in Heidelberg. (Ley-endecker, Bonner Rundschau, 3/12/70)
Officials of Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., said 22 000 persons had filed past hotel’s exhibit of Apollo 12 lunar sample in six days. About 10 000 viewed most successful Strip “show” in one week. (AP, NYT, 4/16/70)	_
ESSA scientist Elmer Schuman was using computer to determine exact limits of safe flight through electrically charged clouds, in study to help avert lightning strikes such as occurred during Nov. 14, 1969, launch of Apollo 12, ESSA reported. (ESSa Release)
Dr. Max Born, nuclear physicist and corecipient of 1954 Nobel Prize in physics, died at age 87. (NYT, 1/6/70, 1) Most common minerals found were pyroxene, plagioclase, ilmen-ite, olivine, and cristobalite. Three new minerals occurring in igneous rocks were pyroxmanganite, ferropseudobrookite, and chromium-titanium spinel. Free metallic iron and troilite, rare on earth, were common accessory minerals in igneous rocks. Silicate minerals were unusually transparent because of complete absence of hydrothermal alteration. Tests had shown that, at time of crystallization, observed phases could have coexisted only in very dry, highly reducing system in which oxygen pressure was estimated to be 10-13 atmospheres—more than five orders of magnitude lower than for typical terrestrial basaltic magmas. Melting experiments indicated 98% of primary igneous liquid crystallized in 1483-1333 K (1210-1060°C) temperature range with minor interstitial liquids continuing to crystallize down to 1223 K (950°C). Microscopic and microprobe examinations had produced evidence for existence of interstitial liquid rich in potassium and aluminum, which probably was immiscible with main liquid. Viscosity of lunar magmas was calculated an order of magnitude below that of terrestrial basaltic magmas. This characteristic might be significant in explaining textural features, differentiation mechanisms that produced chemical composition, and morphological features of lunar seas. Chemical compositions of all igneous rocks were similar except for concentration of potassium, rubidium, cesium, uranium, thorium, and barium. These elements distinguished two groups of igneous rocks, with fine-grained rocks containing more than coarsegrained rocks. All rocks had high concentrations of titanium, scandium, zirconium, hafnium, yttrium, and trivalent rare earth elements, and low concentrations of sodium. Low abundance of europium was striking feature of igneous rocks. Composition of soils and breccias was similar to but distinguishable from igneous rocks. Igneous rocks contained at least one other “rock” component distinctfrom lunar basalts sampled. Soil was rich in nickel and volatile elements—cadmium, zinc, silver, gold, copper, and thallium—that occurred in carbonaceous chondrites. Enrichment was consistent with observed occurrence of meteorite material in soil. Many elements that occurred in low abundance in lunar igneous rocks were strongly enriched in terrestrial crustal rocks that were product of igneous differentiation. It had been suggested that low abundance of these elements derived from residual lunar liquids was indication that whole moon was depleted in number of volatile elements. If inference was correct, it could be inferred that lunar material separated from high-temperature, dispersed nebula at 1273 K (1000°C) or higher. Coincidence of high abundance of titanium, separation of europium from other rare earth elements, and separation of barium and strontium suggested igneous liquids were end product of fractional crystallization process or, less likely, that they were produced by partial melting and subsequent segregation of liquid in lunar interior. High-pressure and temperature experiments had shown that materials with chemical composition of Tranquility Base basalts would, at conditions inferred for lunar interior, have densities exceeding moon’s average density. Therefore, basalts could not represent moon’s bulk composition. Age of basaltic crystalline rock was determined at 3.7 billion yrs. Igneous rocks were melted and crystallized about 10 billion yrs after moon’s formation. Single exotic rock fragment had yielded age of 4.4 billion yrs and indicated variability in age between different areas on lunar surface. Relatively young basalts showed moon had not been completely dead planet from its formation, but that it had undergone significant differentiation, at least locally, in thin lunar crust. Period before 3.7-billion-yr event recorded in older Highland areas was interval in which earth’s record had been obliterated. Therefore much of lunar surface was important in understanding early evolution and differentiation of planets. Observations showed lunar materials were product of considerable geochemical and petrological evolution. Optical properties of soil measured in laboratories agreed with those inferred from telescopic studies and indicated thin layer of soil must have covered most of moon. Correlation of spectral features determined in laboratory with telescopic studies suggested that iron content of lunar surface might vary. Measured dielectric constant of soil agreed with known radar reflectivity of moon. Penetration depth suggested upper layers were electrically transparent. Measured thermal conductivity suggested that diurnal variations in temperature should extend to less than one meter in soil regions. Thermoluminescence studies on core samples showed substantial diurnal variation in temperature 12 cm (4.7 in) below surface. Seismic study showed that attenuation of lunar sound waves decreased with pressure. High-pressure velocities were consistent with those observed in Apollo 12 seismic experiments, suggesting possibility of seismic wave guide at shallow depths on moon. Natural remanent magnetization found in crystalline rocks and breccias suggested ancient moon might have had magnetic field with strength of few percent of earth’s field. Field existing 3.7 billion yrs ago might have been result of fluid motions in lunar interior—effect of earth’s field when moon and earth were closer together or result of processes not yet understood. Lunar samples were valuable for study of low-energy, weakly penetrating radiations and had provided sample of gases blown off sun in solar wind, making it possible to determine isotopic composition and abundance of elements in sun by direct measurement. Results would lead to better understanding of sun’s evolution. Studies of stored nuclear tracks and induced radioactivities had shown effect of bombardment by solar flare particles and suggested activity had persisted for long periods. Abundance of cosmic-ray-produced nuclides in samples showed some rocks had been on or within several centimeters of lunar surface for at least 10 million yrs and within one or two meters (three to six and a half feet) for at least 500 million yrs. In search for life origins on moon, micropaleontological examination of sample by optical microscopy and by electron and scanning electron microscopy had produced uniformly negative results. Intensive search for viable organisms using many environmental and media combinations had produced negative results, as had the one quarantine study. Reports given at conference were published in Jan. 30 issue of Science under NASA contract. (Science, 1/30/70) Cambridge Univ. astronomer Dr. Fred Hoyle was principal speaker at banquet given by National Space Hall of Fame and City of Houston during conference. He said it was significant that in year when men first set foot on another world, desire to save their own planet had suddenly blossomed. “Quite suddenly everyone worldwide has become seriously interested in protecting the environment. Something new has happened to create this feeling of awareness about our planet.” He warned that man had to face probability that he could no longer discover important physical laws solely by observation in earth laboratories. “We are in a transition period, and in the future we must rely more on outside laboratories than astronomers did in the past.” (Burgess, CSM, 1/8/70)
msfc announced award of $4 360 260 modification to Saturn V contract with Boeing Co. for installation of accumulators—small gas reservoirs in liquid-oxygen prevalves—in 1st stage (S-IC) to change frequency of oscillation in propulsion system. Installation had been made after second Saturn V had oscillated severely during unmanned Apollo 6flight April 4, 1968. (msfc Release 70-14)
NASA’s alsep 1, placed on lunar surface by Apollo 12 crew Nov. 19, 1969,	was functioning satisfactorily after more than 64 days of uninterrupted operation, msc announced. Some 1977 commands had been transmitted to and carried out by alsep 1 since deployment. Scientific and engineering data were being transmitted continuously and radioisotope power remained constant at 74 w. Passive seismic experiment had recorded episode of large tilts on long-period horizontal sensors that lasted one hour and coincided with third lunar sunrise Jan. 16. (msc Release 70-12)
ossa Science Steering Committee’s Planetary Biology Subcommittee, concerned about validity of Lunar Receiving Laboratory tests on lunar samples and unexplained biological effect of lunar soil on some plants, had recommended continuation of quarantine procedures through Apollo 13 mission, Victor Cohn reported in Washington Post. Subcommittee had strongly opposed Jan. 15 suggestion by Interagency Committee on Back Contamination that quarantine be abandoned and had prompted NASA to ask nas for reevaluation by a special committee. (WPost, 2/14/70, A5; NASA Exobiology Off)
Moon had been formed as separate planet outside earth orbit and was later captured by earth according to calculations published by Interior Dept, scientist S. Fred Singer and Univ. of Hawaii astronomer L. W. Bandermannin Science. Depletion of volatile substances, which were of lower abundance in lunar surface rocks than in terrestrial rocks, had been explained by late accretion of volatile materials from solar nebula with falling temperature. Scientists had concluded moon had accumulated not in earth orbit but as separate planet. (Science, 10/23/70,438-9)
Apollo seismic experiment scientists, after comparing thousands of signals received by radio frpm sensitive seismometer left on moon by Apollo 12 astronauts,.determined that one or more moon quakes were occurring every 28.4 days, each time moon came closest to earth. Quakes were centered in Fra Mauro highland crater 80 km (50 mi) south of scheduled Apollo 14 landing site. Chief lunar seismologist Dr. Gary V. Latham later said quakes might be source of escaping gases that produced red or orange flashes often seen by astronomers. He intended to ask astronomers to concentrate on Fra Mauro area in future search for flashes. Dr. Latham reported in interview with Washington Post that “seismic record since November now produces strong evidence that the moon has at least some internal heat and seismic activity, (alsep Status Rpt; Cohn, W Post, 7/28/70, Al)
msc announced award of $5.1-million NASA contract to Itek Corp. for six high-resolution cameras to be used for lunar photography on Apollo 16, 17, and 18 missions, (msc Release 70-11)
Laser ranging retroreflector (lrrr) similar to one placed on lunar surface by Apollo 11 crew had been added to alsep package for Apollo 14, NASA announced, lrrr would be placed in Fra Mauro region of moon to make laser distance measurements from earth to moon with 15-cm (6-in) accuracy, (msc Release 70-71)
Apollo 12 seismometer had detected moonquakes at least twice when moon was at apogee, 405 555 km (252 000 mi) from earth, Washington Post reported. Univ. of Hawaii seismologist Dr. Rolf Meissner had said quakes, which had occurred during seven months ending in August, might be caused by sudden venting of trapped gas when tidal stresses from earth’s pull were suddenly relaxed. Finding followed Aug. 10 finding by Dr. Gary V. Latham and NASA team at msc that moon quaked at perigee. Stress pattern was reversed during apogee, Dr. Meissner had said. “What might be happening is the lunar surface layer is pushing down, pulling the interior apart and unblocking gas chambers at some depths in the moon.” While apogee quakes did not appear to emanate from same place producing perigee quakes, they did emanate from same general location—in Fra Mauro hills, where Apollo 14 astronauts were scheduled to land. (O’Toole, WPost, 10/27/70, A3)
NASA announced designation of Apollo Applications program as “Skylab.” (NASA Release 70-30)
dod announced usaf contract awards for operation and maintenance of Air Force Satellite Control Facility tracking stations: $4 300 000 initial increment to Lockheed Aircraft Corp. under $7 772 050 contract and $3 078 000 initial increment under $4 578 444 contract; and $4 500 000 initial increment to Philco-Ford Corp. under $8 424 250 fixed-price contract, (dod Release 241-70) During March: Dr. James A. Van Allen, Univ. of Iowa Director of Physics and Astronomy Depts., discussed significance of lunar landings, in university lecture series: “The Apollo missions, to me, are straightforward though immensely difficult tasks. They do, however, yield relatively little in the way of fundamental understanding of nature. They are not scientific in that sense. There is a longstanding controversy as to whether a manned spacecraft is a better way to conduct science in space than an automated, commandable spacecraft. I’m sure there is no simple answer to that question. As the general romance and entertainment value of manned flight tend to wear off a little, I think this question will be attacked in a thoroughly pragmatic way.” Apollo 11 lunar landing “might properly be compared to the explorations of Amundsen and Perry and Byrd in the Arctic and Antarctic, or perhaps Lindbergh flying the Atlantic. These are great achievements, heroic achievements, but the general potential of the Moon in its relationship to human life on a large scale is by no means obvious to me. I don’t think any competent person has found a significant, economic, human use fortheMoon.” There was general feeling, mostly from aeronautics and allied industries, that development of space flight was important to U.S. future in same sense that aircraft development had been. “I think this is fundamentally a false analogy.” Space shuttle and space station were feasible. “Whether or not it is sensible to pursue them, I have a great difficulty in judging.” (Univ of Iowa Spectator, 3/70,6)
U.S. exhibit including Apollo 10 spacecraft was most popular attraction at Poznan International Fair in Poland, AP quoted U.S. pavilion director Kendall Niglis as saying. He had estimated 6000 visitors an hour were filing past capsule. (WPost, 6/19/70, A8)
MSC announced award of $875 000 contract to Hycon Manufacturing Co. for five lunar topographic camera systems. Cameras, each equipped with 457-mm (18-in) focal length lens and 61 m (200 ft) of film to take more than 400 photos without reloading, would be flown on Apollo 13, 14, and 15 missions to photograph future landing sites and other targets. (MSC Release 70-31)
Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), scheduled to boost Apollo 17 toward moon in 1972, was successfully static-fired for 378 secs at mtf. (Marshall Star, 3/11/70)
NASA announced modifications to 2nd stage (S-II-9) of Saturn V launch vehicle scheduled to boost Apollo 14 toward moon. Accumulator, compartment to suppress pogo-effect oscillations felt on previous Apollo flights, had been installed in liquid-oxygen line feeding the center engine and filled with helium gas to cushion pressures of fluid flowing through line. Three .acceleration-actuated modules would be installed on center cross-beam structure as backup to initiate cutoff of center engine if oscillations were excessive. J-2 engine propellant-utilization valve had been redesigned from motor driven to pneumatically actuated, to bypass much onboard stage electronic circuitry, simplify propellant utilization, and enhance stage’s reliability. (NASA Release 70-207)
MSC announced NASA had awarded United Aircraft Corp. Hamilton Standard Div. $5 461 203 contract supplement for changes in Apollo portable-life-support-system (plss) contract. Agreement formally incorporated changes permitting plss to accept an improved communications system supplied by NASA, (msc Release 70-6)
Cosmonaut Vladimir A. Shatalov, on behalf of all Soviet cosmonauts, sent message to Apollo 13 crew: “We Soviet cosmonauts are following your flight with great attention and anxiety. We wish wholeheartedly your safe return to our mother earth.” (AP, B Sun, 4/17/ 70, A9)
New York Times editorial hailed decision by U.S. and U.S.S.R. to permit exchange of scientists between world’s largest nuclear accelerators at Serpukhov in U.S.S.R. and at Batavia, 111. [see July 2]: “This increased cooperation in particle physics contrasts sharply with the continued—and even rising—Soviet-American competition in space.” NASA’s Skylab project was case in point. “The semipermanent manned space station.. .is precisely the same goal toward which the Soviet Soyuz experiments are directed. The expensive and wasteful rivalry for priority in reaching the moon that preceded the Apollo II flight is being repeated in the effort to create manned orbiting vehicles for earth reconnaissance and scientific experiments in space.” (NYT, 7/3/70,24)
Apollo launch operations contractors at KSC were reducing work forces from 17 500 to between 16 500 and 17 000 by July 1, NASA announced. NASA and contractors would continue to review future manpower requirements and final determination on civilian work force would be made by Sept. 1. Factors influencing final determination included consolidation of manned launch operations at Launch Complex 39; changes in 1970, 1971, and 1972 Apollo and Skylab schedules; and internal cost-reduction effort of Government and contractors. Apollo 13 Review Board results might also affect planned work schedule. (NASA Release 70-84)
msc issued rfps for preliminary study of reusable space tug that could be economically operated around earth, near moon, and in support of interplanetary missions. Preliminary study of highly versatile, four-module system would lead to award of nine-month, $250 000 fixed-price contract to investigate space tug missions and operations and determine if single-design vehicle could accomplish all tasks proposed. Space tug was one of new flight hardware items identified in Space Task Group report to President in September 1969. (MSC Release 70-38)
Kansas City Times editorial commented on President Nixon’s space recommendations: “The hang-the-cost generosity of Congress that marked the early years of the Apollo moon program seems not to have been rekindled by last summer’s landing on the Sea of Tranquility, for all the justified national pride that feat stimulated. And Mr. Nixon, judging from his last budget message, is disinclined to buck this trend. The President’s conviction seems to be that important and dramatic goals await the U.S. in space, but that the reality of competing demands on the national resources prohibits the setting of binding deadlines for their achievement. His caution is reasonable, even if it does not lend itself to flights of public imagination.” (KC Times, 3/11/70)
Lightning and new-generation aircraft were discussed in Science by Rice Univ. space scientist A. A. Few: “It has been estimated that there are approximately 500 lightning strikes per year to commercial jet airplanes operating in the United States alone. Most.. .are triggered by the aircraft, as was very true of the lightning flashes that occurred during the launch of Apollo 12. Because of the larger size of the new-generation aircraft. . .this lightning hazard will increase. If the new aircraft are permitted to fly under the same meteorological conditions that are considered allowable for present aircraft, the probability of the aircraft’s being hit by lightning will be considerably increased.” New aircraft would not be as safe as conventional aircraft in lightning strikes “because of their extensive use of more sophisticated hardware, which is more susceptible to damage from lightning.” (Science, 5/22/70, 1011-2)
Analytical results for lunar material in Sinus Medii derived from alpha-scattering experiment on Surveyor VI (launched by NASA Nov. 7, 1967; softlanded on moon Nov. 9, 1967) were reported in Science by jpl, Argonne National Laboratory, and Univ of Chicago chemists. Amounts of principal constituents at Sinus Medii mare were approximately same as those at Sea of Tranquility. Sodium contents of both maria were lower than those of terrestrial basalts. Titanium content at Sinus Medii was lower than at Sea of Tranquility. Results suggested important differences in detailed chemical composition at different mare areas on moon. (Science, 1/23/70, 376-9)
Experiment to interpret seismic record produced by impact of Apollo 12 lm on lunar surface was described in Science by Univ. of Dayton, MIT, and USAF Institute of Technology scientists. In laboratory simulation, plastic pellets were fired into sand targets at 4° launch angle and 1.68-km-per-sec (1.04-mps) velocity. Shallow elliptical craters were formed, similar to certain lunar craters. Analysis of ejecta suggested lm debris skipped and, with some crater ejecta, reimpacted far downrange but ballistic rain did not account for unusual seismic signal. Experimenters had concluded that deliberate low-angle impact of spacecraft on lunar surface might create serious hazard to men and instruments on and near lunar surface in down-range direction. (Swift, Preonas, et aI., Science, 8/28/70,851-4)
Dept, of Agriculture would start project to determine properties in moon dust that led to growth of plants bigger than those fertilized by potassium, phosporus, or nitrogen, Washington Post reported, usda scientist Dr. Charles P. Walkinshaw had said moon dust “does something to plants that nothing else can duplicate.” He had observed uninterrupted growth of almost 40 different species in moon dust soil. Liverworts, tobacco plants, and ferns had grown larger and to deeper green in moon dust than in other soil. Corn cells buried in moon dust in 1969 were still alive and had grown tough, stringy roots. Dr. Walkinshaw believed moon dust might act as supercatalyst, causing soil nutrients to be absorbed quickly through walls of plants cells, usda Forestry Service and Chevron Chemical Co. planned to investigate how moon dust acted. (Brett, WPost, 12/17/70, G2)
Apollo 13 manned lunar landing mission (April 11-17), aborted after 56 hrs of flight, was officially adjudged unsuccessful by NASA. (NASA Proj Off)
Review of Apollo 13 accident was nearing completion and understanding of accident was good, LaRC Director Edgar M. Cortright, Chairman of Apollo 13 Review Board, told press at MSC. Final report had been delayed pending completion of “critical tests being carried out which will help pin down some of the details of what took place.” One of the key tests at msc was related to special detanking and checkout procedures before launch. Tests had found faulty thermal switches and “demonstrated that if these thermal switches, had failed ... the temperatures ... in the heater tube assembly could have exceeded 1000 degrees F. [800 K] in some spots,” hot enough to bake teflon-coated wires and destroy insulation. Actual flight tank at Beech Aircraft Corp. would be “cycled back through the same series of detanking operations that took place on the 02 tank ... from Apollo 13.” Other tests were being conducted at msc, arc, and LeRC on “the ignition and combustion processes in the tank.” Preliminary data suggested explosion resulted from failure of switches before launch and overheating of heater tube during detanking which destroyed insulation and sparked fire in tank. (Transcript)
Smithsonian Institution’s Museum of Natural History opened exhibition of photographic enlargements of moon particles, including Apollo 11 nickel-iron pellet with 4-mm (0.15-in) diameter discovered by Smithsonian scientists while sifting through moon rock samples. Pellet, called “mini-moon” because of its resemblance to miniature moon in enlarged photo, was magnetic and was believed by Smithsonian scientist Dr. Brian H. Mason to have been formed eons earlier when meteoric fragment crashed on lunar surface. (Schaden, W Star, 8/20/70, B4)
Special detanking procedure applied to Apollo 13 SM No. 2 oxygen tank before launch “probably resulted in major damage to the wiring insulation in the tank,” Edgar M. Cortright, Apollo 13 Review Board Chairman, said in Status Report. It appeared that two thermal switches designed to protect tank’s heaters from overheating might have failed. Tests had shown heater tube could have reached 800 K (1000°F) and that temperature would seriously damage insulation around heater wires. Cortright said damage could have resulted in arcing short circuits that were believed to have initiated combustion of insulation inside tank during flight. Burning, in turn, raised pressure of supercritical oxygen and caused tank to rupture. (Status Rpt No 14)
Display of Apollo 11 lunar rocks and Apollo 12 space helmet opened at New York State Museum in Albany, N.Y. Display had been lent by General Electric Co. and NASA. Exhibit would continue through April 26. (upi, NYT, 4/18/70,12)
Name “tranquilite” had been given to new mineral discovered in Apollo 11 moon rock by scientists Paul Ramdohr and Josef Zaehringer of Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics at Heidelberg, West Germany, Baltimore Sun said. Tranquilite—named for moon’s Sea of Tranquility, Apollo 11 landing site—was compound of titanium, iron, and magnesium related to earth mineral titanifer-ous magnetite. International Nomenclature Commission would review designation of new mineral before name became permanent. German team also had confirmed theory that lunar rocks had lain on moon’s surface for 500 million yrs and had never penetrated deeper than 0.9 m (3 ft). (B Sun, 9/5/70, A10)
NASA released Ecological Surveys from Space (NASA SP-230). Monograph listed feasible uses of spacecraft in 1970s an<l described scientific and technical studies of new images and concepts of earth acquired by venture into space. Publication contained photos taken from aircraft and from Gemini and Apollo spacecraft. (Text)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong was one of 10 persons named to receive National Civil Service League’s 15th annual career service awards. Each honoree would receive $1000, inscribed watch, and citation at banquet May 8. (W Star, 3/19/70, A2)
Crippled flight of Apollo 13 had been chosen top story of 1970 by AP member editors, AP announced. (WStar, 12/28/70)
Apollo 13 launch would open “decade in which space will have a new shape. . .leaner shape, with spending well below the hell-bent-to-the-moon space budgets of the 1960s,” Victor Cohn said in Washington Post. It would also be “subdued shape, lowered and Nixonian. Political and popular enthusiasm for expensive space travel is down several percentage points.” New shape “might turn out to be a more sensible one for many seasons.” It might place “more stress on using space flight to learn the facts of the universe and ways these facts can be applied to improve life on earth.” NASA was still undergoing “wrenching change, with many controversies that are far from ended. There is still a deep split between many space scientists and many aerospace leaders and technologists over the best ways to use America’s new capability.” (WPost, 4/5/70, Bl)
msc announced award of $57 264 989, cost-plus-fixed-fee NASA contract to General Electric Co. for spacecraft checkout, reliability and quality assurance engineering, and systems engineering in support of Apollo and Skylab programs. Contract, which definitized letter contract, covered work from October 1969 through December 1972. (msc Release 70-31)
Two photographs taken from Apollo 9 spacecraft in March 1969 had been used as backdrop for experimental topographic map of Phoenix, Ariz., area, New York Times reported. U.S. Geological Survey scientist Dr. A.P. Colvocoresses had said that “on ordinary maps the lines and symbols used to represent geographic features in such terrain leave many areas essentially blank. On this map, however, there are no blank areas. .. . The map is easy to ‘read’ because the photo shows the actual land surface, enhanced by superposition of cartographic details.” (NYT, 3/26/70)
President Nixon honored visiting West German Chancellor and Mrs. Willy Brandt at White House dinner on eve of Apollo 13 launch. He said: “We are particularly happy that tomorrow you will go to see the takeoff of Apollo 13. We are very honored that tonight among our very honored guests is Wernher Von Braun, which reminds us of the debt we owe to those who have helped our space project and who are of German background.” President said he had telephoned Astronaut James A. Lovell, Jr., and Apollo 13 colleagues as they were having dinner together at msc. “I wished them well and told them that the Chancellor would be there to see the take off and they promised much better weather than when I saw it last year.” (PD, 4/13/70,508-10)
msc scientists reported three kinds of earth bacteria had died when exposed to lunar soil gathered by Apollo 11: staphylococcus aureus scraped from Apollo 11 astronauts when they returned to earth; azobacter vinlandii, solid bacterium; and pseuodomonas aeroginosa, used in laboratory studies, lrl chief of preventative medicine Dr. William Kemmerer said conjecture was that all were killed by poison in Apollo 11 core-tube material. Tube held lunar soil gathered from five to eight inches beneath lunar surface. There had been no ill effects in similar tests with Apollo 11 soil or Apollo 12 surface or underground samples. (Cohn, W Post, 3/12/70, Al)
lrl scientist Frederick J. Mitchell reported microorganism—Streptococcus mitis—thought to have been accidentally deposited in Surveyor III camera before April 17, 1967, lunar launch had been recovered from inside camera after it was returned to earth by Apollo 12 crew in November 1969. Streptococcus mitis was common respiratory organism and had produced no disease on animal inno-culation. Mitchell said microorganism was probably deposited on camera when camera’s shroud was removed for repairs and then replaced. Procedures and high vacuum of space were thought to have been responsible for preservation of organism in lyophilized (freeze-dried) state during launch, 3-day moon journey, and 950-day stay in hostile lunar environment. Organism had been found after laboratory testing of camera parts at MSC. Investigators had predicted possibility of organisms surviving under such circumstances. (NASA Release 70-76)	.
Washington Evening Star editorial on SST: “Backers of the SST program say it is necessary for maintenance of technological primacy and a favorable world trade position, and that, besides, this bird is another of those inevitabilities. But certainly the nation that placed the first men on the moon isn’t hurting for technological status. As to the other arguments, the United States is capable of putting the kibosh on everybody’s SST ambitions, through denial of U.S. landing rights, if the environmental sacrifices appear too forbidding.”(W Star, 8/21/70)
Apollo 14 crew, following splashdown in Pacific Feb. 9, 1971, would be flown to MSC from Samoa instead of from Hawaii, reducing return time to msc by five or six days, nasa announced. Crew would arrive in Houston in mqf about Feb. 12 and would remain under lrl quarantine until Feb. 26. (NASA Release 70-221)
Largest solar-cell-array system ever devised to power spacecraft had been designed by msfc engineers, NASA announced. Each of arrays, to turn sunlight into electric power for Saturn Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount, would provide 10 500 w at 328 K (55°C) during 58-to 69-min sunlight portion of each orbit. Skylab power-generation systems would produce 21 000 w at peak operation. Number of solar cells in workshop array had not been decided; 164 160 cells would be used in atm array, (msfc Release 70-121)
Apollo 11 and 12 lunar samples were seen by 41 million persons in U.S. and abroad during year. Samples were shown at 128 events covering all 50 states, with total attendance of some 12 million. Outside U.S., samples were shown to almost 30 million persons in 110 countries, including almost 14 million visitors to Expo ’70 in Japan. NASA facilities across U.S. were inspected by 3 million persons, with heaviest influx at msc (over 1 million) and ksc (1.2 million). (nasa Release 71-8)
usn announced support aircraft carrier U.S.S. Hornet would be inactivated by June 30. Ship, which had served as recovery vessel in Apollo missions, would be mothballed after 26 yrs of service, (dod Release 38-70)
Group of msfc engineers successfully completed week-long testing of Skylab program hardware in simulated weightlessness aboard usaf KC-135 four-engine-jet research aircraft. Tests included operation of flight-configuration doors for film cassette compartments, retrieval and replacement of film cassettes, and evaluation of handrails and foot restraints. Lunar soil penetration experiment aboard aircraft studied load-bearing characteristics of lunar soil and how lrv wheels would perform on moon. KC-135 was flown in parabolas, with 30 secs of weightlessness achieved on each parabola in technique which most clearly duplicated zero g. (msfc Release 70-169; MSFC PIO)
Science published report of Apollo 12 Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team. Samples from Ocean of Storms were about one billion years younger than Apollo 11 samples from Tranquility Base. While most conclusions reached on Apollo 11 rocks also applied to Apollo 12 rocks, Apollo 11 crystalline rocks displayed one texture (lath-shaped ilmenite and plagioclase with interstitial pyroxene) and similar modes (50% pyroxene, 30% plagioclase, 20% opaque, 0 to 5% olivine), while Apollo 12crystalline rocks showed wide range in texture and mode. Most Apollo 12 igneous rocks fitted fractional crystallization sequence, indicating that they represented either parts of single intrusive sequence or samples of number of similar sequences. Breccias were of lower abundance at Ocean of Storms site than at Tranquility Base, “presumably because the regolith at the Ocean of Storms is less mature and not as thick as at Tranquility Base.” Complex stratification existed in lunar regolith, “presumably due mainly to the superposition of ejecta blankets.” Apollo 12 sample 12033 indicated presence of layer of volcanic ash. Greater carbon content in Apollo 12 breccias and fines than in crystalline rocks was “presumably due largely to contributions of meteoritic material and solar wind.” Amount of indigenous organic material capable of volatilization or pyrolysis, or both, appeared extremely low in Apollo 12 samples. Content of noble gas of solar wind origin was less in fines and breccias of Apollo 12 rocks than in fines and breccias from Apollo IVs Tranquility Base site. Breccias contained less solar wind contribution than did fines, indicating that breccias were formed from fines lower in solar wind noble gases than were fines at surface. Presence of nuclides produced by cosmic rays showed Apollo 12 rocks had been within 1 m (3.3 ft) of surface for 10 million to 200 million yrs. Igneous rocks had crystalized 1.7 billion to 2.7 billion yrs ago. (Science, 3/6/70, 1325-39)
Apollo 14 lunar landing crew would conduct active seismic experiment during first eva period, NASA announced. Crew would set off 21 small explosions while on lunar surface and would arm mortar to rocket-launch 4 grenades by ground command after crew left moon. Explosions would create seismic waves for detection by geophones emplanted in surface to provide data on structure of moon. (NASA Release 70-150)
MSC announced it had awarded Bendix Corp. $8-million, costplusfixed-fee contract modification for fabrication of fifth Apollo lunar surface experiments package (ALSEP) for deployment on moon during Apollo 16 mission. Modification brought total estimated value of contract to $76 million. (MSC Release 70-73)
Apollo 11 spacecraft, first manned vehicle to land on moon, would start year-long tour of state capitals April 17, NASA announced. (AP, P Bull, 2111110)
U.S., Japanese Government, and U.S.S.R. pavilions attracted largest crowds on opening day of Expo ’70 in Osaka, Japan. Apollo 12 moon rock was primary interest of 8000 visitors per hour who passed through U.S. exhibit. (Shabecoff, NYT, 3/16/70)
U.S. Ambassador to Guyana Spencer King said in Guyana that Apollo moon rocks would go on exhibition there during February observance of Guyana’s becoming a republic. (NYT, 1/27/70)
alsep 1 had operated without interruption for over 1948 hrs since being deployed on lunar surface Nov. 19, 1969, by Apollo /2crew, msc announced. To date alsep 1 had received and implemented 2034 commands, (msc Release 70-19)
Flight Crew Health Stabilization program to minimize possible exposure of Apollo flight crews to disease or illness would be introduced before Jan. 31, 1971, Apollo 14 mission, nasa announced. Program provided that crew health be stabilized through epidemiology, din-cial medicine, and immunology programs and limitation of outside contacts with flight crews; prime and backup crew members reside solely in K$c crew quarters for 21 days before launch; access to primary training areas used by crew members be controlled; access to areas during crew occupancy be limited; crew activities be limited to primary areas of Manned Space Operations Building and Flight Crew Training Building, flight line at Patrick afb, Fla., and launch pad white room during 21-day prelaunch period; and crew members use personal vehicles when traveling between primary areas. If crew members were required to go to msc for training, they would live in crew reception area of lrl or in their own residences, where they would be excluded from contact with everyone but their wives. During 60 days before launch, all illnesses in family members of prime, backup, and support crews and close contacts of these families would be reported to medical officials. (NASA Release 70-159)
Accuracy of Apollo 12 LM lunar landing was described by Henry S. F. Cooper, Jr., in post-mission report from ksc published by the New Yorker. After successful completion of mission, Cooper had talked with Flight Dynamics Officer David Reed, who had been in charge of LM trajectory during lunar landing. Cooper reported that Reed and other flight engineers had been “too accurate in plotting their trajectory, for Commander (now Captain) Charles Conrad, Jr., who was at the controls, had to change the LM’s landing point at the last minute. ‘He was afraid he’d land right on top of the Surveyor if he kept on going according to plan, and later, when we fed the data from the lm into a computer, we found that if he’d gone on in the way he was, he would have hit it,’ Reed told me.” (New Yorker, 1/3/70, 46-56)
Boeing Co. announced completion of lunar roving vehicle (LRV) qualification unit, last in series of test units leading to manufacture of first LRV flight model. Fabrication of major components for three flight-model lrvs would begin soon, with first LRV delivered to nasa April 1,1971, and carried to moon on Apollo 15 in July 1971. (Boeing Release)
msc released Surveyor III spacecraft parts, returned from moon to earth by Apollo 12 crew, from lrl quarantine for examination by principal investigators, (msc Release 70-10)
Study of Apollo 12 lunar samples had confirmed earlier conclusion from Apollo 11 sample study that lunar soil contained 1.9% meteoric material of similar composition to carbonaeceous chondrites and that moon had formed in earth’s neighborhood, Enrico Fermi Institute and Univ. of Chicago chemists reported in Science. Four Apollo 12 core and soil samples were “enriched in a number of trace elements of meteoric origin to virtually the same degree as Apollo 11 soil.’’ Meteoritic average influx rate of 4 billionths g per sq cm (1.4 billionths oz per sq in) seemed valid for entire moon. (Ganapathy, Keays, Anders, Science, 10/30/70, 533-5)
Apollo 10 and 11 photos of lunar far side had revealed number of probable igneous intrusions, including three probable dikes that crosscut wall and floor of 75-km (46.6-mi) crater, Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., reported in Science. Intrusions were distinguished by their settings, textures, structures, and brightness. Recognition of probable igneous intrusions in lunar highlands supported indications of heterogeneity of lunar materials and plausibility of intrusive igneous activity on moon, in addition to extrusive volcanism. (Science, 1/2/70,49-50)
President Nixon spoke at Pioneer Day ceremonies in Salt Lake City, Utah: “Just a year ago. . .1 welcomed back from the moon three men who had been pioneers in landing on the moon. ... I can only say that the spirit that took those three men to the moon. . .has built the greatest country on earth.” (PD, 8/3/70,995)
Loss of 0.56-g (0.02-oz) fragment of 0.45-kg (1-lb) Apollo 11 lunar rock from gsfc was reported by NASA. Sample, one of several used by gsfc scientists to study effect of shock waves in lunar material, had been reported missing by gsfc scientist Dr. Nicholas M. Short. NASA was investigating. (NASA Release 70-113)
NASA released preliminary time line for Apollo 14 manned lunar landing mission. Spacecraft would lift off from KSC at 3:23 pm est Jan. 31, 1971; land LM north of moon’s Fra Mauro crater at 4:14 am est Feb. 5 for 34-hr stay; and splash down in Pacific at 4:01 pm est Feb. 9. (NASA Release 70-166)
Apollo 11 commander Neil A. Armstrong held press conference on his reactions to first anniversary of manned lunar landing July 20, 1969: “I really had hoped, I think, that the impact [of lunar landing] would be more far-reaching than it has [been], I had hoped that it might take our minds away from some of the more mundane and temporal problems that we as a society face. ... I think if we could. . .direct our attention a little farther into the future, to try to foresee problems that are going to occur in the next years and decades, then perhaps we could be attacking these solutions from the front side when it’s. . .more easy to provide a viable solution and a meaningful one.” While scientific discoveries resulting from Apollo II had been numerous and were still continuing, Armstrong felt “actual discovery, or revelation, was that man could in fact live on the moon in a rather normal fashion.” This was “necessary key to all future plans for the use of our natural satellite, whatever they may be and however they might develop.” Armstrong described his feelings in looking at moon from earth: “I see the moon from the back yard as a friendly place. And I see a lot of landmarks. I can no longer look at it just as a spot in the sky; but, rather, I actually pick out, of course, the Sea of Tranquility, Clavius, Aristarchus, and places I know and have flown by.” Asked if he expected to fly in space again, Armstrong said, “I’d be surprised if I don’t have the option of buying a ticket.” (Transcript)
Four particles of moon rock no bigger than tea leaf went on display at Science Museum in London. (Reuters, WPost, 3/27/70, C5)
msc announced NASA contract awards: Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $3 248 000 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated 18 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification of vehicle readiness review procedures, vibrational testing, rendezvous radar, quality assurance and reliability procedures, and descent engine updating. Agreement brought total estimated value of contract to $1 673 119 200. Federal Electric Corp. received 10-mo, $3.29-million, cost-plus-award-fee contract extension for support services at msc. Extension brought total value of contract to $7,394 million since June 1, 1969. (msc Releases 70-75,70-76)
Apollo 12 lm in final moments of descent to lunar surface had caused dust shower that pocked Surveyor III and sand-blasted camera, NASA announced. Burton G. Cour-Palais, Chief of Meteoroid Sciences Branch at MSC, reported that Surveyor III TV camera experienced little meteoroid damage during 950 days of exposure to space environment, but had numerous shallow craters of recent origin— apparently caused by lm 183 m (600 ft) away. LM-caused craters were “shallow. . .mostly of recent origin, as indicated by their whiteness against the sandy brown color of the TV camera housing painted surface.” White craters were concentrated on arc of TV camera facing lm, 10 to 100 times as many as on side away from lm. Preliminary assessment of meteoroid impacts indicated more than five impacts on camera housing and four on polished tube. (NASA Release 70-23)
No harmful effects had been found in lower animals exposed to lunar material, LRL Lower Animal Test Team of 14 investigators reported in Science. Selected species of fish and invertebrates had been exposed to Apollo //lunar samples for 38 days in tests to detect extraterrestrial replicating agents possibly harmful to life on earth. No pathological effects or evidence of replicating organisms were detected. (Science, 7/31/70,470-2)
Baltimore Sun editorial on Apollo 13 launch: “If there is less national emotional interest in the moon flights now as they become almost routine, and as their goals are related to specific scientific quests, rather than to the romance of just making the flight and landing, there is still great interest and concern for a safe voyage. That America is not jaded by these brave and difficult ventures is shown in the large crowds that show up for launches in Florida and the attention televised coverage draws in the rest of the nation.” (B Sun, 4/13/70, A12)
NASA announced publication of The Moon as Viewed by Lunar Orbiter (nasa SP-200). Book by Leon K. Kosofsky of NASA Apollo Lunar Exploration Office and Farouk El-Baz of Bellcomm, Inc., contained stereoscopic and other photos of Aristarchus, Schroter’s Valley, Rimae Parry, and Tobias Mayer Dome—lunar craters and valleys. Photos were taken on five Orbiter missions preparatory to Apollo flights. (NASA Release 70-82)
Apollo 14 flight crew completed mock flight to 60 900-m (200 000-ft) simulated altitude in altitude chamber at MSC, in preparation for Jan. 31, 1971, launch to moon. (AP, NYT, 9/2/70, 9)
Manufacture of 15th and final Saturn V 1st stage (S-IC-15) had been completed by Boeing Co., prime contractor, and stage was being shipped to mtf, msfc announced. Stage, scheduled to boost Apollo 19 toward moon in 1974, would be static-fired in late September. S-IC program had begun in December 1961. Eight of 15 S-IC stages had flown on Apollo missions, 6 manned and 2 unmanned, (msfc Release 70-162)
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination suggested elimination of requirement for quarantine after lunar exploration because no evidence of back contamination had been found after Apollo 11 and 12 missions. Committee report released to press said, “There is no need to impose quarantine on the crews, the lunar samples or equipment on subsequent missions.” (AP, WPost, 1/16/70, A5)
NASA’s congratulations on Luna XVI achievement were telegraphed by Dr. George M. Low, Acting Administrator, to Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences: “This impressive technical achievement promises to add significantly to man’s knowledge of the Moon. Along with scientists throughout the world, we look forward to the first reports on analyses of these samples.” (NASA Release 70-156)
MSC announced contract awards: NR Space Div. would receive $305 700 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee/award-fee supplemental agreement ■ to Apollo spacecraft contract for four csm modules for Skylab program. Agreement definitized March 1969 letter contract and brought estimated cost of contract for both Apollo and Skylab to $3 618 006 813. NR Space Div. also would receive $250 000for preliminary planning study of reusable space tug with multipurpose applications. ILC Industries would receive $ 13-million extension to contract for Apollo space suits and support through 1971, bringing total contract value to $46 543 299. (msc Releases 70-61, 62, 63; NASA Release 7088)
NASA announced appointment of Philip E. Culbertson, Director of Project Integration for Apollo Applications Program, as NASA Director of Advanced Manned Missions Program, omsf. (nasa Release 70-6)
NASA published Apollo 12 Preliminary Science Report (NASA SP-235): Nov. 14-24, 1969, mission had accomplished “wide variety of preplanned tasks and paved the way for planning future missions to smaller, more selected landing areas with the possibility of significant scientific returns.” By changing csm orbital plane twice, crew had demonstrated capability to explore new lunar areas during orbital operations. “Future flights will take advantage of this capability to photograph additional potential landing sites and to make scientific observations of the surface, both visually and photographically.” Apollo 12 success in lunar orbit had allowed increase in planned orbital activities for Apollo 13. Large quantity of lunar soil and rocks from Apollo 12 mission would add to scientific information obtained from Apollo 11 samples. (Text)
Lunar roving vehicle training model, 1-G trainer, was delivered by Boeing Co. to msfc representatives at Santa Barbara, Calif., marking major milestone in manned lrv program. Two-man trainer was 3.2 m (10 ft 7 in) long and 1.8 m (6 ft) wide with 2.3-m (7.5-ft) wheelbase. It looked like flight version scheduled for use on Apollo 15, 16, and 17 missions, but weighed twice as much and was equipped with both automobile-type and wire mesh tires. Extra weight came from additional strength in frame, wheels, drive motors, and suspension system, which permitted it to carry 362.9 kg (800 lbs), including two men, equipment, and samples. Battery-operated trainer was driven with an aircraft-like stick hand controller and could stop, turn, move forward, and reverse at variable speeds. Top speed was 14.5 km per hr (9 mph) on smooth surface. Trainer would be shipped to MSC in about one week. (NASA Release 70-201)
Apollo 12 moon rock was guarded by three men as firemen fought fire at Stardust Hotel in Las Vegas, Nev. Lunar sample lent by NASA for display at physics symposium in hotel was kept in place during fire for security reasons, (upi, WPost, 4/12/70, A3)
NASA announced award of $3 300 000 cost-plus-fixed-fee contract to Boeing Co. Aerospace Systems Div. for engineering support of Apollo Lunar Exploration program. Contract covered engineering evaluation, flight readiness reviews, and mission evaluations Jan. 1 through Dec. 31. (NASA Release 70-25)
Science editorial by Dr. Preston E. Cloud, Jr., geologist of Univ. of California at Santa Barbara, scored cancellation of Apollo 15 and 19: “The moon is the only other planet we can hope to study in sufficient detail for close comparison with our own. We have just begun that study. It is as if we were trying to understand North America by examining Plymouth Rock.” Billions had been spent to get within reach of primary scientific goals on moon. “Only a small fraction of the investment already made would see the job to a fruitful conclusion. To stop short for reasons within our control would, in retrospect, be seen as one of history’s most irresponsible follies. Nothing less than the early institution of a comprehensive automated program to get similar information and sample return could begin to ameliorate such a failure.” (Science, 9/18/70,1159)
Apollo csms would be modified to enhance potential use in emergency mode, NASA announced. Modifications included addition of 400-amp-hour battery in SM as alternative power source, provision of storage space for additional 9 kg (20 lbs) of potable water, and addition of third oxygen tank for SM. (NASA Release 70-144)
L/C Joe Klass and Maj. Joseph Gervais, both former usaf officers, said in New York that 10-yr investigation indicated Aviatrix Amelia Earhart, who had disappeared over Pacific in 1937, was alive and living in U.S. They believed woman called Mrs. Guy Bolam, who claimed to have flown with Earhart, was Earhart herself and that Earhart and navigator Fred Noonan had been intercepted in 1937 mission for U.S. Government by aircraft from Japanese carrier, held captive throughout World War II in Imperial Palace in Tokyo, and released when Emperor Hirohito bartered her life for his exemption from trial as war criminal. Col. Klass had written book Amelia Earhart Lives: A Trip Through Intrigue To Find America’s First Lady of Mystery, published by McGraw-Hill. Mrs. Bolam later held press conference to issue denial, calling book “poorly documented hoax” and “utter nonsense.” (AP, W Post, 11/10/70, D2: AP, WStar, 11/11/70, A2) November 10-22:	U.S.S.R. launched Luna XVII unmanned lunar probe from Baykonur at 7:44 pm local time (9:44 am EST).Tass said purpose of mission was to explore moon and near-moon space and check new systems and reported all systems were functioning normally. During flight to moon 36 communications sessions were held with spacecraft and data on parameters and systems were transmitted. Midcourse maneuvers were conducted Nov. 12 and 14 and on Nov. 15 Luna XVIIentered lunar orbit with 85-km (53-mi) altitude, 1-hr 56-min period, and 141° inclination. Luna XVII softlanded in moon’s Sea of Rains Nov . 17 at 8:47 am Baykonurtime (10:47 pm ESTNov. 16). Spacecraft released Lunokhod I, self-propelled vehicle placed on moon to conduct scientific investigations. According to drawing and models shown on Moscow TV, Lunokhod I looked like large silver pot-bellied tub about the size of small automobile with ei^ht spoked wheels apparently powered by solar energy and batteries. Tass said Lunokhod I carried flags and pennants with Soviet coat of arms and Lenin’s bas relief and was equipped with scientific apparatus, instruments and control systems, and radio and TV devices. Lunokhod I left Luna XVII descent stage at 11:28 am Baykonurtime (1:28 am EST) Nov. 17 by special gangway and traveled 20 m (66 ft) from spacecraft to begin experiments. Tass said vehicle’s movement could be controlled automatically or by ground controllers following televised information on position and character of surrounding lunar surface. Between Nov. 17 and Nov. 22, 10 radio and TV sessions were held and large amount of data was transmitted. Chemical composition of surface layer of lunar soil was analyzed with x-ray spectrometer and mechanical properties of lunar soil and transportability of vehicle were investigated. In addition, Tass said, “an instrument was used which has a punch for soil intrusion, and a system of sensors for measuring forces acting on the wheels.” Panoramic pictures of lunar landscape were taken, in which tracks made by Lunokhod I, details of lunar surface, and parts of vehicle were clearly visible. Tass said TV cameras, “designed for surveying and evaluating the route traveled, provided the necessary information for travel in the conditions of uneven, broken terrain. At some points. . .the incline reached 14 deg. Along the path, Lunokhod encountered. . .deep craters the detours to which were ensured byithe operators (on Earth).” On Nov. 22, after five days on lunar surface, Lunokhod I was commanded to terminate operations in preparation for lunar night. Tass said vehicle had competed “a complex of tests.. .and a wide program of tests of its mobility” and had traveled 197 m (646 ft). Vehicle was moved to an “assigned position” where it would remain stationary during lunar night and solar panels were closed. Luna XVII was first unmanned spacecraft to land on moon and deploy automatic lunar explorer. Last mission in series, unmanned Luna XVI(Sept. 12-24), had landed on moon and returned to earth with lunar samples. (Sov Rpt, 12/4/70; GSFC SSR, 11/30/70; SBD, 11/20/70,81-2; Clarity, NYT, 11/18/70,1)	'
MSC announced NR had been awarded $4785 130 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo cm and SM contract. Agreement formally incorporated 26 changes previously authorized by NASA for modification to ground support equipment, for test and checkout of CSM, modification of flight and ground test hardware, and additional test-and-effect-analysis changes and brought total value of contract to $3.5 billion. (MSC Release 70-73)
First measurements of spectral reflectivity (0.30 to 1.10/x) of several asteroids using double-beam photometer on 152-cm (60-in) telescope of Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory, Chile, and 152cm and 254-cm (100-in) telescopes of Mount Wilson Observatory, were described in Science by mit astronomers Thomas B. McCord and Torrence V. Johnson and astronomer John B. Adams of Caribbean Research Institute College of the Virgin Islands. Asteroid Vesta’s reflection spectrum contained strong absorption band centered near 0.9ju, and weaker absorption feature between 0.5 and 0.6fi. Reflectivity decreased strongly in uv. Reflection spectrum for Pallas and probably for Ceres asteroids did not contain 0.9fi band. Vesta showed “strongest and best defined” absorption bands yet seen in reflection spectrum for solid surface of object in solar system. Comparisons with measurements of meteorites and Apollo 11 samples indicated that Vesta surface had composition similar to that of certain basaltic achondrites. (Science, 6/19/70, 1445-7)
U.S.S.R. announced it had found Apollo experimental capsule (used for training and experiment) and would turn it over to uscg cutter Southwind at port of Murmansk. Cutter was on oceanographic expedition in area. U.S. Embassy sources in Moscow had said Soviet government had informed Embassy three weeks before that capsule had been found in Bay of Biscay, off France, by Murmansk fishermen. (NYT, 9/5/70, 5; NASA OMSF Pio)
Philadelphia Sunday Bulletin editorial commented on Apollo 13: “The ease with which Mr. Swigert fitted into the prime crew lineup would suggest that the real risks in the Apollo 13 mission are still the risks the public never sees or comprehends. These involve mechanical and electronic components beyond lay understanding. They are immediately interchangeable on Earth, but they lack the adaptability of Captain Lovell and his companions at the point of no return.” (P Bull, 4/12/70)
Pravda published year-end review of U.S.S.R. space activities by A. Dmitriyev. Soviet leadership was swinging full circle back to belief that Soviet approach was distinctly superior to that of U.S. Automatic spacecraft were cheaper than manned spacecraft but Soviet efforts were encompassing across-the-board capabilities—manned as well as unmanned. Main directions were systematic research in near-earth space using automatic vehicles and manned craft, moon and circumlunar space as testing ground for Soviet cosmonautics, and research of distant planets, primarily Venus, with aid of automatic devices. Recent Soviet accomplishments had paved way for significant breakthroughs in all of these directions. (AF Mag, 6/71, 54-9)
NR Space Div. had earned incentive award fees of $1006 080 and $643 200 under contracts for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S-II), NASA announced. Awards, determined by NASA Performance Evaluation Board, covered management performance during 1969. (NASA Release 70-52)
Seismic signals obtained from seismograph carried by Apollo 12 crew at epicentral distance of 76 km (47.2 mi) from lm impact differed from any seen on earth, CornellUniv.radiophysi-cists Dr. Thomas Gold and Dn Steven Soter reported in Science. Signal caused by Apollo 12 lm was interpreted in terms of propagation between source and receiver through layer of powder in which sound velocity increased with depth. Increase, due to compaction, extended over several kilometers and led to concentration of seismic waves toward surface. Computer simulations using ray acoustics and based on assumption of randomly undulating lunar surface approximated the observed signal. Seismic amplitudes were enhanced in this medium over solid rock, so that observed signal required less power to be transmitted than previously estimated. (Science, 9/11/70,1071-5)	t
Advertisement offering “genuine” moon rock fragments at $1 per carat had been denounced as fraud by West German police in Frankfurt. Check with U.S. authorities had revealed fragments could not possibly have come from Apollo 11 samples, AP reported. (WPost, 1/16/70, A12)
Interagency Committee on Back Contamination notified NASA that Apollo 12 lunar samples and Surveyor parts could be released from lrl quarantine to principal investigators, (msc Release 70-7)
SNAP-27 radioisotope thermoelectric generator carried to moon on board Apollo 12 (Nov. 14-24, 1969) completed one year of operation on lunar surface. SNAP-27 weighed 19.5 kg (43 lbs) and was designed to provide 63.5 w electrical power for one year. Scientists now expected lifetime to be five or six years. (SBD, 11/18/70,68)
Two new clean rooms for checkout of Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) in Skylab program were being constructed at KSC. Control of temperature, humidity, and air in rooms would help prevent contamination of delicate lenses and other critical components of ATM experiments. (ksc Release 279-71)
ksc announced award of $99 189, 24-mo contract to Univ. of Florida for research and preparation of narrative history of icsc Apollo launch facilities and operations. Contract included option to extend for six months, (ksc Release 245—71)
Soviet scientist Boris Nepoklonov said in Tass interview that data from Lunokhod 1 (placed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) would help define age of moon more precisely. Information showed that Sea of Rains was one of oldest lunar formations. Analysis of phototelevision panoramas had shown that large craters over 100 m (328 ft) in diameter had emerged several billion years ago, while small craters up to 10 m (32.8 ft) in diameter were millions of years younger. Study of lunar terrain showed many layers. Outer layer, from 0.2 to 0.5 mm (0.008 to 0.02 in), was loosest and had poor heat conductivity, which resulted in sharp temperature fluctuations on lunar surface within half hour. Denser layer beneath was strong enough to sustain weight of Lunokhod 1. Nepoklonov, scientific leader of Lunokhod 1 control team, said that information received from vehicle would be published in multivolume monograph. First book had already appeared. (fbis-Sov— 71-212-3, 11/3/71, L5-6)
Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar rock groups differed in potassiumuranium abundance systematics, jpl scientists Dr. Fraser P. Fanale and Douglas B. Nash reported in Science. Difference indicated “that relatively little exchange of regolith material has occurred between Mare Tranquillitatis [Sea of Tranquility] and Oceanus Procellarum [Ocean of Storms]. Two suites appear to have been derived from materials of identical potassium and uranium content.” It appeared unlikely “that bulk lunar material has the ratio of potassium to uranium found in chondrites. However, systematic differences in the potassium-uranium ratio between Apollo samples and crustal rocks of the earth do not preclude a common potassium-uranium ratio for bulk earth and lunar material.” (Science, 1/22/71, 282-4)
Philadelphia Inquirer editorial commented on Apollo 14: “With 8400 million of taxpayers’ money behind it and the dubious future of manned spaceflight depending on it, the Apollo 14 mission to the moon ... is grimly earnest business.” If mission was successful there would be “another Apollo shot in midsummer, two more next year.” If it was not, there would be “a whale of a battle in Congress and elsewhere about appropriations and the wisdom of the whole idea.” {P Inq, 1/26/71)
LeRC announced it was accurately producing and measuring surface contamination to spacecraft by harsh elements in outer space under simulated space vacuum conditions in liquid-helium-cooled space tank linked to computer. Facility could achieve and maintain very high vacuum. LeRC Aerospace Environment Branch also would study effect of exhaust from small reactor control thruster—like those used for Apollo attitude control—on optical properties of nearby surfaces in space, such as Skylab surface. (LeRC Release 71-6)
Synthesis, without using water, of six amino acids that formed building blocks of life by exposing combination of formaldehyde, ammonia, methanol vapor, and formic acid vapor to uv light for 25 days, was reported in Nature by Columbia Univ. scientists Goesta Wollin and David B. Ericson. Because chemicals in combination had been identified in interstellar space, findings suggested life might arise on moon or waterless planet. (Nature, 10/29/71, 615-6)
Capt. Chester M. Lee (usn), Apollo Mission Director, discussed Apollo 14’s docking problems with press at MSC and assured press mission would continue toward moon as planned:	. . first of all we did have a successful docking and every indication is that it was a normal docking.” Engineers “have been making extensive analysis here and we can find nothing wrong with the probe. So far as we’re concerned it’s all operating. We do not fully understand why it did not operate or why the first attempts at docking were not successful. However, we are confident that the drogue ... is good. As to the cause, it could have been a foreign particle. ... we did ask the crew to look diligently for any foreign particles and they didn’t find any. . . . We did ask them to inspect the probe head very carefully ... to see if there were any foreign particles. We found none. If that were the problem, it apparently dislodged and is no longer there and is no longer causing a problem . . . and the probe certainly works now.” (Transcript)
Third attempt to test manned Apollo 15 LM in simulated environment was completed at KSC. Two attempts during previous week had been unsuccessful because technician failed to open oxygen valve and because two oxygen regulators failed. (SBD, 4/7/71, 192)
Long-term commitment and definition of policy for storage and curatorial handling of lunar materials had been urged by Cal Tech scientist Dr. Gerald J. Wasserburg, AP reported. A principal investigator of lunar material, Dr. Wasserburg had said lack of planning and handling could deny future generations use of moon rocks now being studied. (P Bull, 8/19/71)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 unmanned lunar rover explored 457-m (500-yd) crater on moon, made chemical analysis of soil, photographed area around crater, and “engaged in Cosmo-physical measurements,” Tass announced, (upi, W Star, 3/14/71, A15)
Apollo program’s contribution to lunar science was praised in Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial: “Apollo has taken lunar exploration out of the hands of tree-full-of-owls theorists and put it into the care of the lunar explorers, who will eventually provide sufficient data to unravel some of the major mysteries of the moon and our universe.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 8/19/71, 7)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated following eighth lunar night since vehicle was landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970.	Temperature in instrumentation compartment was 295 K (72°F), pressure was 100 375 newtons per sq m (753 mm mercury), and all systems were functioning satisfactorily. (Tass, fbis-Sov-129-3, 7/6/71, LI)
NASA continued to receive proposals for using surplus Apollo hardware for “Apollo 18” lunar mission, Aviation Week & Space Technology reported. Dr. Robert R. Gilruth, msc Director, had suggested mission be flown in April 1974 to map moon from polar orbit. During mission, which would cost about $190 million, lm would be converted into “massive scientific experiments bay.” (Av Wk, 11/1/71, 15)
Special Apollo Awards Ceremony was held at MSC to recognize individuals and support groups for their contributions to Apollo 13 and Apollo 14 missions. Dr. George M. Low, Acting nasa Administrator, presented NASA Distinguished Service Medals to Walter J. Kapryan, ksc Launch Operations Director; Eugene F. Kranz, Apollo 14 Flight Director; Glynn S. Lunney, Apollo 13 Flight Director; former astronaut James A. McDivitt, Apollo Spacecraft Program Manager; Dale D. Myers, nasa Associate Administrator for Manned Space Flight; and Sigurd A. Sjoberg, Apollo 13 Flight Operations Director. nasa Distinguished Public Service Medal was presented to James J. Gavin, Jr., of Grumman Aerospace Corp.’s LM team and Public Service Medal to Donald E. Eyles of mit. nasa Exceptional Service Medals were presented to 23 employees of MSC and ICSC. Group Achievement Awards were presented to DOD Recovery Forces and Manned Spaceflight Support Network, (nasa Special Ann, 2/26/71; nasa Release 71—28)
No viable organism and no evidence of fossil material had been found in Apollo 14 lunar samples, Lunar Sample Preliminary Examination Team reported in Science. Major findings had been: only 2 of 33 rocks had basaltic textures; samples differed from earlier lunar rocks and from their closest meteorite and terrestrial analogs in chemical content; chemical composition of soil resembled that of rocks; rocks displayed characteristic surface features and shock effects similar to those of Apollo 11 and 12 samples; concentration of solar-wind-implanted material in soil was large, as in Apollo 11 and 12 material, but solar wind contents of rocks ranged from that of soil “to essentially zero”; carbon content of Apollo 14 rocks was within range of that for Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; four fragmental rocks showed surface exposure time about an order of magnitude less than typical exposure times of Apollo 11 and 12 rocks; broader range of soil mechanics properties had been found at Apollo 14 site than at Apollo 11 or 12 sites and Surveyor landing sites; and no evidence of biological material had been found in Apollo 14 samples to date. (Science, 8/20/71, 681-93)
nsf published statistics that showed Federal R&D funding was on upward trend. Figures were taken from soon to be published report Federal Funds for Research, Development, and Other Scientific Activities, Vol. XX. Estimated 9% increase in overall Federal funding for r&d from 1970 to 1972 indicated upward trend after decline that began in 1968. Total of $15.3 billion in actual obligations for 1970 established low for recent years. Although 1971 Federal r&d total was expected to be same—$15.4 billion—total $16.7 billion requested in President Nixon’s 1972 budget marked new high. nasa had risen from 5% share of Federal r&d in 1960 to high of 34% in 1965 but was expected to fall back to 19% in 1972. Final phase-out of Apollo and reduced nerva engine development were expected to be nearly offset by increase in other NASA programs so that 1972 would be almost a leveling off. (nsf Highlights, 9/7/71)
NASA released two publications for sale by Superintendent of Documents, gpo. Apollo 14 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—272), prepared by msc, described Apollo 14: mission and summarized scientific results. On the Moon With Apollo 15, guidebook to Hadley Rifle and Apen-nine Mountains, had been prepared by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, msc Chief Scientist. Publication would aid in following progress of Apollo 15 mission by giving timeline for mission, describing and illustrating lunar surface scientific experiments, and defining terms. (Texts)
Washington Evening Star editorial commented on selection of scientistastronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt for Apollo 17 crew: “The argument for the scientist-astronaut has come. So far as we are concerned, it always made sense. Therefore, any congratulations to [nasa] for finally putting one of the flying geologists to work might be accompanied by a raise of eyebrows over the obvious tokenism of the assignment and a reproachful question as to why they waited so long to put a scientist into the richest geological treasure house that man has yet discovered.” (W Star, 8/19/71)
Completion of tests to determine cause of Apollo 15 parachute failure was announced by NASA. Possible causes were fuel dump, which expelled six pounds of monomethyl hydrazine (mmh) from CM reaction control system, and flaws in links connecting suspension lines to risers. Officials doubted exact cause could be determined. Dump through hot engine could cause tongues of flame that might reach parachute lines. Flaws were detected in links on one recovered chute, but the failed chute had not been recovered. Corrective action would be taken on both possible causes for Apollo 16. Dump would be eliminated and material for links changed. (NASA Release 71—188)
National Endowment for Humanities sponsored Thomas Harriot Symposium at Univ. of Delaware, honoring Elizabethan mathematician, astronomer, geographer, navigator, and philosopher sent to New World in 1585 by his patron, Sir Walter Raleigh. Harriot had written first English account of wealth of America, A Briefe and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia. After 350 yrs of obscurity, Harriot was being revived by scholars who were mentioning his name with Kepler and Galileo, New York Times reported. Harriot had independently begun telescopic observation of heavens in July of 1609, at about time Galileo did in Italy, and had drawn what was believed to be earliest map of moon in which vast seas and craters were recognizable. He had observed and counted sun spots through telescope using London fog as filter and had calculated period of solar rotation and traced moons of Jupiter. In 1601 he had discovered law governing refraction of light. (Reinhold, NYT, 4/8/71, 39)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod I lunar rover had successfully completed 11th lunar day of work on moon since it was landed by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, Tass announced. During 11th lunar day rover had made “a detailed survey of the structure of the moon surface in the area” and “panoramic route survey of the surrounding locality,” traveling 100 m (328 ft) before being powered down for 11th lunar night, (fbis—Sov— 180-3, 9/16/71, LI)
George W. Cherry, Director of Aeronautical Operating Systems Div. in NASA oart, received aiaa Mechanics and Control of Flight Award in ceremonies at Hempstead, N.Y. Award was for “pioneering the development of the digital control system for space vehicles and the application of these techniques to the Apollo Command and Service Modules and the Lunar Modules.” (NASA Activities, 9/15/71, 155)
nasa Performance Evaluation Board had given NR Space Div. incentive award fees of $234 600 and $307 350 for Apollo csm and Saturn V 2nd stage (S—II), NASA announced. Awards covered management performance under contracts during 1970. (nasa Release 71-97)
New York Times editorial said scientists were pressing nasa to “take another look at the cancelled Apollo 18 and 19 flights—flights for which much equipment is available. The Soviet contribution to the new picture of the moon is still miniscule, despite the feats of the Luna space vehicles. But it would make good sense for the United States and the Soviet Union to get together and plan joint manned moon flights, perhaps by making Apollo 18 and 19 the first truly international ventures to earth’s companion in the skies.” (NYT, 9/3/71,26)	_ s International Institute for Strategic Studies published The Military Balance 1971-1972. Annual report of London-based independent research group said Communist China had entered nuclear missile race, U.S.S.R. had moved further ahead of U.S. in icbm deployment, and U.S.S.R. was challenging supremacy of U.S. underwater nuclear strike force. (Reuters, B Sun, 9/3/71, 1)
Training mockups of two Skylab spacecraft components— Orbital Workshop and Apollo Telescope Mount—arrived at msc aboard NASA barge Orion from msfc. Shipment also included multiple docking adapter exterior shell and portion of airlock module mockup. Trainers and hardware would be used by msc for training prospective Skylab crewmen for missions scheduled to begin in early 1973. (nasa Release 71-187; msc pio)
Denver mint held preview showing of nickel alloy Eisenhower dollar which would be released in October. Back of coin depicted Apollo 11 lunar landing, (upi, W Post, 9/2/11)
NASA announced selection of Descartes as lunar landing site for Apollo 16, scheduled for launch in March 1972. Descartes, in central lunar highlands, provided opportunity to sample volcanic-like highlands basin fill and uplands volcanic terrain, (nasa Release 71—106)
Space officials feared budget pressures could prompt either President Nixon or Congress to cancel final two Apollo missions in 1972, Wall Street Journal said. In event of cancellation, NASA would propose to use Apollo equipment for “lengthy orbital flights due to start in 1973” in the Skylab program. (WSJ, 6/11/71,1)
Dr. Charles S. Sheldon II, Chief of Science Policy Research Division of Library of Congress, commented in interview after Sept. 28 launch of unmanned lunar probe Luna 19 that Moscow still had plans to land men on the moon, perhaps about 1973 or 1975. Dr. Sheldon said five previous Soviet Zond circumlunar flights had been capable of carrying men and several other earth orbital flights had simulated manned lunar landing maneuvers. Dr. Sheldon also recalled that Mstislav V. Keldysh, President of Soviet Academy of Sciences, had said in 1969 that manned missions to moon were not ruled out. (Sehlstedt, B Sun, 10/29/71, A5)
nasa signed $195 400 000 supplemental agreement to Apollo lm contract with Grumman Corp. for changes to increase lunar staytime, activity support, and other features of lm. (NASA Activities, li/15/71, 187)
Dr. Georgy N. Babakin, prominent Soviet space scientist who had designed equipment for unmanned Soviet spacecraft, died at age 56. Izvestia obituary said Dr. Babakin had been recipient of Hero of Socialist Labor, highest Soviet civilian title, and corresponding member of Soviet Academy of Sciences and had made “a great contribution to the development of Soviet space technology and the study of the moon and Venus.” (NYT, 8/5/71, 34)
Apollo Telescope Mount (atm) prototype was flown to msc from MSFC for extensive thermal-vacuum-chamber testing. Tests would continue through early December, (msfc Release 71-146; msfc pio; msc Hist Off)
NASA announced selection of Apollo 17 prime and backup crews. Prime crewmen were Eugene A. Cernan (commander), Ronald E. Evans (cm pilot), and scientist-astronaut Harrison H. Schmitt (lm pilot). Backup crewmen were David R. Scott, Alfred M. Worden, and James B.	Irwin. Apollo 17 would be launched in December 1972 on 12-day lunar-landing mission with 68-hr lunar surface stay time, (nasa Release 71-149)
Lockheed Aircraft Corp. had said settlements with U.S. Government on military contracts and other problems had resulted in net loss of $86.3 million in 1970 and $96.6 million in fourth quarter of 1970, Wall Street Journal reported. {WSJ, 3/21/1\, 3) May 27—June 6: Twenty-ninth Paris International Air Show was held at Le Bourget Airport. More than one million visitors to world’s largest air show viewed Soviet Tu-144 supersonic transport in its first appearance in West; Anglo-French supersonic airliners, Concorde 001 and 002; Soviet Mi-12, world’s largest helicopter; Lockheed C—5A Galaxy, world’s largest aircraft; Lockheed 1011 TriStar; and more than 200 private aircraft in total exhibition of 600 aircraft. U.S. Pavilion exhibited Apollo moon rocks. Canadian Pavilion contained mockup of integrated stol system envisaging 10-min air hops between suburban shopping areas and city centers. (B Sun, 5/26/71, 5/31/71; Hess, NYT, 5/26/71)
Portable magnetometer carried during Apollo 14 eva had detected unexpected bulge in moon’s magnetic profile, arc announced. Data indicated lunar magnetic field at point 297 m (325 yds) northeast of Apollo 14 landing site was about 100 gammas—three times higher than measurements at Apollo 12 site. Another reading, 457 m (500 yds) away near edge of Cone crater, measured about 40 gammas. (arc Release, 71-4)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, energized by solar cells after surviving second lunar night on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed third exploration operation, moving about 128 m (140 yds) during 4%-hr period. Vehicle had been inoperative since beginning of lunar night Dec. 23, 1970, and had been opened to receive solar energy Jan. 8. It had been released on surface by Luna 17, which had soft-landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 1/11/71, 28; 1/12/71, 35)
Senate passed S.J.R. 101, to “authorize and request the President of the United States to issue a proclamation designating July 20, 1971, as ‘National Moon Walk Day.’ ” (CR, 6/21/71, S9476)
More than 20 hrs of live TV coverage from Apollo 15 spacecraft and lunar surface would be carried via orbiting Intelsat comsats, ComSat-Corp announced. Coverage would include liftoff, transposition and docking, intravehicular transfer, landing site approach, lunar surface exploration, first color broadcast of lunar liftoff, rendezvous and docking, film transfer in space, lunar eclipse, press conference from space, and splashdown. (ComSatCorp Release 71-39)
msc announced signing of $11577 561 supplemental agreement with Grumman Aerospace Corp. for changes in Apollo LM contract. Agreement brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 617 510 000 (msc Release 71—18)
Chicago Tribune editorial commented on Apollo 15 crew: “Out of all they saw, collected and recorded by camera they hope to make a significant contribution to science and the understanding of the universe, and they hope from this to apply what they learned to the betterment of life on earth. If there is one regret, it is, as Scott said, that after the vista from this peak of experience, what comparable mountain remains to be searched?” (C Trib, 8/14/71)
Apollo 14 backup pilot Eugene A. Cernan narrowly escaped death when helicopter in which he was practicing lunar landing maneuvers crashed and burned in Indian River near ksc. After leaping from helicopter and swimming toward shore Cernan was rescued and taken to Patrick afb for treatment of minor cuts and bruises and singed eyelids and eyebrows, (upi, W Post, 1/24/71, A5)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover began sixth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains, traveling 301 m (988 ft) across lunaT surface and completing two communications sessions with ground. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (SBD, 4/9/71, 205)
S-IC-511 1st stage for Saturn V launch vehicle that would launch Apollo 16 toward moon in 1972 was shipped by barge from Michoud Assembly Facility, to arrive at Kse Sept. 17. (msfc Release 71-152)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments planned for ninth lunar day on moon’s Sea of Rains and was preparing for lunar night, Tass announced. Experiments included stereoscopic photography of crater bed and slopes, chemical analysis of rock, studies of crater 190 m (208 yds) in diameter, and measurements of cosmic radiation. Vehicle had traveled 10.2 km (6.3 mi) over lunar surface since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis-Sov—138-3, 7/20/71, LI)
Article by Paul Dickson in The Progressive discussed “Empire of Think Tanks.” r&d in U.S. had become “vast, powerful, and well financed empire . . . replete with its own priorities, powers, and pecking order. Atop this empire is a diverse group of institutions called think tanks, which as agents of applied research and policy study have a fateful impact on the nation. The most famous of these ... is the RAND Corporation ... a prime mover in military research.” r&d was “particularly critical element in the battle over national priorities because it not only reflects our current priorities but largely determines what will be technologically feasible in the future.” Lunar landings had shown “how much is possible if a great deal of thought, resources, and dedication are channeled into any stated goal. The vast majority of Project Apollo money had been pumped into space R&D during the decade prior to the first landing. There is, however, a catch in invoking the Apollo/NASA example, because such a new knowledge as is developed in such a program must be applied and directed in order to get anywhere. If not conscientiously applied, well-performed research can lead to a range of ends from a simple nonuse to a more insidious ruse—a way of dodging action under the guise of studying the problem.” Independent think tanks needed to be scrutinized along with Federally sponsored ones. “Many of them receive the bulk of their funds from the Government, and, though not officially ‘sponsored’ like rand, they bring up the same questions of power, unchecked and unanswerable, evoked by the officially sponsored outfits.” (CR, 11/3/71, S1752-5)
NASA released Apollo 11 Mission Report (nasa SP-238), summarizing events and results of July 16-24, 1969, Apollo 11 manned lunar landing mission. Report was for sale by National Technical Information Service in Springfield, Va. (Text)
Analysis of low-frequency sound from Apollo 14 spacecraft passing 188 km (117 mi) over Bermuda, obtained from infrasonic sensors in Bermuda, was presented in Science by Columbia Univ. geologists. Signals^ reminiscent of N-waves from sonic booms, were horizontally coherent, had nearly identical appearances and frequencies, and had supersonic trace velocities across tripartite sensor arrays. They had identical arrival times after spacecraft launch from ICSC and were only coherent signals recorded over many hours. Observations “seem to establish that the recorded sound comes from the rockets at high elevation” but values of surface pressure appeared explainable by combination of “kinetic theory approach to shock formation in rarefied atmospheres with established gas-dynamics shock theory.” (Cotten, Donn, Science, 2/12/71, 565-7)1
MSFC announced it had modified existing contract with Martin Marietta Corp. for work in Skylab Program to incorporate earth resources experiment package (erep) into flight version of multiple docking adapter, device to permit Apollo spacecraft to dock with Skylab cluster. Total cost of modification was $6 070 500. erep would contain photographic experiments to study earth from orbit, (msfc Release 71-111)
nasa announced it had begun distribution of more than 2200 samples and polished thin sections of Apollo 15 lunar material to U.S. and foreign scientists. Total weight of largest and most varied sample collection was about three kilograms (six and a half pounds). Material would be analyzed by 700 investigators in U.S., Virgin Islands, 15 foreign countries, and ESRO. (nasa Release 71-223)
Age and composition efEects on alteration of lunar optical properties were described in Science. Evidence from Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 samples and telescopic spectral reflectivity measurements indicated that lunar seas “are similar in mineralogy on a regional scale and that the highlands are consistent with ah anorthositic-gabbro composition. Bright craters and rays in both regions expose materials that are relatively crystalline compared with their backgrounds, which are richer in dark glass. With age, bright craters and rays in the maria darken in place by meteorite impact-induced vitrification and mixing with the surrounding material. Highland bright craters and rays may, however, darken primarily through regional contamination by iron and titanium rich mare material.” (Adams, McCord, Science, 2/12/71, 567-71)
nasa and Soviet Academy of Sciences had confirmed results of June 21-25 Joint Working Group meetings at msc, nasa announced. Groups had considered technical requirements for compatible systems for space rendezvous and docking, radio and optical reference, communications, life support, crew transfer, and docking assemblies. They had agreed to study experiments to test technical solutions. Experiments might include docking spacecraft of Apollo type with orbital scientific station of Salyut type and docking spacecraft like Soyuz with station like Skylab. Mission models would test suitability of technical requirements and solutions. Next working group meeting was scheduled for late November in Moscow, to complete agreement on technical requirements for compatible systems. Working Groups had been established under Oct. 28, 1970, agreement, (nasa Release 71164)
msc announced contract awards. Grumman Aerospace Corp. received $4 364 849 supplemental agreement for changes in Apollo lm contract. Agreement formally incorporated procedural changes previously authorized by NASA and brought total value of contract since January 1963 to $1 788 034 399. Boeing Co. was awarded $4.3-million, one-year, cost-plus-fixed-fee contract for reliability, quality assurance, and flight safety engineering at msc. (msc Releases 71-67, 71-68)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover completed experiments and was powered down for 11th lunar night on moon. Vehicle had landed on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970. (fbis—Sov—71—137—3, 8/13/71, LI)
Historical value of Apollo 14 was appraised by Thomas O’Toole in Washington Post article. Mission “may well be remembered as a turning point in the sense that it taught man what his role could be in the exploration of space.” Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 landings had been “feats of technology that showed the world what its richest nation could do when it set its mind to something. Apollo 14 went a giant step further, to a place where man might appreciate what he had done and what he could do in the future on the surface of the moon or another planet.” (W Post, 2/14/71, Cl)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970, had safely endured 10th lunar night and was functioning satisfactorily, Tass announced. (fbis—Sov—172-3)
NASA announced flight schedule for 1972. Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission would be launched in March and Apollo 17 in December. Pioneer-F would be launched in February on two-year mission to Jupiter, and erts would be launched into polar orbit during the first half of 1972 to obtain earth surface imagery. Other launches would include Intelsat-IV F—4, F-5, and F-6 comsats for ComSat-Corp; heos-a2 Highly Eccentric Orbit Satellite for esro; mts Meteoroid Technology Satellite; TD-1 scientific satellite for esro ; itos-c, -d, and —e Improved Tiros Operational meteorological satellites for noaa; oao-c Orbiting Astronomical Observatory; imp-h Interplanetary Monitoring Platform; esro-A scientific satellite for esro; Aeros scientific satellite in cooperation with West Germany; sas-b Small Astronomy Satellite; Telesat-A comsat for Canada; Nimbus-E r&d satellite; and sms-a Synchronous Meteorological Satellite. In addition, NASA schedule would include broad range of aeronautical research and cooperative exploration with other countries. Aircraft noise abatement would be high-priority goal, with development of QUESTOL aircraft, construction of noise-reduction laboratory at LaRC, and mating of acoustically treated nacelle to quieter jet engine. Supercritical wing test aircraft would be fitted with side fairings to increase flight efficiency and wing would be fitted to modified F—111 aircraft for tests in 1973. X-24A lifting body would be modified and redesignated X-24B and would begin flight tests in fall 1972. (nasa Feature Release)	............
Assistant chief designer for U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 moon rover said in Tass interview that all goals of mission had been attained. Lunokhod 1 had landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 and had exceeded expected three-month operating time and provided valuable information. Mission had resulted in acquisition of new skills and development of new techniques and control methods. Principles of remote control, reliability, and durability, as well as power supply, might find application on earth. (fbis-Sov—71—223-3, 11/18/71, L2-3)
Apollo missions plus Surveyor, Orbiter, and Soviet missions had permitted first detailed study of formative stages of planetary body, UCLA scientist Dr. George W. Wetherill said in Science article. “Future work will require sampling distinctly different regions of the moon in order to provide data concerning other important lunar events, such as the time of formation of the highland regions and of the mare basins, and of the extent to which lunar volcanism has persisted subsequent to the first third of lunar history. This work will require a sufficient number of Apollo landings, and any further cancellation of Apollo missions will jeopardize this unique opportunity to study the development of a planetary body from its beginning. Such a study is fundamental to our understanding of the earth and other planets.” (Science, 7/30/71, 383-92)
frc and MSC scientists and engineers would begin research in adapting Apollo hardware to “fly-by-wire” electronic control system for future aircraft, nasa announced. System substituted lightweight wires for push-rods and added redundant wire paths at different locations in aircraft, to make overall system less vulnerable to damage. Electronic system could soften bumps, sways, and lurches of aircraft in rough weather and ease pilot’s load, (nasa Release 71-36)
LRL scientists opened first box of lunar samples returned by Apollo 14. Samples included one rock almost pure white with some grey flecks and one with 10 times more potassium, thorium, and uranium than was found in Apollo 11 and 12 samples. Dr. Paul Gast, Director of Planetary and Earth Sciences at msc, said preliminary studies of samples were “not inconsistent” with idea that lunar highlands might represent lunar crust. “If this additional evidence that the (highlands) materials on the moon contain abundant rocks with high potassium and high uranium and high thorium ... it means the highlands are almost as old as the moon itself. What we’re saying is that there is a layer of unknown thickness . . . on the surface of the moon which is of very different composition than the average moon.” (AP, W Star, 2/13/71, Al)
Small “quasi-moon” 1.6 to 3.2 km (1 to 2 mi) in diameter was gravitationally linked to earth and moon in three-body team of celestial objects orbiting sun, Dr. Hannes 0. Alfven of Univ. of California at San Diego said in telephone interview with New York Times. Although little asteroid, named Toro, was discovered in 1964, computer calculations showing it was locked with earth and moon had not been reported until September at Nobel Conference in Stockholm, Toro came within 15 million km (9.3 million mi) of earth every eight years. Discovery was first indication that another celestial object was part of earth-moon system. (Rensberger, NYT, 10/8/71, 24)
First simulated altitude test of manned Apollo 15 CM in ksc vacuum chamber was postponed after oil was found leaking from light fixture. Problem did not affect spacecraft. (SBD, 4/6/71, 183)
Element variation and possible material source of Apollo 12 crystalline rocks was discussed in Science by Univ. of Tokyo geologists Ikuo Kushiro and Hiroshi Haramura. Chemical analysis of nine rocks had shown five rocks contained normative quartz; others had normative olivine and hypersthene. Rocks showed wide range in ratio of iron to magnesium. Findings led investigators to suggest rocks, with one exception, represented different parts of differentiated magmatic body, in which magmatic differentiation by crystallization and settling of olivine was most effective. Source material of original magma might be peridotite with or without plagioclase or spinel or garnet, depending on depth of magma generation. (Science, 3/26/71, 1235-7)
Despite basic differences, lunar samples were not completely different from terrestrial rocks, Northern Illinois Univ. geologist S. S. Goldich wrote in Science. Basalt hornfels from Keweenawan Duluth complex in Minnesota, containing 7% by weight of titanium, were similar in many respects to Apollo 11 lunar samples. Hornfels’ texture, as well as primary textures in lunar rocks, resembled those in Keweenawan rocks. {Science, 3/26/71, 1245-6)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover (landed on moon by Luna 17 Nov. 17, 1970) was powered up to begin experiments for 10th lunar day. (upi, W Post, 8/4/71, A6)
Feasibility study at msc had ruled out use of small TV camera on lrv Rover while in motion during Apollo 16 mission, Los Angeles Times reported. Cost would exceed usefulness and pictures might be hazy and induce nausea in viewers because of up-and-down motion of Rover over lunar surface. Necessary adjustments to provide TV from Rover would cost almost $5 million. {LA Times, 9/27/71)
Selected fire departments across U.S. would be testing new fire-resistant outfits developed by msc for use by NASA rescue crews, NASA announced. Prototype outfit had been displayed at symposium of International Assn, of Fire Fighters. Clothing included thermal underwear, coverall, chaps, two kinds of trousers, two jackets, and two proximity suits that permitted fire fighters to move close to fire or even enter flames. Nonflammable materials in garments had been developed to ensure maximum safety of Apollo crews in oxygen-rich atmosphere. (NASA Release 71—12)
Baltimore Sun editorial praised progress of NASA-Soviet Academy of Sciences plans for compatible spacecraft rendezvous and docking system: “For all the impediments, actual and potential, to genuine collaboration in an almost illimitable project which no single nation can ever claim for its own alone, America and Russia have managed, it seems, to come to terms on some major technical points.” Consultations that produced agreement “indicate the growth of sensible, humane realism in both Washington and Moscow in looking to the future,” (B 5»re, 9/4/71) Mitchell W. Sharp, Canadian External Affairs Minister, said at news conference following opening session that it was time for U.S. and U.S.S.R. to negotiate underground nuclear test ban. Dr. Glenn T. Seaborg, Conference Chairman and former AEC chairman, said in paper that plutonium 244, heaviest element, could assist in determination of earth’s age. In newspaper interview, Dr. Seaborg said leading nuclear scientists agreed that nuclear-generated power was “clean, safe and necessary,” but that people of world needed to be convinced. He felt that responsibility for ensuring safety in use of nuclear energy should eventually be transferred from aec to some other agency but move would be “premature” at present. Milton Klein, manager of aec—nasa Space Nuclear Propulsion Office and Director of aec Space Nuclear Systems Div., reported on nasa plans to send nuclear-powered space probes to outer planets in next five years, followed by manned missions using atomic engines in the 1980s. First mission using nuclear reactor to provide onboard electricity [Pioneer F Jupiter flyby] would be launched in 1972. U.S.S.R. withdrew from conference program paper it had intended to read entitled: “Development of nuclear power systems for space in the U.S.S.R.” and substituted paper on operation of small Topaz reactor. Washington Post quoted observers as attributing substitution to U.S.S.R. lag in space nuclear power field. One observer had said only other explanation might be that they were embarrassed by failure of Lima 18 “to perform on the moon.” (aec Releases 0-151, 153; Reuters, W Post, 9/10/71, A13; NYT, 9/12/71, 20; Sullivan, NYT, 9/16/71, 14; O’Toole, W Post, 9/16/71, A21)
Soviet engineer 0. Sashin described in Sotsialisticheskaya Industriya activities of U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, landed on moon by Luna 17, Nov. 17, 1970: At time of launch “it was supposed that the whole . . . program could be fulfilled in 3 lunar work days. . . . Over these three days Lunokhod-1 . . . visited a multitude of craters, repeatedly surmounting rock fields. ... In all, during the 3 working days envisaged by the initial program, 42 radio communications sessions were held with Lunokhod-1, during which 8,924 radio commands were issued and fulfilled. . . . the route covered by the apparatus amounted to 3,551 meters [3883 yards], the television cameras transmitted to earth more than 80 high-quality panoramas of the surrounding locality and the scientists obtained vast information about the moon. The fourth working day passed, then a fifth, and a sixth. . . . Each was succeeded by a 2-week lunar night with all its ‘charms’ including an outside temperature which drops to below minus 150 degrees. But the next morning came and Lunokhod-1, roused by a radio command from earth, obediently set about its work. “The work of the self-propelled lunar scout . . . continues. . . . 132 radio communications sessions have been held ... in which 22,792 radio commands have been given. A route 10,226 meters [11 183 yards] . . . over the lunar surface has been covered. The 10th working day on the moon has arrived. And again the indefatigable scout [is] continuing its search.” (fbis-Sov-158-3, 8/16/71, LI—3)
Newspaper editorials praised Apollo 15. Washington Daily News: “The record harvest of rocks and other data brought back by Apollo 15 may turn out to be one of the biggest steps ever toward understanding the solar system, the dominant influence on earthly existence. This has been the most remarkable decade of research and development in history, and the space program has been the core of it.” (W News, 8/9/71) Philadelphia Evening Bulletin: “The pictures taken by Endeavour and the data being supplied by the tiny satellite the astronauts left orbiting the moon are providing the most exact and comprehensive intelligence yet about minerals on the moon.” It was “becoming obvious that what we spend in space we are investing in the future of mankind.” (P Bull, 8/9/71)
U.N. Secretary General U Thant said in message to President Nixon that Apollo 15 was “another brilliant chapter in man’s peaceful exploration of outer space.” (Reuters, NYT, 8/8/71)
LRV had run into development difficulties that had boosted estimated cost more than 60%, Thomas O’Toole said in Washington Post. Cost was now estimated at $41 million, $12 million more than $19 million stipulated in October 1969 contract let to Roeing Co. and General Motors Corp. Overrun was due “almost entirely to overtime paid to the two companies to make sure the Rover will be ready to fly with Apollo 15 when it takes off for the moon July 25.” Trouble with electronic controls and independent harmonic drive and other problems had delayed testing of lrv until Dec. 14, 1970, almost three months late. (W Post, 1/30/71, A3)
President Nixon telephoned congratulations and good wishes to ground and flight crews of Apollo 15 following moon landing. (PD, 8/2/71, 1099)
lm similar to those used on Apollo 11, 12, and 14 was placed on permanent display at Smithsonian Institution’s National Air and Space Museum. (W Post, 5/7/71, Bl; Smithsonian pio)
European Broadcasting Union said in Geneva that it would provide live TV coverage of Apollo 14 for 21 countries in Western Europe and North Africa and coverage for TV stations in U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe. Fourteen multilateral broadcasts would be transmitted via Intelsat-III F-6 to earth station at Raisting, West Germany. (NYT, 1/31/71)
Soviet Academician Dr. Anatoly A. Rlagonravov said in broadcast that Soviet lunar vehicle Lunokhod’s safety margin and “perfect design” had “surpassed all expectations.” He said at this stage of space technology man could not have stayed on moon for as long a time as Lunokhod had. In future it would be possible to assign to automatic devices such tasks as studying meteorites, exploring volcanoes, and studying radiation in near-moon space. What was more important “is that we now have an almost ideal means of conveyance on the moon, a means independent of super-rigorous conditions of vacuum and sharp changes of temperature. We can load such a selenomobile with different scientific apparatus.” (AF Mag, 6/71, 59-9)
ksc announced award of $33 157 979 addition to cost-plus-fixed-fee contract with Bendix Corp. for support services for Apollo spacecraft and Skylab programs from Oct. 1, 1971, to Dec. 31, 1972. Addition brought total amount of contract to $210 081 335. (ksc Release 227—71)
Acid hydrolysis, vacuum crushing, and vacuum pyrolysis experiments to investigate amount, nature, and isotopic composition of carbon in Apollo 12 sample 12023 were described in Science by arc exobiologists Sherwood Chang, Keith A. Kvenvolden, James G. Lawless, and Cyril A. Ponnamperuma and ucla geologist I. R. Kaplan. Results indicated that sample contained indigenous carbide and methane in amounts comparable to those found in Apollo 11 fines. Hydrolyzable carbide in Apollo 12 sample was heavier, isotopically, than any known carbide phase in meteorites. Large difference between isotope values for lunar and meteorite carbide suggested “that the former was either native to the moon or deposited by meteorites and subsequently subjected to isotope fractionation processes on the lunar surface.” If meteorites were not source of lunar carbide, “then we are left with the possibilities that the carbides represent primordial indigenous lunar carbon, however formed, or the product of interaction between solar wind carbon and metals or metal oxides or minerals on the lunar surface.” Evidence existed for presence of carbides in Apollo 11 rocks but amounts were too low for isotopic measurements. “If the carbon was indeed indigenous to the lunar rocks, the observed range of isotopic composition would be more representative of primordial lunar carbon.” (Science, 2/5/71, 474-6)
Second flight model of lrv Rover was delivered by Boeing Co. to ksc for Apollo 16. (msfc Release 71-144; ksc pio) .
Texas a&m Univ. scientists had irradiated five grams of lunar soil to determine whether its elements, apparently soluble in water, were absorbed in growing lettuce plants, AP reported. Laboratory plants growing in moon soil mixture had grown better than those in ordinary soil. Dr. Paul Baur, Jr., botanist working at Msc, had said if plants took up activated elements from lunar soil they could be detected on x-ray plates. “This may give us new clues to the fertilizer requirements of plants.” (W Star, 4/25/71, A16)
Battery and companion unit in Apollo 15 lm failed during tests at ksc and were replaced. Investigation revealed battery had been contaminated with magnesium chips. Problem did not delay countdown, which continued on schedule toward 9:34 am edt liftoff July 26. (Wilford, NYT, 7/24/71, 29)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover, on moon’s Sea of Rains, completed experiments for eighth lunar day and was put in stationary position for lunar night. Experiments had included examinations of lunar rocks, stereoscopic panoramic photography, and measurements of chemical composition and physico-mechanical properties of crater 150 m (164 yds) in diameter. Vehicle had traveled more than 10 km (6 mi) since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and was still functioning normally. (Sov Rpt, 7/8/71, 12)
Former New Mexico Governor David F. Cargo presented Apollo 11 moon fragments to Museum of New Mexico at ceremony in Santa Fe. Later, AP said incumbent Governor Bruce King had claimed lunar samples for people of New Mexico, while Cargo said they had been presented to him, personally, by President Nixon. AP said White House records showed plaque presented with moon fragments was inscribed “to the people of the State of New Mexico.” (AP, W Post, 2/11/71)
Skylab flight hardware manufacturing was nearing completion, MSFC announced. Post-manufacturing checkout would soon begin at industrial and Government installations. Major Skylab spacecraft components include Workshop, Apollo Telescope Mount (atm), airlock module (am), and multiple docking adapter (mda). (msfc Release 71-212)
Number of accredited newsmen covering Apollo 15 mission had dwindled to 402 from high of 1200 for Apollo 11, UPi noted. ApoUo 12 had been covered by 700 newsmen and Apollo 14, by 600. (W Star, 8/1/71, A10)
Apollo 16 spacecraft was rolled out from ksc Vehicle Assembly Building to Launch Complex 39, Pad A, in preparation for manned lunar landing mission scheduled for launch March 17, 1972. Rollout was watched by about 10 000 persons at ksc. (upi, NYT, 12/14/71, 12; ksc Release 263-71)
Finalization of order for 175 F-^l jet fighter aircraft by Federal Republic of Germany was announced by Secretary of Defense Melvin R. Laird at DOD press conference. Order amounted to more than $750 million. (Transcript) Luna 18 reached moon’s surface Sept. 11 near Sea of Fertility, 3° 34' north latitude and 56° 30' east longitude. Tass announced landing was “unlucky” and communications stopped at 10:48 am Moscow time (3:48 am edt). Luna 18 was assumed to have crashlanded. Previous mission in series, Luna 17, landed successfully on moon Nov. 17, 1970, and released Lunokhod 1, self-propelled lunar rover designed to carry out scientific investigations. (fbis-Sov-172-3, 9/3/71, LI; 174-3, 9/8/71, LI; 173-3, 9/12/71, LI; SF, 11/71, 401)
President Nixon issued statement on successful Apollo 15 launch; “The flight of Apollo 15 is the most ambitious exploration yet undertaken in space. Even as it reflects man’s restless quest for his own future, so it also reenacts another of the ‘deeper rituals of his bones’— not only the compulsion of the human spirit to know where we are going, but the primal need in man’s blood to know from what we have come. We hope, by this journey, to know better the origins of Earth, the moon, and their other planets. We hope to understand something more of the mysteries of God’s great work. And ... we hope to understand more of man himself.” {PD, 8/2/71, 1088)
Preliminary results of studies of nuclear tracks in glass lens cover of TV camera landed on moon by Surveyor 3 April 19, 1967, and retrieved by Apollo 12 mission were reported in Science by Washington Univ. physicists G. Crozaz and R. M. Walker. Studies gave information about low-energy nuclear particles from sun and provided basic calibration for nuclear tracks in lunar rock surfaces—erosion rate of nearly 10 millionths cm per year. Results also suggested “small-scale erosion process in lunar rocks.” Use of Surveyor 3 TV camera glass filter had enabled General Electric Co. scientists R. L. Fleischer, H. R. Hart, Jr., and G. M. Comstock to determine, for first time, energy spectrum of solar cosmic-ray particles of iron group over energy range from 1 to 100 million ev per nucleon. Difference between observed spectrum and limiting spectrum derived previously from lunar rock tracks gave erosion rate of 0 to 2 A per year. “High-energy fission of lead, induced by galactic cosmic ray protons and alpha particles, has also been observed.” {Science, 3/26/71, 1237-41)
Micrometer-sized silicate grains from all depths in Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 lunar core samples showed unusually high density of nuclear tracks, Univ. of California physicists reported in Science. Densities exceeding 100 billion per sq cm in several percent of grains indicated possibility that grains had been irradiated in space as extralunar dust orbiting sun before being caught by moon to build lunar soil—a possible extralunar origin of part of lunar soil. (Barber, Hutcheon, Price, Science, 1/29/71, 372-4)
Final communications session of 10th lunar day was held by Soviet ground controllers with Lunokhod 1 lunar rover on moon, Tass announced. Vehicle had traveled 215 m (235 yds) during 10th lunar day, bringing total distance covered since landing on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17 to 10 452 m (11430 yds), (fbis—Sov—159—3, 8/17/71, LI)
Lunokhod 1—which landed on moon Nov. 17, 1970, on board Luna 17— was declared officially dead at end of lunar night because resources of its isotope heating system had been exhausted. (SBD, 11/3/71, 18)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial commented: “Apollo 14 . . . demonstrated that man still has much to learn about the moon. Even with the ability to land in relatively rough areas and to extend useful working time on the moon, the experience of the Apollo 14 duo in the Fra Mauro area indicates that better new equipment is needed to extend the range and accuracy of their explorations. And once the various typical areas of the lunar surface are reached it is obvious that vehicles with payloads much larger than Apollo will be required to haul the equipment needed to establish permanent scientific working stations on the lunar surface. For not until that is accomplished will man really begin to reap the full harvest of knowledge from his lunar capabilities.” (Hotz, Av Wk, 2/15/71, 9)
U.S.S.R.’s Lunokhod 1 lunar rover was activated on moon’s Sea of Rains after surviving fourth lunar night since landing on moon on board Luna 17 Nov. 17,1970. (SBD, 3/10/71,55)
National Science Foundation issued Manpower and Financial Resources Allocated to Academic Science and Engineering Activities, 1965-71 (nsf 72-302). Universities and colleges employed 273 800 full- and part-time scientists and engineers in January 1971, 6% per year increase from January 1969. Annual increase rate had been 8% 19651969. Current and capital expenditures for science and engineering totaled $7.9 billion in 1970, 6% increase per year over 1968. Annual increase rate had been 15% 1964-1968. In constant dollar terms based on Gross National Product, 1968-1970 increase averaged only 1% per year, while 1964-1968 rate of growth averaged 12% per year. Annual growth rate of 6% in expenditures for scientific and engineering activities in current dollars during 1968—1970 was considerably lower than the 16% “nonscientific” activities in universities and colleges 1968-1970. (nsf Highlights, 3/20/72, 1) March 20-23:	New uses of electrical energy developed from NASA research were exhibited at Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers convention in New York. Exhibit included patient-assist devices for human rehabilitation, “life signs” monitoring systems for hospitals and nursing homes, powered prosthetic hand replacement, portable light indicator for blind persons, sight-switch-operated wheelchair, system for recording school attendance, private alarm systems, gas analysis system for checking room or container atmospheres, system of easily concealed circuitry for controlling lights and appliances, bacteria detection equipment, and long-range laser surveying system. (nasa Release 72—57) March 21:	President Nixon sent letter to Dr. Rocco A. Petrone, Apollo Program Director: “As we approach the final countdown for Apollo 16, I want you and all the men and women of Apollo to know how much this nation values your splendid efforts. The moon flight program has captured the imagination of our times as has no other human endeavor. You and your team have, in fact, written the first chapter in the history of man’s exploration of space, and all future achievements must credit all of you for having blazed the path. Countless people throughout the world will soon be sharing with you the excitement of Apollo 16’s voyage, and I know I speak for all of them in conveying to you my warmest best wishes for a safe and successful flight. Good luck!” Dr. Petrone later sent copy of President’s letter to Apollo team. (Petrone letter)
U.S.S.R.’s Luna 19 lunar probe completed 1810 orbits of moon and was operating satisfactorily. Spacecraft had conducted 516 radio communications sessions since launch Sept. 28, 1971, and had collected data on moon’s gravitational field. (Tass, fbis—Sov, 3/13/72, LI)
Meteorite crashed into moon near Apollo 14 Fra Mauro landing site with force estimated to be equivalent to 8900 kilonewtons (1000 tons of tnt)—100 times larger than impact of Saturn V S—IVB stage, larger than any previous seismic event recorded on moon, and large enough to record reflections from lunar core if it existed. Dr. Gary V. Latham, principal investigator for Apollo passive seismic experiirients, said meteorite must have heen about 3 m (10 ft) in diameter and probably created new crater as large as a football field. Signal recorded by four Apollo seismometers on moon was so strong that Apollo 14 seismometers were knocked completely off-scale for 16 min. Total signal lasted more than three hours and signals that might correspond to rain of debris thrown out by impact were recorded for about one minute, (msc Release 72-105)
Navy’s Manned Spacecraft Recovery Forces in Pacific and Atlantic would again cachet and cancel philatelic mail for Apollo 17 mission scheduled for Dec. 6 launch, Washington Sunday Star and Daily News reported. Covers would be processed in Norfolk, Va., and Honolulu; Pacific covers would be postmarked on board prime recovery ship on splashdown date. Atlantic covers would be canceled at Norfolk. (W Star & News, 9/10/72, G19)
Vice Chairman Kuo Mo-jo of Standing Committee of National People’s Congress of People’s Republic of China told visiting French delegation to Peking that U.S.S.R. had begun underground tests of explosive devices in 250- to 300-megaton range Nov. 25. Tests, southeast of Ural Mountains, would continue to Dec. 30. He noted concomitance of European security talks in Helsinki, Finland, and of Dec. 6 Apollo 17 launch. Kuo said both Apollo 17 and Soviet nuclear tests showed technological supremacy with equal military potentialities. (Comparet, Agence France-Presse, Atlanta JC, 12/10/72, Bl)
National Science Foundation released Scientists, Engineers, and Physicians from Abroad: Trends Through Fiscal Year 1970. Immigrant scientists and engineers admitted to U.S. in FY 1970 totaled 13 300— one third more than in 1969 and two and one half times 1965 number. Increases over 1965 level had occurred under October 1965 amendments to immigration law. More than 50% of immigrant scientists and engineers in 1970 had last lived in Asia. In 1965, only 10% of smaller total had been from Asia. Total of 2900 Indian scientists and engineers in 1970 had been largest number admitted from any one country over last 20 yrs. (Text) January 7:	Launch of Apollo 16 manned lunar landing mission, scheduled for March 17, was postponed by NASA because of problems with suit fitting, lunar module (lm) battery, and command module (cm) docking-ring jettison device. Apollo 16 would be launched April 16— with lm landing on moon April 20 and lifting off moon April 23— and would return to earth April 28. (nasa Release 72-8; AP, B Sun, 1/8/72, A5)	_
New York Times editorial commented on Apollo 16 mission now in progress: “It will take many months and even years before the full harvest of Apollo 16’s scientific contribution is in. But even now there is much material for scientists to analyze. It is information made available by the superb television pictures received here on earth, by the verbal descriptions of the astronauts and by the data radioed back to this planet from the various automatic sensors ... on the lunar surface.” Preliminary conclusion was “that in some important ways the moon is now even more mysterious, even harder to understand, than it was before Apollo 16 took off. The additional knowledge of lunar conditions available from last weekend’s exploration indicates that the reality of the moon’s origin and history is even more complex than previous theories had assumed.” (NYT, 4/24/72, 34)
House Committee on Government Operations in 10th report, Aircraft Collision Avoidance Systems, criticized Federal Aviation Administration’s failure to develop “vigorous and meaningful program for preventing mid-air collisions.” Committee recommended faa research and development program to provide “unified, coordinated approach encompassing all elements of air traffic control, including ground-based air traffic control, airborne collision avoidance, the structure of the Nation’s airspace.” Committee gave faa Administrator until June 30 to report development by FAA, NASA, and aviation community of program to provide U.S. with “acceptable level of collision avoidance capability at the earliest possible date.” (Text) March 15—21:	NASA launched 29 sounding rockets from Wallops Station in cooperative international program to test weather data systems for France, Japan, and U.S. Project was sponsored by United Nations World Meteorological Organization’s Commission for Instruments and Methods of Observation. Objective was to compare data for better understanding of upper-air temperature and wind measurements and to encourage international cooperation in exchanging data obtained from meteorological rockets. Rockets—which carried radiosonde payloads ejected at apogee and descending on parachutes—included 12 U.S. Loki-Datasondes carrying NASA payloads, 10 Japanese MT-135s carrying Japan Meteorological Agency payloads, and 7 U.S. Super Areas rockets carrying French National Meteorological Agency payloads. Twenty-four flights were successful, three were failures, and two were partially successful. Second series of launches was planned for late 1973 with U.S., U.S.S.R., United Kingdom, Brazil, France, and India. (WS Release 72-3; WS pao) March 16:	President Nixon praised ability of Americans to “harness the discoveries of science in the service of man” in message to Congress on science and technology: “They have found a way of preventing polio, placed men on the moon, and sent television pictures across the oceans.” But, “when other countries are rapidly moving upward on the scientific and technological ladder, challenging us both in intellectual and in economic terms,” U.S. position in aircraft, steel, automobile, and shipbuilding industries “is not as strong as it once was. A better performance is essential to both the health of our domestic economy and our leadership position abroad.” U.S. should “combine the genius of invention with the skills of entrepreneurship, management, marketing and finance;” ensure favorable environment for technological innovation; realize “that mere development of a new idea does not necessarily mean that it can or should be put into immediate use;” encourage young people to become “dedicated scientists and engineers;” continue priority assigned to basic research and to “exploratory experiments which provide the new ideas on which our edifice of technological accomplishment rests;” and “appreciate that the progress we seek requires a new partnership in science and technology—one which brings together the Federal Government, private enterprise, State and local governments, and our universities and research centers in a coordinated, cooperative effort to serve the national interest.” President had increased FY 1973 Dept, of Defense budget to “ensure our strategic deterrent capability, continue the modernization of our Armed Forces, and strengthen the overall technological base that underlies future military systems.” To “apply our scientific resources in meeting civilian needs,” President had developed “overall strategic approach in the allocation of Federal scientific and technological resources.” He urged Congress to support new strategy that included reorientation of space program “to focus on domestic needs—such as communications, weather forecasting and natural resource exploration. One important way ... is by designing and developing a reusable space shuttle, a step which would allow us to seize new opportunities in space with higher reliability at lower costs.” President also advocated “providing new sources of energy without pollution;” developing “fast, safe, pollution-free transportation;” reducing losses from natural disasters; improving programs to curb drug abuse; increasing biomedical research; providing better health care; and drawing more directly on “capabilities of our high technology agencies”—NASA, Atomic Energy Commission, and National Bureau of Standards—in applying r&d to domestic problems. To improve “climate for innovation” President had proposed National Science Foundation support of “assessments and studies focused ... on barriers to technological innovation and on the consequences of adopting alternative Federal policies which would reduce or eliminate these barriers.” Additionally he would “submit legislation to encourage the development of the small, high technology firms” and “provide additional means for the Small Business Investment Companies (sbics) to improve the availability of venture capital to such firms.” Among “cooperative international efforts” in science and technology President cited exchange of lunar samples with U.S.S.R. and exploration of “prospects for closer cooperation in satellite meteorology, in remote sensing of the environment, and in space medicine. Beyond this, joint working groups have verified the technical feasibility of a docking mission between a salyut Station and an Apollo spacecraft.” {PD, 3/20/72, 581-90)
Llewellen J. Evans, President of Grumman Corp., died at age 49. Evans had joined Grumman in 1951 after four years in Navy Office of General Counsel and had played important role in development of Apollo lunar module. (W Post, 7/17/72, C4; NASA Hist Off)
Apollo program accomplishments were praised by Dr. Wernher von Braun, Vice President for Engineering and Development with Fairchild Industries, Inc., and former NASA Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning, in New York Times article: “Two developments stand out in my view: (1) The remarkable advance in sophistication of flight techniques and capabilities of the crews, and (2) . . . the eye opening increase in both the extent and results of the scientific activities of manned lunar exploration.” After completion of Apollo 17 mission would come realization “that we have only begun the exploration of the moon. As the analysis of Apollo lunar data and specimens proceeds, it will dawn on us what an enormous treasure trove awaits mankind just offshore from our planet. It will also occur to the scientific community that a base on the moon is just as important as a base in the Antarctic.” (NYT, 12/3/72, 68)
Legal Subcommittee of United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space began four-week session in Geneva to study Soviet draft treaty for cooperation in exploration and use of moon. Draft treaty had been submitted to U.N. in June 1971. At opening session U.S. representative Herbert K. Reis proposed that nations planning manned or unmanned lunar missions be required to notify U.N. in advance and that Soviet draft treaty be amended to permit use of military personnel or facilities on moon for peaceful purposes. (NYT, 4/11/72, 10)	_
Appointment of Owen G. Morris as Manager, Apollo Spacecraft Program, was announced by Dr. Christopher C. Kraft, Jr., Manned Spacecraft Center Director. Morris, former manager for lunar module in program office, succeeded b/g James A. McDivitt (usaf), who became Special Assistant to the Center Director for Organizational Affairs. Appointments were effective immediately, (msc Release 72-85)
l/g Frank A. Bogart (usaf, Ret.), Manned Spacecraft Center Associate Director since November 1969, retired. Gen. Bogart had joined NASA in 1964 and had received numerous high awards and honors, including 1969 NASA Distinguished Service Medal for his contributions to Apollo lunar landing program, (msc Release 72-18)
NASA published Apollo 15 Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP—289) containing mission description, summary of scientific results, photographic summary, crew observations, findings from geologic investigation of landing site, findings from lunar sample examination, and results of specific experiments on July 26-Aug. 7, 1971, mission. (Text)
Tass said Soviet test of lunar iron samples from Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had shown lunar iron resisted rust better than iron found on earth. (Reuters, C Trib, 1/26/72)
NASA announced that joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be designated Apollo Soyuz Test Project (astp) . (pao memo)
United Nations Legal Subcommittee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space ended four-week session in Geneva with agreement on some articles in Soviet draft treaty to ensure free access to moon. Subcommittee had agreed to uphold right to explore and use moon and right of lunar explorers to use facilities placed on moon by another country in distress situations. U.S.S.R. had refused to accept U.S. proposals that treaty apply to other celestial bodies and that every country give 60-day notice before launching space mission. U.S. and U.S.S.R. had expressed reservations on draft convention introduced by France and Canada that would compel publication of launch information. (NYT, 5/6/72, 3:9)	_
NASA had invited 63 ambassadors to Apollo 16 launch but had canceled flight scheduled to carry them to Cape Kennedy because only 10 had accepted, Washington Post reported. (W Post, 4/16/72)
Aviation Week & Space Technology editorial adapted from paper by Dr. Homer E. Newell, NASA Associate Administrator, presented views on future trends in space: Decade of 1970s would see emphasis on “beneficial returns from our investments in the first decade of the space age. It will also be a decade in which we will consciously seek to avoid the large funding peaks that characterized the Apollo era.” Number of achievements possible within limited budgeting would be limited. “In the science arena, and in particular in the exploration of the solar system, this will mean some effort on extending our exploration of earth-like planets. And that will be about it, unless some circumstances again change our emphasis on space science.” In 1980s NASA would “be getting to those very special, very important missions to the smaller bodies of the solar system . . . which will give us probably our best look at the very earliest days of the solar system. Then, in addition, we should during the 1970s look to the best husbanding and application of our space sciences resources to see if we can’t get in one or two early missions of this type.” At any progress rate, “the nation, and indeed the world, is not going to run out of important and exciting and inspiring things to do in exploring and seeking to understand this wonderful universe.” (Av Wk, 5/8/72, 7)
Poll of 123 persons in 6 Moroccan villages had shown 63% thought U.S. lunar landings were hoax or had doubts about them, Washington Post reported. Of those polled, 88% said they had heard of manned lunar missions since 1969. Of 20 persons between ages of 14 and 25, 55% believed reports of moon landings; only 25% of 20 persons between ages of 61 and 90 thought reports were true. Of villagers who believed men had gone to moon, 20% thought landings had been made by Russians. (Aubin, W Post, 7/24/72, A14)
Soviet scientists had suggested system of time registration for moon in lunar stellar days, hours, minutes, and seconds, Tass announced. They had also calculated positions of 72 stars and of Jupiter for every 10 days of lunar year. Work was outlined in book Formulas and Ephemerides for Field Observations on the Moon. (fbis-Sov, 10/2/72, LI)	_
New York Times editorial commented on results of Third Lunar Science Conference at Manned Spacecraft Center [see Jan. 10-13]: “Science fiction writers predicted long ago that the moon would be colonized; some even projected a future ‘revolution’ by lunar settlers against domination from the earth. Though such writers could skip over the many difficulties and high costs required by any genuine settlement attempt, there is now increasing evidence that the moon may not be quite so inhospitable as scientists once believed. The possibility that on this, too, the science fiction writers may have been prophets no longer seems as fantastic as it did before the first men walked on the moon.” (NYT, 1/21/72, 46)
NASA released Physics of the Solar System (NASA SP—300), edited by Dr. S.	Ichtiaque Rasool of Goddard Institute for Space Studies. Book was based on lectures given at Fourth Summer Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics at Stony Brook, N.Y., June 17-July 15, 1970. It covered broad range of topics in solar physics, planetary structure and atmospheres, and origin and evolution of solar system. (Text) July 1:	Proposal to produce rare bloodclot-dissolving enzyme urokinase aboard Apollo spacecraft during 1975 joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. rendezvous and docking mission would be made to NASA by university-industry scientific team, Washington Post reported. Scientists from Abbott Laboratories, General Dynamics Corp. Convair Div., and Univ. of California at Los Angeles had suggested use of device developed by UCLA biophysicist Alexander Kolin that separated the one kidney cell out of every 19 that made urokinase. Device had been used successfully on earth, but team believed urokinase-producing cells could be isolated more effectively in space, where gravity did not hinder separation. Cells would be separated aboard spacecraft, ampuled, frozen, and brought back to earth, where enzyme would be produced by pharmaceutical plant. If successful, method could reduce high cost of urokinase to $50 per dose. National Heart and Lung Institute had treated 236 victims of pulmonary embolism with enzyme at more than $1000 per patient. (O’Toole, W Post, 7/1/72, A3)
Chicago Daily News editorial on Pioneer 10 said: “After several moon landings and all the fuss over spending on space ventures, the public is probably a bit jaded by now with outbound rockets. Yet there is something special, and more than a little bit eerie, about this one.” Only “scientists whose minds can absorb the concept of infinity can really appreciate the possibilities wrapped up in the voyage of Pioneer 10. But the rest of us can share a sense of awe as the spacecraft plunges into eternity, and think a bit about the specks called Man, lost in the vastness of the Universe.” (C Daily News, 3/6/72)
Two proposed flight plans, both with nighttime launch, for December Apollo 17 mission were being studied by Manned Spacecraft Center, Houston Post reported. Proposed launch times—selected for optimum sun angle during lunar landing and surface activities—were 8:39 pm Est Dec. 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 am est Dec. 11, and 8:48 pm est Dec 6, with lunar landing at 1:47 pm est Dec. 11. Nighttime liftoff would he first in U.S. manned program. (Maloney, H Post, 5/15/72)	_
Tass announced Apollo 16 launch 22 min after U.S. news agencies reported blastoff and issued brief report when spacecraft entered orbit. UPl said coverage was quick by Soviet standards and was part of “gradual expanding coverage the Russians have been giving to U.S. space shots which were all but ignored ten years ago.” (W Star, 4/17/72, A6)
Reporting on Jan. 10-13 Third Lunar Science Conference results, Science said “far more comprehensive picture of the moon but far fewer claims to understand how the moon evolved were evident.” Conflict in geochemical evidence suggested “an initially cold moon in which partial melting of its outer layers took place and magnetic evidence that suggests an initially hot moon with a molten core during the early part of its history.” Other puzzles were indication that radioactive materials on moon’s surface were concentrated in one area and evidence of unexpectedly high heat flux from moon’s interior at Apollo 15 site. Seismic evidence that moon had layered crust 65 km (40 mi) thick had been unexpected. More details on lunar chronology had been determined, “such as the date of formation of the Imbrium basin about 4.0 billion years ago and of the Copernicus Crater only 900 million years ago.” It also appeared that, “because of the initially high rate of meteoroid impacts on the moon, very little if any of the original crustal rocks have survived.” Lunar-sample chemistry was “proving far from easy—the possibility that volatile elements have migrated on the lunar surface ... is complicating the analysis of trace constituents.” Despite complications, “scientific understanding of the moon is much further advanced than . . . even a year ago. The systematic coverage of the moon’s surface provided by the orbital experiments on Apollo 15, in combination with the lunar samples, laboratory work, and the experiments on the lunar surface have provided new data to replace what sometimes proved to be unfounded speculations.” (Hammond, Science, 2/25/72, 868-70)
Saturday Review editorial appraised Apollo program’s final significance: Militarily “little strategic value beyond increased sophistication in rocketry and global surveillance seems to have been realized.” Scientific benefits were difficult to determine until data were analyzed. Program “signals the end—for the time being—of what must be regarded as a kind of dream . . . wherein human captains ply their ships through the reaches of the heavens. In a way we are all vicarious captains of space ships, and with the end of Apollo it will be infinitely more difficult to imagine ourselves aboard craft that are guided only by the circuitry of electronic crews. As machinery for exploration, the human captain has been superannuated, at least for the foreseeable future. The inescapable corollary is that we are earthbound once again, tightly contained in the atmosphere of our single spinning island by insurmountably vast distances and the laws of physics.” Apollo 11 Astronaut Neil A. Armstrong’s “giant leap for mankind” had been, perhaps, “that the Apollo program, for all its costs and whatever the legitimacy of its birth, created a cosmic event—earth-rise played on the retinas of terrestrially evolved organisms.” (Meyer, Saturday Review, 12/23/72, 22)
U.S.S.R. launched Cosmos 489 from Plesetsk into orbit with 1004-km (623.9-mi.) apogee, 967-km (600.9-mi) perigee, 104.7-min period, and 74° inclination, (gsfc SSR, 5/31/72; SBD, 5/9/72, 48) May 7:	Tank cart defueling recovered Apollo 16 command module for storage at San Diego Naval Air Station exploded because of overpressurization. Forty-six persons were hospitalized. All were suspected of having inhaled toxic fumes, but examination revealed no symptoms of inhalation. One suffered broken kneecap and two broken toes. Six were treated for lacerations and bruises, (upi, W Post, 5/8/72, A2; AP, B Sun, 5/8/72, Al; msc pao)
Explosion and flash fire at Newhall, Calif., plant of Space Ordnance Systems, Inc.—manufacturers of Apollo spacecraft components—injured six workers. Facility made explosive bolts used to separate Apollo lunar module ascent stage from descent stage on liftoff from moon. Explosive substance causing fire was identified only as “commercial product.” (W Post, 7/22/72, A4; NASA proj off)
On the Moon with Apollo 16 by Dr. Gene M. Simmons, former Manned Spacecraft Center Chief Scientist, was available for sale from Government Printing Office, NASA announced. Book described landing site and scientific aspects of mission scheduled for launch to moon’s Descartes region April 16. (nasa Special Release)
Jan. 25 fuel leak in Apollo 16 spacecraft had added extra $200 000 to cost of mission, Washington Post reported. Most of money went to pay overtime to technicians who had worked two weekends bringing vehicle with csm/lm from launch pad to Vehicle Assembly Building (vab), where command module had been partly disassembled, and returning spacecraft to pad after repair work on launch vehicle and command module had been completed. (W Post, 4/16/72, A3)
Fact that all spacecraft orbiting earth or moon traveled “oval shaped path called Keplerian elipse” testified to “durability” of Johannes Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, New York Times said. In article on 1971 celebration of 400th anniversary of mathematician-astronomer’s birth, Dec. 27, 1571, Times noted, “Whether it is the space program or a new fashion in historical research, the life and works of the sickly son of a mercenary soldier who rose to be Imperial Mathematician of the Holy Roman Empire are undergoing a kind of rehabilitation at the hands of scholars.” (Reinhold, NYT, 2/18/72)
NASA released color photo of Shorty Crater area of Apollo 17 TaurusLittrow lunar landing site. Photo, taken Dec. 12 during second extravehicular activity of Dec. 7-19 mission, confirmed existence of orange soil discovered by astronaut-geologist Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt, (nasa photo 72-HC-933)
Soviet President Nicolay V. Podgorny had sent congratulations to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo 17 mission, Moscow radio reported. Message had conveyed best wishes to brave crew, their flight, and explorations that “have contributed greatly to the study of space.” (fbis-Sov, 12/21/72, Gl)
Washington Post editorial commented on Apollo 16:	. . what has struck us about the moon flights is that so little has gone wrong and how much of what has gone wrong has been correctable. It is a sad commentary about the quality of life on earth when it takes days to fix a television set or a refrigerator while it takes only hours to analyze and overcome an electronic flaw in a craft that is circling the moon.” (W Post, 4/29/72, A18) April 30:	Apollo 16 discoveries were described in New York Times article. Mission had been “longest, most ambitious and, in many respects, most productive” in Apollo series. Discoveries included fact that Descartes region of lunar highlands contained almost no specimens of unaltered volcanic rock despite region’s age, “older than the seas and the more prominent craters.” Region had been found to contain breccia rock that had been “fragmented, jumbled, and cemented together again.” High magnetism observed at sites visited by Apollo 16 astronauts might provide clue to moon’s early history, since analysis of lava rocks on earth had indicated earth’s magnetic field flipped over at intervals of thousands or millions of years, with shift requiring centuries. Reverse polarity discovered in rocks near Apollo 16 landing site might mean moon had done magnetic flip at some time in its early history. Among experiments whose outcome was still uncertain was attempt to photograph and analyze ultraviolet light from hydrogen clouds thought by some scientists to exist and to be “missing mass” that would explain gravity assumed to be keeping clusters of galaxies from flying apart. (Sullivan, NYT, 4/30/72, 3)
Question of whether moon was hot or cold was discussed in Science by California Institute of Technology scientists Dr. Don L. Anderson and Dr. Thomas C. Hanks. High surface concentrations of uranium, thorium, and potassium found on moon and Apollo 15 heat-flow value of 33 ergs per sq cm per sec had indicated high present-day temperatures in lunar interior. But recent interpretations of lunar conductivity profile—“non-hydrostatic shape of the moon, the existence of mascons, the remarkable aseismicity of the moon, and the absence of present-day volcanism”—had suggested lunar interior had always been cold. “We find that the basic observations do not demand a presently cold moon and are, in fact, consistent with a hot moon. We find that an iron-deficient, highly resistive, hot lunar interior, capped by a cool rigid lunar lithosphere with a thickness of several hundred kilometers [100 kilometers = 62 miles] can explain the relevant observations and is a reasonable model of the moon today.” (Science, 12/22/72, 1245-9)
Columbia Univ. sociologist Dr. Amitai W. Etzioni suggested “most hopeful epitaph for Project Apollo” in New York Times article: “This was the last gasp of a technologically addicted, public-relations-minded society, the last escapade engineered by an industrial-military coalition seeking conquests in outer space, while avoiding swelling needs on earth.” {NYT, 12/3/72, 64)
New York Times editorial praised accomplishments of Atomic Energy Commission’s new nuclear accelerator at Batavia, 111. [see March 1]: It was at accelerator “that some of the most illuminating experiments of the next decade are likely to be carried out. For this powerful instrument may have the resources—the penetrating power of its incredible proton beam—to answer some of the ultimate questions about the structure of nuclear particles. If so, man’s understanding of the material universe and his powers over it may well be revolutionalized in the years immediately ahead.” (NYT, 3/5/72, 4:12) March 6:	Dr. James C. Fletcher, NASA Administrator, said in letter to nasa staff that Pioneer 10 (launched March 2) if successful would be “technological and scientific achievement of the first magnitude.” During launch it had set spacecraft speed record of some 51 500 km per hr (32 000 mph). “One small detail that impressed me was . . . Pioneer 10 passed the Moon only 11 hours after launch. It makes the Moon seem very close at hand. So we have a new measure for the nearness of what we used to call ‘outer space.’ It brings home, even as we begin the great adventure of exploring the outer planets, the primary importance of moving forward with our preparations for the routine exploitation of inner space.” (NASA Activities, 3/15/72, 44)
In interview published in Time magazine President Nixon discussed impact of his impending visit to People’s Republic of China: “. . . what really matters here is not the fact that the trip to China is announced” but results of trip. “Our people have become accustomed to the spectaculars. It is exciting. A trip to China is like going to the moon.” {Time, 1/3/72, 14—5)
Soviet scientists who had examined lunar samples brought to earth by Luna 16 and Apollo 11 had reported findings on lunar iron, Tass announced. Lunar iron was almost completely void of impurities and had not been affected by corrosion, in spite of its long presence on earth. Scientists maintained “that lunar vacuum and high temperature during the supposed eruptions of volcanoes themselves served as reducers of pure iron out of compounds.” (fbis-Sov, 8/15/72, L2)
There was “much reason to suspect that sooner than most Americans realize there will be Soviet cosmonauts striding and riding on the moon’s surface,” New York Times article said. But U.S.S.R. was “no more capable of fully exploring the moon and achieving monopoly control of, the lunar surface than the United States.” It would take “resources of all nations to finance, equip and staff the permanent manned bases on the moon which will be needed if the moon’s scientific, economic and other potentials are to be fully exploited.” (Schwartz, NYT, 12/11/72, 39)
Romanian President Nicolay Ceausescu had sent telegram to President Nixon on successful conclusion of Apollo, 17 mission, Romanian news agency Agerpres announced in Bucharest. Telegram had said: “We express our conviction that the remarkable successes in outerspace exploration scored during the Apollo programme that concluded with this brilliant mission will serve the general progress of science and technique and will be put in the service of humanity, peace and understanding among people.” (FBis-Romania, 12/22/72, HI)
Montana State Low Income Organization, activist group, had sent box of rocks to President Nixon to protest Apollo 16 mission, upi reported. Group had said purpose of mission appeared to be merely collection of rocks; Montana rocks were free and represented areas in state where social problems needed Government attention. (NYT, 4/23/72, 60)
NASA released specifications of Apollo 17 lunar roving vehicle (lrv) to be carried to moon on final Apollo mission Dec. 6. Following scheduled Dec. 11 lunar landing, lrv would travel about 37 km (23 mi), about 10 km (6 mi) farther than previous lrvs, and would have loaded earth weight of 725 kg (1600 lbs), increase of about 27 kg (60 lbs) over lrvs used during Apollo 14 and 15. Apollo 17 lrv would carry traverse gravimeter to measure variations in subsurface structure and provide data on whether Taurus mountains had deep roots or were deposits on uniform subsurface. Surface electrical properties experiment would measure physical properties of lunar interior to 1-km (0.6-mi) depth. Experiment, connected to LRV navigational system by cable, also would indicate subsurface electrical and mechanical properties, extent of subsurface layering, and degree of energy scattering at landing site, and possible existence of underground water. First direct LRV linking with experiment would enable scientists on earth to correlate its specific location with experiment data, (nasa Special Release)
Director Glynn S. Lunney of Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (astp) briefed press at Manned Spacecraft Center on plans for joint U.S.-U.S.S.R. mission in 1975 to be finalized at meetings to begin July 6 at MSC. Delegation of 25 Soviet engineers would discuss with NASA “precisely how we are going to do the mission, when we are going to do things and who is going to be doing things.” Groups would exchange documents proposing specific details of mission, including launch time, docking schedule, launch sequence, and communications. Spacecraft would be docked about 48 hrs and crews would make several exchange visits. Docking module would be used to transfer crews and as prebreathing chamber to protect crews from bends while changing from lower-pressured Apollo to higher-pressured Soyuz. Lunney said he expected U.S. crew or pool of crew candidates to be selected “within a year or so.” (AP, B Sun, 1/6/12)
National Book Committee included Norman Mailer’s Of a Fire on the Moon, account of Apollo 11 lunar landing mission, among 102 books it announced as nominees for National Book Awards. Final choice of 10 winners for $1000-prizes would be announced April 11. (Raymont, NYT, 3/27/72, 42)
Lunar Samples Analysis Planning Team, using information imparted at Third Lunar Science Conference [see Jan. 10-13], reported in Science on advances made and problems still outstanding in lunar science. Most important gain had been that “we now know there is a lunar crust.” Primal igneous activity in outer layers of moon had generated feldspathic crust 40 km (25 mi) thick. Apollo 15 core samples had shown that material at all levels had resided within few centimeters (one inch or so) of lunar surface at some time, but gradient in some cosmic ray product allowed tentative conclusion that soil in lower half of core had been stratified for 0.5 hillion yrs. Apollo 15 mission and Third Lunar Science Conference had answered many fundamental questions, but each answer raised new questions. “What are the nature and chronology of rock types in the lunar highlands? Answers to date have been indirect or broadbrush. The most interesting epoch of lunar history, the first half-billion years, is recorded in highland rocks if it is preserved anywhere. Why is the occurrence of lunar norite or kreep so sharply restricted to the northwest quadrant of the moon’s nearside? Is an exceptionally mighty impact . . . required to raise noritic rock to the surface? This would be inconsistent with the supposedly shallow depth of origin of the Fra Mauro Formation cratering debris.” Last two Apollo missions were targeted to regions that offered prospect of answering these questions. Most “profound question of all” was origin of earth-moon system. Apollo science had eliminated once-popular hypothesis that moon had Been captured 1 to 2 billion yrs ago, “but beyond this the question remains unanswered. If the nature of compositional heterogeneities in the moon at the time of its accretion can be inferred correctly from chemical and petrologic studies . . . this information will go far toward answering the question.” Goal of understanding moon would be furthered by international cooperation. Third Lunar Science Conference had been “minor landmark” because of participation of Soviet scientists and exchange of samples between U.S. and U.S.S.R. (Science, 6/2/11, 975-81)
The anti-environmental backlash was in full swing, the Wall Street Journal said. Environmentalists were being blamed for the energy crisis, lingering unemployment, high prices, high taxes, food shortages, and the falling birth rate. Several state legislatures had killed ecology-oriented bills they would have passed a session or two before, “and a few others have voted actually to relax environmental-protection laws enacted in the heyday of concern.” Environmental groups were encountering serious fund-raising problems. “Inevitably, businessmen, union officials and others who have felt the lash of environmental power in recent years will now be tempted to hit back hard.” This could be a risky, “almost fatal” calculation. While the environmentalists might no longer win all the battles, “chances are, too, that sooner or later a fresh disaster—a new oil spill, a heavy smog—will rebuild environmentalists’ strength.” (Otten, WSJ, 8/2/73) August 3:	A New York Times editorial commented on the Aug. 2 discovery of an oxidizer leak that threatened the safety of the Skylab 3 astronauts (launched July 28 to man the Orbital Workshop launched May 14): “Even though it finally proved unnecessary to order three men back to earth immediately, two points did emerge with special clarity from this short-lived scare situation. First, not all difficulties that can arise in manned space missions can be repaired by men on a troubled vehicle.” Second, “and more fundamental, this latest incident again brings into sharp focus the need for standby rescue rockets for manned space ventures. The lack of rescue vehicles in the past has come in for justified and severe criticism. This time NASA has demonstrated that it has learned the lessons of history.” An Apollo spacecraft was being readied as a rescue vehicle for the Skylab 3 crew if a new emergency arose. “Men in space are no longer forced to be so self-sufficient and independent of help from earth as was the case not long ago, especially during the Apollo voyages to the moon.” (NYT, 8/3/73, 30)
U.S.S.R. ground control, during a communications session with Lunokhod 2 to check onboard systems, found a temperature of 90 K (— 297°F) at the end of a rod containing magnetometer sensors. It was the lowest temperature recorded near the lunar surface. Lunokhod 2, inactivated Jan. 23 for the lunar night after it had explored the lunar surface for seven days, had been launched aboard Luna 21 Jan. 8 and landed on the moon Jan. 16. It would begin its second lunar day of exploration Feb. 9. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 2/13/73, LI)
Kennedy Space Center’s Launch Complex 39—site of the July 16, 1969, launch of Apollo 11, the first manned spacecraft to land on the moon— was entered in the National Register of Historic Places of the Dept, of the Interior’s National Park Service. The complex, built between November 1962 and October 1968, was first used for the Nov. 9, 1967, launch of the unmanned Apollo 4, the first Apollo launch, and was still in use for Skylab launches, (icsc Hist Off)
The last lunar sample containment bag from Apollo 17, the last Apollo mission to the moon (Dec. 7-19, 1972), was logged into the processing cabinets at the Lunar Receiving Laboratory at Johnson Spacecraft Center. (Apollo Sample Analysis Planning Team, Science, 8/17/73, 615)
Petrographic and chemical description of Apollo 16 lunar samples was given in a Science article by the Apollo 16 Preliminary Examination Team. Preliminary characterization of samples had “substantiated the inference that the luna terra are commonly underlain by plagioclase-rich or anorthositic rocks. No evidence has been found for volcanic rocks underlying the regolith in the Apollo 16 region. In their place, we have found anorthositic rocks that are thoroughly modified by crushing and partial melting.” Anorthositic rocks varied texturally and chemically, Occurrence of deep-seated or plutonic rocks in place of volcanic or pyroclastic materials suggested that “the inference from physiographic evidence that the latter materials are widespread in terra regions may be incorrect.” Other conclusions of the preliminary examination were: (1) Combination of data from the Descartes region and data from the orbital x-ray fluorescence experiment indicated that “some backside, highland regions are underlain by materials that consist of more than 80 percent plagioclase.” (2) Soil or upper regolith between North Ray and South Ray had not been completely homogenized since formation of the craters. (3) Chemistry of the soil indicated that rocks rich in potassium, uranium, and thorium—similar to those at the Fra Mauro site—were relatively abundant in the Descartes region. (4) Potassium-uranium ratio of the lunar crust was similar to that of icreep basalts. (5) The carbon content of the premare lunar crust was “even lower than that of the mare volcanic rock.” (Science, 1/5/73, 23-24)
The U.S.S.R. iunar vehicle Lunokhod 2 had completed its mission, Tass announced. The New York Times later said there were indications that Lunokhod 2 had had an accident shortly after the start of its fifth lunar day, while heading toward the uplands east of Le Monnier Crater and that the vehicle’s operation had been terminated unexpectedly. Lunokhod 2 (landed on the lunar surface Jan. 16 by Luna 21, launched Jan. 8) had covered 37 km (23 mi) of complex terrain and withstood sharp temperature changes. It had taken the first measurements from the lunar surface of the luminosity of the lunar sky and had established that the moon was surrounded by a layer of dust particles in which the visible solar light and the reflected earth light were dispersed. Lunokhod 2 had taken 86 relief panoramas and 80 000 TV photos of the lunar surface during 60 communications sessions. It had also measured physical, mechanical, and chemical properties of the upper layer of lunar rock and had studied the characteristics of the corpuscular emission of solar and galactic origin. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 6/6/73, L5; NYT, 6/5/73, 18)
NASA released a list of personal mementoes carried by Apollo 17 crew Eugene A. Cernan, Ronald E. Evans, and Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt on the Dec. 7-9, 1972, lunar mission. The crew had been permitted to carry 12 items each. Cernan had carried two Apollo 17 pins, a lunar module tie pin, wedding ring, moon flag pin, personal jewelry piece, $20 gold piece, religious memento, three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals, and memento from Gemini 9 and Apollo 10. Evans had carried a wrist watch, wedding ring set, gold brooch set, ring, three wedding diamonds, a moonstone gem, identification bracelet, and three Apollo 17 gold commemorative medals. Schmitt had carried eight moon pins, turquoise beads, a family memento set, and two Apollo 17 silver commemorative medals. (NASA pao; W Post, 1/20/73, A7)
Establishment of the impact origin of Lonar Crater in Maharashtra, India, at less than 50 000 yrs ago was reported in Science by a team of U.S. and Indian geologists. Fission-track dating of shock-melted glass had also shown the preservation state to be in accord with such comparative youthfulness. As the only known terrestrial impact crater in basalt, Lonar Crater provided unique opportunities for comparison with lunar craters. Microbreccias and glass spherules from Lonar Crater had close analogs among Apollo lunar specimens. (Frederiksson et al., Science, 5/25/73, 862-4)
The exhibit “The Image of the Moon—Galileo to Apollo XI,” from the art collection of Anthony Michaelis, opened at the Univ. of Houston in Clear Lake City, Tex., in cooperation with the Univ. of Houston Libraries. (Invitation)
A Los Angeles Herald-Examiner editoral commented on NASA’s 15th anniversary [see Oct. 1] : “A decade and a half ago, the Congress charged NASA to explore outer space and to adapt space-related advances for immediate general use. Both mandates have been fulfilled, and NASA officers predict hundredfold advances over the next 10 years. We salute NASA on its 15th anniversary. When the question is asked ‘If we can go to the moon, why can’t we . . . ?’—chances are, the answer is ‘We can!’” (LA Her-Exam, 10/23/73)
A lunar sample brought hack from the moon by Apollo 17 (Dec. 7-19, 1972, lunar mission) was presented to President Henryk Jablonski of the Polish Council of State by U.S. Ambassador to Poland Richard T. Davies in Warsaw. Ambassador Davies invited Poland to participate in the U.S. Bicentennial celebration in 1976. (Warsaw pap, FBIS-Poland, 7/17/73, Gl)
Science articles presented geological data from the Dec. 7-19, 1972, Apollo 17 mission. The Apollo 17 Preliminary Examination Team described characteristics of lunar samples in one article. Petrographically, the samples were “the most variable returned by any mission. Some have the cataclastic, highly crushed textures common in Apollo 16 [April 16-27, 1972] return. Many are crystalline breccias whose petrographic characteristics indicate varying degrees of recrystallization or partial melting. Others are friable and dark gray like the many regolith breccias of previous missions. Others display features typical of the lavas returned from the Apollo 11 [July 16-24, 1969], 12 [Nov. 14-24, 1969] and 15 [July 26-Aug. 7, 1971] mare sites and a few have the coarse-grained igneous textures typically developed during the slow crystallization from basaltic melts.” Chemically, nearly all the characteristics of the Apollo 17 rocks could also be found in samples from previous Apollo missions. “However, unusually high zinc concentrations in the orange soil and the exceptionally low Ni content of the basalts suggest different source materials than for previously returned igneous rocks. The trace element contents of the anorthositic rocks are significantly different from nearly all those previously returned, again suggesting variations in the source regions.” ' The Apollo Field Geology Investigation Team reported on the ApoUo 17 Taurus-Littrow landing site. Impact-generated breccias underlay the massifs adjacent to the valley “and basalt has flooded and leveled the valley floor. The dark mantle inferred from orbital photographs was not recognized as a discrete unit; the unusually thick regolith of the valley floor contains a unique high concentration of dark glass beads that may cause the low albedo of much of the surface.” Apollo 17 scientist-astronaut Dr. Harrison H. Schmitt described the geological investigation of the Taurus-Littrow valley as reported in “the last major report of observations by the crews during the Apollo explorations of the earth’s moon.” He was confident “that the future holds many other such reports as man continues his exploration of the earth’s frontier and his use of the space environment.” He believed that “man’s abilities and spirit will continue to be the foundation of his evolution into the universe. Full satisfaction from this evolution only comes with being there.” (Science, 10/16/73, 659-90)
Lunokhod 2, the U.S.S.R. automatic vehicle landed on the moon Jan. 16 by Luna 21 (launched Jan. 8), began its fifth lunar day. The panel of the solar battery was opened and the onboard systems checked. The vehicle left the large tectonic fracture explored the previous lunar day and started northeastward toward the shore cusp of the Taurus Massif to continue exploration of the Le Monnier Crater. Lunokhod’s Rifma radiation analyzer was sending data on the solar x-ray spectra and making comprehensive readings of a broad band of solar radiation. (Tass, fbis-Sov, 5/11/73, LI; Av Wk, 5/21/73, 20)
President Nixon praised U.S. space technology in a commencement address at Florida Technological Univ. in Orlando: “The genius that could send men to the moon, the genius that could produce the Skylab, the genius that built America into the strongest and most productive nation in the world, the science, scientists, the technicians, all the engineers, all of those who could do that, certainly they can find the way to clean the air, and clean the water, and do the other things that will build a better environment in America.” (PD, 6/11/73, 747)
Analysis of Apollo 15 and 16 data had shown that certain lunar craters, including Aristarchus, emitted gas puffs, the New York Times reported. Data from alpha particle experiments had indicated the events occurred in dark-floored or rimmed craters. Most events recorded had occurred when the moon was nearest earth orbit—the same time at which moon-quakes occurred. (Sullivan, NYT, 2/22/73)
Neutron-activation analysis of 27 Apollo 16 lunar samples for 17 trace elements was reported in Science by Enrico Fermi Institute chemists. Several breccias had been found to be strikingly rich in volatile elements. Similar enrichments had been found in smaller quantities in all lunar highland soils. “It appears that volcanic processes took place in the lunar highlands, involving the release of volatiles, including water.” Measurements suggested that the moon’s original water content could not have exceeded the equivalent of a layer 22 m (72 ft) deep. “The cataclastic anorthosites at the Apollo 16 site may represent deep ejecta from the Nectaris basin.” (Krahenbuhl et al., Science, 5/25/73, 858-61)
A Kansas City Times editorial commented on the proximity of Soviet Salyut 2 and U.S. Skylab launch dates: “A minor fuss has been made over the timing of Salyut’s launch [April 3], which was seen by some as an attempt by the Soviets, after several misfortunes and embarrassments, to steal a bit of the luster from a U.S. manned flight. The point is irrelevant. These are not merely showpiece, national prestige projects. They are bricks-and-mortar foundation-laying for both countries’ futures in space. In the race for the moon, being first counted for something. In . . . learning to function usefully in a long-term space environment, the test is not how soon you get up but what’s accomplished after you’re there.” (KC Times, 4/11/73)
Telecare, an 18-kg (40-lb) medical unit equipped to diagnose and treat victims at a scene of emergency, had been developed by SCI Systems, Inc., from space technology, NASA announced. The ambulance-stored unit with two-way voice and telemetry communications permitted medical technicians to administer prompt professional care with special equipment under radio supervision of a doctor miles away. (NASA Release 73-209) October 18:	NASA announced plans to study Comet Kohoutek with an extensive array of electronic eyes. The comet, now some 400 million km (250 million mi) from the sun, was expected to be visible in the Northern Hemisphere around Christmas time. It was expected to be as bright as a full moon and to be larger than Halley’s Comet, which had appeared last in 1910. NASA scientists would use optical telescopes, radiotelescopes, and radar to study Kohoutek in visible, ultraviolet, and infrared light from the ground and a high-altitude C—141 aircraft, as well as satellites, sounding rockets, and Skylab 4 telescopes and cameras—to learn more about whether planets were remnants of the formation of the solar system or interstellar matter captured by the sun. Scientists would try to determine possible existence of a solid comet nucleus. Kohoutek was believed to have a 20- to 30-km (12- to 19-mi) nucleus with a probable head diameter of 96 000 km (60 000 mi). (NASA Release 73—207)
Miami chemist Harry Bennett received U.S. Patent No. 3 738 374 for a tobaccoless cigarette filled with graphitized carbons developed by NASA for space use. The carbon, which would emit normal combustion gases and produce an ash without nicotine or tar, had been used by NASA to resist heat and strengthen lightweight structural components in spacecraft. (Pat Off pio; B Sun, July 9:	NASA announced it had invited U.S. and foreign scientists to propose experiments to be carried on the Apollo spacecraft during the July 1975 Apollo-Soyuz mission to rendezvous and dock U.S. and Soviet spacecraft in space. The U.S. would carry 180 kg (400 lbs) of scientific and applications experiments and NASA also would conduct experiments from the earth orbit in space science, applications, medicine, and technology. Proposals for experiments were due July 23. (NASA Release 73127)
The Astronomy Survey Committee of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Research Council issued Astronomy and Astrophysics for the 1970’s, Vol. 2, Report of the Panels. The report confirmed the Committee’s 1972 observation that the opening of the radio sky had suggested the presence of undiscovered physical laws and requirements for new observations and explanations. The observation had been made in Vol. 1, released June 1, 1972. The Panel on Radio Astronomy report said: “The processes taking place in the radiation-emitting region of pulsars are the most extreme we know of in the galaxy and far surpass in energy production any power source yet invented.” The understanding of the generating mechanism through further detailed study would improve the understanding of physics and could lead to “major developments in energy generation here on earth.” Suspicion was growing that the molecules already discovered in space were part of “a large group of molecules of ever-increasing complexity that may exist in space.” Belief was growing “that interstellar clouds . . . and fast particles may form large organic molecules. Such molecules, which may be as complex as the amino acids and may be of equal importance in our understanding of life, may be discovered by observations made at radio frequencies.” The Panel on Optical Astronomy noted that new technology for basing detectors in the upper atmosphere and in space had begun to make infrared astronomy “realistic.” The Panel on Space Astronomy said, “It appears that much of the energy emitted from astronomical objects and from the universe itself probably resides in the infrared, and hence some of the most important astronomical discoveries will be made in this region.” The Panel on Astrophysics and Relativity said that violent activity in the nuclei of galaxies was “probably commonplace” and not due to thermonuclear processes. The report concluded: “Man has landed on his first planet—the moon. But his mind and eye have traveled billions of light years into the past and in the next decade will penetrate unimagined new worlds.” (nas-nrc-nae News Report, 4/73, 1; nas pxo)
Fourth anniversary of Apollo IPs first manned lunar landing July 20, 1969. Reps. Don Fuqua (D-Fla.) and Lou Frey, Jr. (R-Fla.), entered tributes in the Congressional Record. Fuqua said: “Since July of 1969 when Neil Armstrong first set foot on the lunar surface our national space program has had an ever-increasing wealth of technology and new knowledge and practical information of direct benefit to the people of the Nation and of the world.” In remembering the first lunar landing, “we need to be reminded of the need for strong support for our national space program today and in the years ahead.” Frey said: “The people of our space program are not resting on the laurels of this great achievement but are pressing on with the Skylab and the space shuttle to make space an ever-increasing contributor to the well-being of our Nation and the world.” (CR, 7/20/73, E4957, 4961)
A proposal to tap energy from tiny black holes, superdense objects in space, was presented by Dr. Lowell Wood, member of a three-man team from the Lawrence Livermore Laboratories, at a conference of international physicists organized by the New York Academy of Sciences. Some black holes within the orbit of the moon might be so tiny that their effects would not be evident beyond a few hundred meters. A tiny power plant could be placed in orbit to accompany the moving hole but remain at a discreet distance. Fusion fuel would then be fired from the power plant to the hole, and the hole’s extremely powerful gravity would squeeze the fuel toward the vanishing point. The fuel would fuse, releasing vast amounts of energy, which could be collected and beamed to the earth by microwave frequencies. (Sullivan, NYT, 9 March 74, 12)
Sen. James G. Abourezk (D—S.D.) asked the Government Accounting Office to investigate the “evidence of solar energy feasibility” contained in a report by Atomic Energy Commission scientists. He said evidence that solar energy could be developed more quickly and cheaply than previously believed had been ignored when the aec recommended, in a report to the President, that only $200 million out of a total of $10 billion for energy research should be spent on solar energy for a five-year period beginning in 1975. Sen. Abourezk wanted to know “why the A.E.C. has been sitting on scientific data pointing the way toward solar energy while major oil companies are quietly moving to take control of the means to produce solar power.” (upi, NYT, 1 April 74, 34) During March: Apollo 17: Preliminary Science Report (nasa SP-330), dated 1973, was issued. The Taurus-Littrow landing site for the 7-19 Dec. 1972 final mission of the lunar landing program had been the most diverse in both geologic features and samples brought back. Seismic traverse experiments had indicated basaltic flows extended to a depth of 1.2 km. The traverse gravimeter experiment had provided limits to the density of underlying material and permitted development of models to help interpret mascons. Analysis of mare basalts from the Apollo 11,12,15, and 17 missions and from the U.S.S.R.’s Luna 16 indicated that the filling of the mare basins took place mostly between 3.2 billion and 3.8 billion yrs ago. Formation of more than 90% of the cratering was believed to be 4 billion yrs earlier. Highland material collected on Apollo 14,16, and 17 missions showed a widespread occurrence of breccias with an apparent age of 3,8 billion to 4.1 billion yrs, with strong evidence that rocks as old as 4.5 billion to 4.6 billion yrs existed on the moon. Dark mare regions were thought to be underlain by lava, but craters had been mostly caused by impacting projectiles. The moon was once active volcanically but was now quiet, with any activity since 3 billion yrs ago highly restricted or nonexistent. It had a crust more than 60 km thick and a negligible overall magnetic field. Two theories of lunar evolution had come from mission data. The first was that the planet was chemically layered during its formation, with a low interior temperature gradually increasing, perhaps reaching the melting point in the last billion years, while the initial heat of the exterior gradually decreased. The second theory assumed that the moon, chemically homogeneous and molten during formation, underwent extensive chemical differentiation resulting in surface concentration of radioactivity very shortly after formation. None of the three theories of origin of the moon—separation from the earth, capture from a solar orbit, or formation from a dust cloud—could be absolutely eliminated by data collected to date, but chemical differences made it unlikely that the moon was torn from the earth. (Text)
The first map of gravity forces on the moon’s far side indicated that the strong gravitational tug of mascons (mass concentrations) on the lunar face was caused by lava flooding rather than by buried meteorites as previously thought, California Institute of Technology planetary scientist Dr. Alfred J. Ferrari reported in a press release based on a paper to be published in Science. The map was developed from measurements of the orbits of two small subsatellites left orbiting the moon by Apollo 15 and 16 in July 1971 and April 1972 and of Lunar Orbiter 5 (launched 1 Aug. 1967). Basins on the moon’s far side, not lava-filled, exerted only weak gravitational forces on orbiting spacecraft, while lava-flooded basins on the front side exerted a strong pull. (Miles, LA Times, 17 Dec 74; Ferrari interview, 20 Nov 75; Ferrari, Science, 27 June 75, 1927-1300)
The British government announced that it was seeking new talks with France on the Concorde supersonic airliner after heavy losses were predicted for each airliner built. Official estimates had indicated that Britain would lose $450 million to $517 million in producing 16 aircraft and, even with a selling price of $40.25 million to $47.5 million, losses would rise until sales reached 70 or more. (Reuters, B Sun, 19 March 74, C9) Dr. A. Albee, California Institute of Technology scientist, said that analysis of an Apollo 17 lunar rock sample indicated that the sample was 4.6 billion yrs old and an example of a very early differentiate. The study suggested that the lunar crust formed very early in the evolution of the moon by extensive melting associated with differential, gravitational separation of various other rock types. The conference showed the trend among lunar scientists had been shifting away from the initial dating and chemical analysis of rock to cross-discipline studies of possible implications of the lunar samples to understanding of solar system chronology. (JSC Release, 7 March 74; JSC Roundup, 29 March 74,1)
The U.S.S.R. launched Soyuz 16, carrying cosmonauts Col. Anatoly V. Filipchenko and Nikolay N. Rukavishnikov, from Bay-konur Cosmodrome near Tyuratam at 2:40 pm local time (4:40 am est) in preparation for the July 1975 U.S.-U.S.S.R. Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission. The spacecraft, identical to the one that would fly during the ASTP mission, entered orbit with a 280-km apogee, 194-km perigee, 89.3min period, and 51.8° inclination. Tass reported the purpose of the mission was to test the spacecraft’s onboard systems, which had been “modernized to meet the demands of the joint flight”; make scientific and technical investigations; and observe and photograph sections of the earth’s surface for the solution of economic problems. In a prelaunch Tass interview, Filipchenko said that the mission was to last several days. “This would be enough for us to test carefully all the ship’s systems, above all its docking gear.” Using a passive simulator docking ring, Soyuz 16 would make docking and separation maneuvers in almost all the ASTP modes. In addition, U.S.S.R. astp Technical Director Konstanin D. Bushuyev said in a launch-day Tass interview, the crew would check out the Soyuz life support system, which had been redesigned for better compatibility with Apollo. Soyuz normally had a cabin pressure of 10 newtons per sq cm (14.7 psi) and an atmosphere similar in oxygen content to terrestrial atmosphere. Apollo maintained its pure oxygen atmosphere at 3.5 newtons per sq cm (5 psi). To reduce the acclimation period for the crews’ transition between the two atmospheres, the U.S.S.R. had agreed to reduce the pressure and increase the percentage of oxygen in the Soyuz atmosphere. The system’s capacity also had been increased to accommodate four persons. On 3 Dec. NASA, which had been tracking Soyuz 16 since shortly after launch, began a 15-day joint tracking rehearsal with the U.S.S.R. After the mission, information gathered by nine U.S. tracking stations would be compared with data from Soviet tracking stations. Meanwhile the crew reduced the spacecraft’s cabin pressure to 7.2 newtons per sq cm (10.4 psi) and doubled the oxygen content, from 20% to 40%, with no adverse effect. Color TV broadcasts from the spacecraft showed all was well. A trajectory correction 4 Dec. placed Soyuz 16 in a circular orbit with a 225-km altitude, 88.9-min period, and 51.8° inclination, an orbit similar to astp requirements. Simulated docking and separation maneuvers “passed off without a hitch” 5—7 Dec., Tass reported. Medical, biological, earth resources, and astronomy experiments also were carried out during the six-day mission. At 1:04 pm Baykonur time (3:04 am est) 8 Dec., Soyuz 16 softlanded in the U.S.S.R. 300 km north of Dzhezkazgan in Kazakstan. Tass reported the cosmonauts were in good health. Following the successful landing, U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney conveyed his congratulations “for the brilliant rehearsal before the Soviet-U.S. flight.” In a Tass interview Bushuyev said, “We have succeeded in checking in real space flight the whole package of the new system and units responsible for the success of the future linkup of the Soviet and U.S. spaceships.” Soyuz 16 was the third manned U.S.S.R. launch in 1974, following Soyuz 14 (launched 3 July) and Soyuz 15 (26 Aug.). (gsfc SSR, 31 Dec. 74; Tass, fbis-Sov, 2-11 Dec 74; Wren, NYT, 3 Dec 74, 16; 4 Dec 74, 26; jsc Release 74-272) 2, 12 December: American astronauts and technicians, although denied access to Soviet spacecraft factories, would be permitted to inspect the Soyuz spacecraft for the joint Apollo-Soyuz Test Project at the Bay-konur Cosmodrome launch site in May 1975, NASA officials said at a Johnson Space Center news conference. U.S. astp Technical Director Glynn S. Lunney said the arrangement would satisfy U.S. technical needs. In a 12 Dec. press conference at Star City, Maj. Gen. Vladimir A. Shatalov, U.S.S.R. chief of cosmonaut training, said American crews would be permitted to view only facilities directly connected with the flight itself. “Everything that American astronauts need to be acquainted with on the Soyuz that will fly will be shown them beforehand.” In the meantime astronauts would train with mockups and simulators, (jsc Pio, interview, 15 Sept 75; Keefer, Today, 5 Dec 74; Chriss, LA Times, 3 Dec 74; Toth, LA Times, 13 Dec 74; fbis-Sov, 13 Dec 74, Ul)
Although more than 26 million Americans watched the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project handshake in space, TV coverage was “adequate without being particularly outstanding,” TV critic Lee Winfrey said in the Philadelphia Inquirer. Two obstacles were insurmountable. NASA “is doggedly efficient, it got us to the moon first and it did the job again this time. But it is as colorless as a pane of glass and invariably capable of making the highest excitement look like the dullest routine.” NASA had an unshakable air of the 1950s about it: till white, all male, crewcut, and straight-shouldered. The second obstacle was that the mission was “another goodie that Richard Nixon dreamed up for us. Which means it was all show and no substance.” The U.S. paid $250 million for an aerial handshake. “Nixon made us buddies with Brezhnev and so, through shadow shows like Apollo-Soyuz, we are supposed to remain.” (Winfrey, P Inq, 22 July 75)
Pope Paul VI told a crowd of 5000 at the papal palace near Rome that he was enchanted by the unique encounter of the Apollo and Soyuz crews in space [see i5—24 July]. He said, “We too, our eyes dazzled by sky light or wide open toward the depths of nighttime space, will shout out, long live the heroic men of such a fantastic feat. Man has won and we cannot refrain from foretelling more wonderful advances in the dominance of nature beyond the heavenly sphere. Man will win.” (ASTP air-to-ground transcripts, 20 July 75)
The Los Angeles Times discussed the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project mission in an editorial: At the instant the Apollo and Soyuz docked, “the two ships ceased to be two and became one. And at that moment, the common fate of the five adventurers was indissolubly linked for the next 44 hours, symbolic of the shared destiny of the 4 billion passengers on the mother spaceship 140 miles below.” That the passengers were from two different countries was of no significance. “They communicated in each other’s language, and they saw the lovely blue earth across the vistas of space through the same eyes, with the same perception. It is a vision that is desperately needed by earthbound statesmen.” (LA Times, 18 July 75)
The Apollo-Soyuz Test Project reflected the “progress made in the relations between our two nations and . . . the successes of the policy of peaceful coexistence, and promotes a further improvement of the international situation, and the strengthening of mutually rewarding contacts,” Acting President of the Soviet Academy of Sciences Vladimir Kotelnikov said at a press briefing. General Vladimir Shatalov, head of cosmonaut training, told the newsmen, “While placing great emphasis on the importance of this joint flight, the Soviet Union also attaches great importance to its national space program, which at present centers on the establishment of long term manned orbital stations of the Salyut type.” He said that the success of ASTP along with that of Salyut 4 “testifies to the maturity of the Soviet space program, to the fact that it is able to man and launch several spacecraft at the same time and control their flight.” ASTP cosmonaut Aleksey A. Leonov, who had been promoted from Soviet Air Force colonel to major general, said he had thought language would be the biggest problem during the joint session but “we understood each other very well.” He added, “we didn’t have problems during our joint operation.” When asked about future joint projects, Willis Shapley, NASA Associate Deputy Administrator, said, “For the future I see accomplishments in two directions. . . . On one hand we must jointly plan and execute further joint technical projects. At the same time we must further develop the areas of political understanding and cooperation between our two countries. . . . Preliminary discussions are already underway between specialists... from both sides.” (Soyuz crew press conf. transcript, Apollo news center, Houston, 24 July 75)
NASA announced early findings of the 3 Dec. 1974Pioneer II flyby of Jupiter. Data returned by Pioneer II (launched 5 April 1973, and renamed Pioneer Saturn following the flyby) suggested that Jupiter’s magnetic field might be created by a large ring current and many eddies deep within the planet. Earlier measurements from Pioneer 10, launched toward Jupiter on 2 March 1972, had indicated only a simple magnetic envelope with a single “ring current” much like earth’s. The more complex magnetic field could explain the Jovian field’s high-energy particle pattern as well as the bursts of intense radio energy observed emanating from the planet. Jupiter’s magnetic field stretched across 14 million km in some places and shrank in volume by three-fourths or more in others; inside this pulsating field were belts of intense radiation with trapped electrons 10 000 times more intense than those in earth’s Van Allen belts. Pioneer had experienced peak intensities of high-energy electrons that were moderately higher than those found by Pioneer 10, encountering 10 times as many electrons as predicted by earth-based studies. Peak intensities of very high-energy protons were 100 times stronger than predicted but concentrated in small shallow regions. Other early findings of Pioneer 11 included the observation that Jupiter’s cloud tops were substantially lower at the poles than at the equator and were covered by a thicker transparent atmosphere. Also, the clouds at the planet’s south pole were lower than those at the north pole. Although Pioneer 11 found much less evidence of rapid circulation at the poles than at the equator, the polar areas showed many small convective cells dwarfing similar earth disturbances such as thunderstorms. “Blue sky”—attributed to multiple moleculescattering of light by gases of the transparent atmosphere—was visible at the poles. Pioneer 11 accurately determined, for the first time, that the mass of Jupiter’s moon Callisto was 15 times that of earth’s moon. Seen for the first time was an extensive white south polar cap on Callisto. (NASA Release 75— 49)
The Apollo lunar scientific experiment package (ALSEP) left on the moon’s surface during Apollo 14, reported dead [see 18 Jan.] when transmission ceased last month from unknown causes, came to life just as unexpectedly 19 Feb. with transmitter, receiver, and experiments functioning very well. One experiment—the charged-particle lunar environment experiment—had previously been unable to perform during lunar daylight because temperature variations had degraded its power supply; since the revival, the experiment had been sending good data during lunar daylight. JSC scientists and Bendix engineers who designed the ALSEPs had no idea what happened to the Apollo 14 station, one of 5 transmitting data from the moon; one possibility cited was a relay in the power system that had stuck and then became unstuck. Estimated remaining life of the Apollo 14 station was once again 2 to 3 yr; all the stations had performed well, with the oldest—from Apollo 12—nearing its 7th year. ALSEP experiments were still providing data on conditions inside the moon and on moonquakes; scientists were still hoping for seismic signals from a large meteor impact that would identify the moon’s core. (NASA Release 76-34; JSC Release 76-17)
The U.S. should orbit solar-power stations Emd mine the moon for raw materials, science fiction writer Isaac Asimov told President Csirter in an open letter printed in the Chicago Tribune. Citing the benefits of orbitsd stations capable of transmitting solar energy in microwaves to earth stations, Asimov stressed the need for international cooperation in using space and in preventing the extinction of humanity. (C Trib, Mar 26/77, 1-7)
KSC announced it had awarded a $480 193 fixed-price contract to Reynolds, Smith and Hills of Jacksonville, Fla., for modifications to Complex 39B to adapt it for Shuttle launch operations as had been done to Complex 39A. KSC had used 39B to launch Apollo 10; Skylabs 2, 3, and 4; and the U.S. spacecraft of the Apollo-Soyuz mission. (KSC Release 125-77)
NASA announced that preparations at KSC for launching the Space Shuttle had required only two new major constructions: an orbiter-landing facility, one of the largest runways in the world (roughly twice as long and twice as wide as an average commercial landing strip), with a microwave scanning-beam landing system to assist the orbiter to an automatic landing; and a large hangar called the “orbiter processing facility” with two high bays for checking out and servicing the orbiters immediately after landing. Existing facilities modified for Shuttle use were the Vehicle Assembly Building, 2 of its 4 high bays being altered for Shuttle assembly, and the launch-control center being equipped with an automated launchprocessing system developed for Shuttle checkout and launch, using a tenth of the manpower for Shuttle that had been used for Apollo: 45 persons, compared to more than 450. Final countdown for Shuttle launches would take only 2.5hr compared to the 28hr needed in countdown for an Apollo/Saturn V. Much of the work had been completed, NASA reported, and the eventual cost of the modifications would be about $240 million, less than a fourth of the 1960s cost of building the Spaceport for Apollo. (NASA Release 77-124)
NASA reported that Pioneer 11 was working well on its way out of the solar system after a successful flyby of Saturn, during which it found two new rings and possibly a new moon of the planet. Barring a failure, the Pioneer could continue to return useful data until the late 1980s when it would pass beyond radio contact with Earth. The spacecraft was built by TRW Systems Inc., and the project was managed by ARC in California. After a six-year trip of more than 3.2 billion kilometers (2 billion miles) in space, Pioneer 11 spent 10 days photographing and measuring the ringed planet. The spacecraft experienced at least two hits from meteroids above the rings of Saturn and three more hits below the rings; it recorded no damage from high-velocity ring particles, showing that spacecraft could operate safely near the visible rings. Major findings of the flyby included a magnetic field around Saturn; analysis of the gravity field and composition of the planet’s core; radiation into space of 2.5 times more heat that Saturn received from the Sun; and low temperatures on the moon Titan that might remove the possibility of life there. (NASA Release 79-135; ARC Release 79-42)
JSC reported on its new water-immersion facility (WIF) for Shuttle crew training. MSFC would furnish some payload training mock-ups; JSC would build others including a full-sized Shuttle bay. The new pool, measuring 33 x 78 x 25 feet and located in a building formerly housing an Apollo manned centrifuge, would hold half a million gallons—as much water as 25 average backyard swimming pools—heated to a constant 85 °F for diver comfort over long periods of time. It would replace a 25-foot-diameter tank built in the mid-1960s for Gemini and Apollo emergency training. Filter and chemical systems would reduce bacteria and provide a clear medium needed for underwater photography. Six submersible television cameras, two operated by divers and four mounted under water, would follow the training operations, with pan, tilt, and zoom operated from a console at the pool edge. The facility would include a 5-ton air-powered overhead crane to lift trainers and mock-ups out of the water (and eliminate electrical shock), as well as air compressors to fill scuba tanks. (JSC Roundup, Aug 22/80, 1)
The British Interplanetary Society’s publication Spaceflight carried an article by one of its fellows (barrister Cyril Horsford, also a director of the International Institute of Space Law), on the agreement covering the activities of states on the Moon and other celestial bodies, opened for signature at the United Nations (U.N.) December 18, 1979. The “moon treaty,” 10 years in the making, was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly as a resolution; some of its principles were already in the first outer space treaty in 1967, but several nations, “notably the USSR,” had expressed the need for a separate agreement specially directed at exploration of the Moon. The treaty now awaiting signature would apply to all bodies in the solar system and their orbits, as well as the Moon; the text (reproduced as appendix to Horsford’s article) was already the subject of controversy among international lawyers and others in two particular areas. First, Article IV said use of the Moon was “the province of all mankind”; Article XI said the Moon and its resources were “the common heritage of mankind .’’ The difference had raised questions whether the meaning was the same. Article I of the 1967 space treaty had used the words “province of all mankind,” whereas the words “common heritage” first appeared during a Law of the Sea conference, when a moratorium on exploration preceded a General Assembly resolution affirming the common-heritage principle. International law had not defined the limits of the principle; the new “moon treaty” would reserve privileges under it to States Parties to it (although “all mankind” would be beneficiaries). Also, the concept of “common heritage of mankind” was apparendy limited to the terms of Article XI. 1. Second, the third paragraph of Article XI would apparently prohibit any appropriation of resources found on the surface or subsurface of the Moon; in its literal meaning, this wording would preclude any mining or exploitation of valuable minerals found there in future. Some felt the language was “merely legal,” reaffirming the existing principle that no legal property in lunar resources in place could accrue to an exploring state. The U.S. delegate to the United Nation’s legal subcommittee was confident that the wording did not place any moratorium on exploration, pending the international “regime of management” required under Article XI.5. Horsford noted that opposition to Article XI had already led the U.S. Senate to postpone ratification of the treaty this year. Although the 1967 space treaty “clearly enshrined” the principle of nonsovereignty over celestial bodies, “some quarters” feared that such a clause would inhibit space powers (particularly the United States) from embarking on “the costly adventure of lunar exploitation” while such a restraint existed or where an international regime of shared resources would result in little or no profit. “This danger is already apparent in. . .deep sea mining, when an international regime is involved,” said Horsford. (SF, July-Aug 80, 273)
NASA announced development of a new lightweight flame-resistant material subject only to charring even at 800°F (426°C): polyimide resilient foam, a product of International Harvester’s solar division at San Diego, under contract to JSC. Use of the new foam, available next year, would reduce hazards for buses, trains, and automobiles as well as planes. Between 1965 and 1978, fires occurred in 20% of all passenger air-carrier accidents and caused 2,727 deaths, 469 of them (17%) attributed to effects of fire or smoke. Airlines and builders of commercial planes had sought improved materials since the 1960s; in the late 1960s, materials developed by NASA for Apollo and Skylab were made available to the industry, which chose not to use them because of cost, scarcity, and lack of durability. (NASA Release 80-185)
Only a day away from its closest encounter with Saturn, Voyager 1 had surprised scientists again with images of a huge hill on the moon Tethys and some distorted “ringlets” inside Saturn’s concentric ring system. The head of the imaging team, Dr. Bradford Smith, said Saturn’s rings were a complex system with dozens of small ringlets forming perfect circles within circles; traditional theories did not explain even the series of concentric ringlets. Of one ringlet offset in a ring gap, Smith said that it was not circular and not of uniform width, varying from 15 to 50 miles wide; this and another found elsewhere might be caused by small moonlets not yet visible on either side, distorting the ring particles with their gravity. (W Star, Nov 12/80, A-5)
The New York Times said that launch pad 39A at KSC, earlier reported to have been seriously damaged by Columbia’s blastoff, suffered “very minimal” damage, according to a KSC damage-assessment team. Wayne C. Ranow, an assistant to pad-site manager Tip Tallone, supplied a preliminary list of items damaged and added that just a few more seconds of “hang time” before the Shuttle cleared the pad would have caused much more damage. NASA spokesman Hugh Harris said KSC had expected “a lot more damage than that;” although it would take two weeks to restore the pad this time, “we will learn from the experience and change some things” to avoid delays in the program. The impact of the 6.6 million pounds of thrust was “similar to what we saw with Apollo,” Harris said. (NYTimes, Apr 17/81, A-26)
The International Sun-Earth Explorer (ISEE), a spacecraft intended to be the first man-made machine to encounter a comet, came within 72 miles of the Moon’s surface in a maneuver designed to carry it through the tail of the comet Giacobini-Zinner in September 1984. Engineers at GSFC stored the five-year-old spacecraft on a horseshoe-shaped path behind the Moon, then down over the Sea of Smyth on the visible side of the Moon, where it picked up speed and sped out oward deep space. Goddard’s worldwide tracking network lost contact with the spacecraft when it flew behind the Moon, then regained contact when it flew across the Moon in a flyby as close as any unmanned spacecraft had ever made to another heavenly body without going into orbit around it. The close approach to the Moon was intended to provide a slingshot effect from the brush with lunar gravity that accelerated the spacecraft from 2,900 to 5,145 miles per hour. The flight through the comet’s tail was to take place on September 11, 1985, when Giacobini-Zinner was 44 million miles from Earth. It was planned that the spacecraft would fly through the comet’s tail for about 30 minutes at a distance of about 12,000 miles from its head. On passing the Moon, the ISEE-3 spacecraft was renamed the International Cometary Explorer to emphasize its new mission. (NASA Dly Actv Rept, Dec 28/83; W Post, Dec 23/83, A-4)
The European Space Agency announced that it had signed with the Commission of the European Communities an agreement to cooperate on the APOLLO project, which would provide, through the EUTELSAT 1 series of communications satellites developed by ESA and European industry, a highspeed digital information transfer system suitable for long data messages, particularly document facsimiles, transmitted from a small number of information providers (up to 10) to many widely dispersed users. The agreement provided for development as specified by ESA of prototype equipment by European industry and for the Commission with the assistance of ESA to provide overall coordination of APOLLO, including archives planned for the Office for Official Publications of the European Communities in Luxembourg and for several other large document archives in Europe. The commission estimated that APOLLO would help to provide a longterm infrastructure for a market expected to expand greatly over the next five years and to contribute to experience in the design, costing, and operation of small dish earth terminals and other equipment developed for APOLLO. APOLLO could also stimulate the creation of a market for European earth stations and associated equipment. Trial users transferring digital records, documents, and computer files would assess the system for high-speed and high-quality information. (ESA release Aug 2/85)
The UNISTICK control system, used in NASA's lunar rover vehicle during the Apollo moon landings, was utilized as a handoperated device for steering, acceleration, and brake control in vehicles for handicapped drivers. The joystick type system was developed by the Johnson Engineering Corporation, which had made plans for commercial production. (NASA Release 86123)
Planetary scientists working with data from a Voyager 2 encounter with Neptune announced that the spacecraft had recorded wind speeds on the planet of up to 1,500 miles per hour. These wind speeds exceeded those observed on Saturn and were believed to be the highest in the solar system. The scientists also reported the discovery of at least two additional volcanic plumes on Neptune's moon, Triton. (AP, Dec 6/89; C Trib, Dec 6/89; NY Times, Dec 7/89)
Japan launched a lunar probe from Uchinoura, on their southern coast, making it the third nation, after the United States and the Soviet Union, able to send up a moon probe. The flight schedule was to go into elliptical orbit around the Earth until it came within 10,000 miles of the Moon, launch an instrument package to orbit the moon, and send back data concerning temperatures and electrical fields. (WSJ, Jan 25/90; W Post, Jan 25/90; NY Times, Jan 25/90)
A lengthy account in the New York Times dealing with asteroids and the threat they posed to early life as well as the continuing possibility they might destroy Earth, referred to NASA's findings about early life forms based on a survey of impact craters on the moon. Several scientists' findings, discussed in the journal Cell, were also reported. The newspaper also published an article citing NASA's expenditure of somewhat less than $1 million a year to search for Earth-crossing asteroids. NASA reportedly was also studying the feasibility of nudging asteroids aside and in this connection is to help sponsor the first International Conference on Near-Earth Asteroids. (NYT, Jun 18/91)
Scientists reported that enhanced versions of the pictures taken from the Voyager 2 spacecraft reveal what look like three gigantic ice-gushing volcanoes on Neptune's frozen moon Triton. (NY Times, Feb 18/92; AP, Feb 14/92)
It was reported that the spacecraft Ulysses had revealed unexpected changes in the violent vicinity of Jupiter since the last Earth probe flew past in 1979, including a swelling of the giant planet's magnetic field and an apparent abatement in volcanic eruptions on the Jovian moon Io. (W Post, Feb 12/92; NY Times, Feb 12/92; USA Today, Feb 12/92; W Times, Feb 12/92; AP, Feb 11/92; B Sun, Feb 9/92; P Inq, Feb 9/92)
NASA announced that the Clementine mission to orbit the moon and to visit an asteroid would be headed by Dr. Eugene Shoemaker of the U.S. Geologic Survey, Flagstaff, Arizona. Clementine, sponsored by the Strategic Defense Initiative Office (SDIO), was scheduled to launch a small spacecraft in January 1994 to orbit the moon for several months. The mission would test new, lightweight sensors in a space radiation environment and demonstrate autonomous navigation and spacecraft operation. (NASA Release 93-66)
Lowell Nesbitt, an artist who documented the Apollo 9 and 13 space launches for NASA, was found dead in his Manhattan studio on July 8. Death was attributed to natural causes. He was 59. (UPI, Jul 8/93)
The journal Science reported that the brightness of a full moon, thought to be caused by a process called shadow hiding, in which the sun shining directly on the moon minimizes shadows, is really caused by a phenomenon known as coherent backscatter.
The Defense Department said that robot spacecraft Clementine suffered a malfunction on May 7 that would prevent it from flying by and photographing the asteroid Geographos. However, Clementine was to continue to perform a military mission that would test 23 "advanced technologies." On May 19 the managers of Clementine were to fire its main thruster to ease the craft into a circular path between the moon and Earth, where they can continue to test its prototype military components in the upper reaches of the Van Allen radiation belts around the planet. Since its January 25 launch, Clementine has provided 1.5 million images of the moon at a bargain price. (W Post, May 10/94; NY Times, May 10/94; USA Today, May 10/94; W Post, May 11/94; W Times, May 13/94; W Post, May 19/94)
Robot spacecraft Clementine successfully completed a two-month mission to map the moon's surface in unprecedented detail. Radar data indicate what scientists term an "astonishing" depth of 7.5 miles in one of the moon's ancient basins. Other data may reveal ice in a permanently shadowed spot at the lunar south pole. At 6:20 p.m. EDT, controllers were to command the spacecraft to fire its rockets for four minutes to remove it from lunar orbit, loop around Earth, and head for the small asteroid 1620 Geographos for a late August rendezvous. NASA provided funding to refocus the mission effort, substituting the moon and asteroids for man-made "Star Wars" objects. (W Post, May 3/94; NY Times, May 4/94)
Various special television programs were scheduled to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the moon landing. In addition, the press planned to feature accounts recalling events of the first moonwalk. (B Sun, Jul 10/94; C Trib, Jul 10/94; LA Times, Jul 10/94; AP, Jul 10/94; USA Today, Jul 11/94; W Post, Jul 11/94; AP, Jul 11/94)
Spence Armstrong, Associate Administrator for NASA's Office of Human Resources and Education, announced its Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This was a three-year, $500,000 annual award to six states as a new initiative to improve their research and competitive capability while expanding education and training opportunities for women and minorities. The funding would enable states to develop an academic research enterprise for long-term, self-sustaining, nationally competitive capability, contributing to the states' economic viability. The involved states were Alabama, Arkansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Montana, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
NASA astrophysicist Fred Espenak stated that an annular eclipse would be visible to observers within a 145-mile wide path from El Paso, Texas, through Toledo, Ohio, and much of New England on May 10. The moon will appear completely silhouetted against the sun, which will form a dazzling unbroken outer ring for up to six minutes. People outside the ground path will see only a partial eclipse. (Reuters, May 2/94; W Post, May 4/94; B Sun, May 8/94; W Times, May 8/94; W Post, May 9/94)
Geochemists from the University of Michigan and the University of Tennessee announced that they had arrived at the most accurate and precise estimation of the age and origin of the Moon yet calculated. They suggested that a collision between the Earth and another planet, 4.5 to 4.52 billion years ago, resulted in the creation of the Moon. To reach their conclusion, the researchers used a special spectrometry technique to examine 21 lunar samples. The scientists also concluded that the collision had set Moon’s orbit.(United Press International, “Researchers Narrow Moon’s Origins, Age,” 10 November 1997.)
Lunar Prospector settled into its orbit after three flawless engine burns. The five scientific instruments (magnetometer, electron reflectometer, gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron spectrometer, alpha particle spectrometer, and Doppler gravity experiment using an S-band antenna) began transmitting streams of data. The neutron spectrometer scanned the lunar surface for evidence of hydrogen; the gamma-ray spectrometer determined concentrations of elements such as uranium and iron; and the alpha-particle spectrometer searched for indications of volcanic and tectonic activity.(Reuters, “Corrected—U.S. Space Probe Begins Hunt for Water on the Moon,” 14 January 1998; NASA, “Solar System Exploration: Lunar Prospector,” http://solarsystem.nasa.gov/missions/profile.cfm?MCode=LunarPr&Dis play=ReadMore (accessed 30 July 2007).)
NASA released “unusually detailed” images of Jupiter’s moon Ganymede taken by the Galileo probe in June 1996 and June 1997. Although the images did not indicate the existence of any form of life, they showed that life had been possible in Ganymede’s oceans billions of years ago. At that time, the moon had water, heat, and organic material, brought by comets from outer space. The images also revealed geological formations, including mountain-like ridges and a valley system of volcanoes. Early in the moon’s history, the volcanoes had supplied water for Ganymede’s oceans, which are now frozen.(Paul Hoversten, “Photos Suggest Life Could Have Existed on Jupiter’s Moon,” USA Today, 16 July 1998; New York Times, “Hints of an Ocean on Jupiter’s Moon Yield Questions About Life,” 16 July 1998.)
Scientists published a study in the journal Science, using images from the Galileo probe as evidence that an ocean beneath the surface of Europa, one of Jupiter’s moons, was once warm and salty. James K. Crowley of the U.S. Geological Survey stated that Galileo data showed that “salt absorption patterns on Europa were similar to those on Earth.” Gary B. Hansen, a University of Hawaii geophysicist, added the observation that “the size of the salt bands on Europa’s surface are continuous and stretch across much of the moon,” evidence of a salty ocean beneath the moon’s icy surface. Jeffrey S. Kargel, also of the U.S. Geological Survey, commented on his colleague’s study in Science, saying that salt is an important “piece in the puzzle,” but in the absence of other evidence, does not prove that a salty ocean lies beneath Europa’s surface. Scientists seek other evidence, such as shifting ice plates, cracks in the frozen surface, and a magnetic field.(Michael Kahn for Reuters, “Jupiter Moon Might Have Salt Ocean—U.S. Study,” 22 May 1998; T. B. McCord et al., “Salts on Europa’s Surface Detected by Galileo near Infrared Mapping Spectrometer,” Science 280, no. 5367 (22 May 1998): 1242.)
NASA announced that Lunar Prospector’s gamma-ray spectrometer had returned data about the Moon’s elemental composition. Scientists had used the data to develop the first global maps delineating compositional variations of thorium, potassium, and iron ore over the lunar surface. The maps provided insights into how the Moon’s crust had developed. Prospector’s magnetometer and electron-reflectometer data indicated that the Moon contained magnetized rocks on its upper surface, which had created the two smallest known magnetospheres in the solar system. The craft’s Doppler gravity experiment had enabled scientists to develop the “first precise gravity map of the entire lunar surface,” showing seven previously unknown lava-filled craters, which cause gravitational anomalies. NASA also announced that Lunar Prospector had supplied additional evidence of water-ice deposits on both poles of the Moon.(NASA, “Latest Lunar Prospector Findings Indicate Larger Amounts of Polar Water Ice,” news release 98-158, 3 September 1998.)
The journal Science published data gathered from NASA’s Lunar Prospector, indicating the presence of hydrogen, often bundled as water molecules, on the north and south poles of the Moon. Alan B. Binder, Chief Scientist for the Lunar Prospector mission, explained that the spacecraft had detected an abundance of hydrogen, and that the science team had interpreted the data to mean that the Moon has 1–10 billion tons (910–9,100 kilograms or 0.9–9.1 billion tonnes) of water. In a previous mission to the Moon to collect data, the spacecraft Clementine had found radar indications of water on the Moon’s south pole. Paul D. Spudis, a member of the Clementine science team, remarked that Prospector’s discovery was significant because “the presence of lunar water has been confirmed by two different research methods.”(D. J. Lawrence et al., “Global Elemental Maps and the Moon: The Lunar Prospector Gamma-Ray Spectrometer,” Science 281, no. 5382 (4 September 1998): 1484–1489; Reuters, “Prospector Finds Water on Moon: NASA Spacecraft Locates Ice at the North and South Poles,” Washington Times, 4 September 1998; Associated Press, “Man in the Moon May Have Plenty To Drink: Abundance of Water Likely; Scientists Foresee Colonization,” Chicago Tribune, 4 September 1998.)
Scientists studying Galileo data published findings in the journal Nature describing the likely presence of a subsurface, liquid, salty ocean on Callisto, Jupiter’s second largest moon. Margaret G. Kivelson, space physics professor at the University of California at Los Angeles and NASA’s Principal Investigator for Galileo’s magnetometer instrument, explained that data showed variability in Callisto’s magnetic field similar to that of another Jupiter moon, Europa. However, neither Callisto’s atmosphere, which lacks charged particles, nor Callisto’s icy crust, is a good conductor for generating a magnetic field. Kivelson explained that a layer of salty melted ice could carry “sufficient electrical currents to produce the magnetic field.” In addition, she noted that Galileo data indicated electrical currents flowing in opposite directions at different times, a “key signature consistent with the idea of a salty ocean.” However, scientists had concluded that, unlike Europa, Callisto was unlikely ever to support life, even if it had an ocean, because of its insufficient energy sources. Callisto’s only apparent source of heat is radioactive elements, whereas Europa’s closer position to Jupiter means it possesses tidal energy.(NASA, “Jupiter’s Moon Callisto May Hide Salty Ocean,” news release 98-192, 21 October 1998; K. K. Khurana et al., “Induced Magnetic Fields as Evidence for Subsurface Oceans in Europa and Callisto,” Nature 395, no. 6704 (22 October 1998): 777–780.)
NASA’s Lunar Prospector crashed into a frozen crater on the Moon, but detected no water upon impact. Scientists, believing that the crater held frozen water, had hoped that the “fire and violence of the collision would vaporize ice,” sending a “wet plume, detectable by special instruments, spiraling into the lunar sky.” Telescopes equipped with ultraviolet detectors recorded hours of data after the impact, searching for the “chemical signature” of water. The Prospector mission, which had lasted 18 months following its 6 January 1998 launch, had used five instruments to “map the magnetic, chemical and gravitational character of the [M]oon.”(Associated Press, “Spacecraft Smashes into Moon: Scientists Hoping for Evidence of Ice Vapor in Lunar Sky,” Washington Post, 1 August 1999.)
NASA’s Galileo probe survived intense radiation emanating from Jupiter during a “do-or-die effort,” when the spacecraft came within 380 miles (611 kilometers) of Jupiter’s volcanic moon Io. The craft experienced computer problems when passing through the densest part of Jupiter’s radiation belt, but 1 hour after Galileo’s closest encounter with Io, all of its systems had resumed normal functioning. Duane Bindschadler, Manager of Science Operations for the Galileo Program, explained that close-up study of Io could help scientists learn about the behavior of volcanoes, thereby helping them predict the behavior of volcanoes on Earth. However, because Jupiter’s radiation field could damage or destroy the spacecraft, NASA had planned the close flyby for the end of the two-year extended mission, following Galileo’s original two-year mission.(NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, “Galileo Succeeds in Historic Flyby of Jupiter’s Volcanic Moon,” news release, 11 October 1999; Reuters, “Galileo Probe Risks Ruin for a Closer Look at Io,” Washington Post, 12 October 1999.)
At the annual meeting of the American Astronomical Society’s Division for Planetary Sciences, research group leaders from the University of Texas at Austin announced that scientists had sifted through the data from Earth-based observatories and from spacecraft such as the HST, obtained from the controlled crash of NASA’s Lunar Prospector into a crater near the south pole of the Moon on 31 July. The researchers reported that they had identified “no observable signature of water” in the Moon’s crater. The announcement confirmed the conclusion reached at the time of the crash. The Lunar Prospector spacecraft had launched on 6 January 1998. In March 1998, mission scientists had announced the first tentative findings of the presence of water ice on both of the Moon’s poles. The controlled crash, proposed by engineers and astronomers at the University of Texas, was “a low-budget attempt to wring one last bit of productivity from the low-cost” mission. NASA had accepted the proposal because of the successful peer review of the idea, and because the craft’s useful life was nearing its end.(NASA, “No Water Ice Detected from Lunar Prospector Impact,” news release 99-119, 13 October 1999; Associated Press, “Craft’s Crash into Moon Finds No Water,” Los Angeles Times, 13 October 1999.)
NASA announced the creation of a new office dedicated to improving heath and safety for its workforce. NASA Administrator Daniel S. Goldin appointed Dr. Arnauld E. Nicogossian as Chief Health and Medical Officer, giving him the responsibility for developing programs to research and implement the best medical procedures for astronauts and other NASA personnel. “On the ground and in space, rapid advances in medical knowledge and tools need to be adapted and incorporated into our planning and practices,” Goldin said when announcing the new position. Nicogossian faced the task of establishing NASA’s Health Council, in keeping with NASA’s commitment to making heath and safety its number-one priority.(NASA, “NASA Creates New Office To Foster Heath and Safety,” news release 00-69, 1 May 2000. 915 Associated Press, “Glenn Honored for Test Pilot’s Role as Armstrong Watches,” 3 May 2000.)
In an article in the journal Nature, scientist Paul M. Schenk provided evidence that Jupiter’s moon Europa might not be able to support life, challenging many scientists’ previous assessments about the potential for life on the moon. Astrobiologists had theorized that Europa might be able to support life, based on the possibility that it might possess a heat source, liquid water, and organic material, all necessary for life to exist. However, researchers had also known that Europa is covered with a shell of ice, which might be sufficiently thick to prevent sunlight and oxygen from reaching water below the icy surface, thereby impeding Europa’s ability to support life. Using data obtained from NASA’s Galileo and Voyager spacecraft, Schenk had calculated the thickness of Europa’s ice shell by comparing the depths of impact craters on Europa with those on Callisto and Ganymede, two other moons of Jupiter. Schenk’s analysis indicated that Europa’s ice shell is at least 19-kilometers (12-miles) thick―nearly twice that suggested by previous studies and thick enough to prevent the existence of life.(Usha Lee McFarling, “Life on Jupiter Moon Likely on Thin (or Thick) Ice,” Los Angeles Times, 23 May 2002; Paul M. Schenk, “Thickness Constraints on the Icy Shells of the Galilean Satellites from a Comparison of Crater Shapers,” Nature 417, no. 6887 (23 May 2002): 419–421.)
A group of astronomers, including NASA’s Christophe Dumas, announced the discovery of a new moon orbiting the planet Uranus. S/2001 U 1 was Uranus’s 21st confirmed moon, one of six Uranian moons with an irregular orbit on a different orbital plane from that of the planet’s other moons. Moons with irregular orbits are hard to find, because they tend to be very distant from the planet they orbit and are so faint that they are difficult to distinguish from stars. The six Uranian moons with irregular orbits were the planet’s smallest moons, ranging in size from 10 to 20 kilometers (6 to 12 miles) in diameter. Scientists theorized that these smaller moons were the result of collisions that had occurred during the early stages of planetary formation.(NASA JPL, “Scientists Boost Tally at Uranus,” news release, 25 October 2002.)
The FBI and NASA’s Office of Inspector General (OIG) announced the arrest of three students employed at NASA’s JSC. The FBI had charged the students with the theft of lunar and meteorite samples. According to the FBI, the three student employees and another man had stolen a safe containing the samples and had attempted to sell the specimens. JSC had notified the FBI and NASA’s OIG of the possible theft on 15 July.(NASA, “NASA Cooperating in Investigation of Theft,” news release 02-133, 22 July 2002; Los Angeles Times, “4 Charged in Theft of NASA Moon Rocks,” 23 July 2002.)
A group of scientists led by Enric Pallé of the New Jersey Institute of Technology published research indicating that, since 1999, the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface had declined. Analyzing NASA’s data on cloud cover, along with data from Earth-based telescopes, the team had calculated how much sunlight Earth reflected to the Moon, using the results to determine the amount of sunlight that reached Earth. They reported that the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface had begun to increase in the mid-1980s, but had started to decline in the early 1990s, a trend that the team attributed to the increasing pollution of Earth’s air. The air pollution had reduced the amount of sunlight reaching Earth’s surface and had increased the amount of water droplets condensing in the atmosphere, thereby increasing the amount of cloud cover blocking sunlight.(Enric Pallé et al., “Changes in Earth’s Reflectance over the Past Two Decades,” Science 304, no. 5676 (28 May 2004): 1299–1301; Kenneth Chang, “After a Period of Brightness, Earth Dims, Researchers Say,” New York Times, 28 May 2004.)
NASA’s Cassini orbiter successfully released ESA’s Huygens probe on a controlled course to Saturn’s largest moon Titan. ESA, NASA, and the Italian Space Agency had created the Cassini- Huygens mission to study Saturn and its moons, scheduling the Huygens probe―specifically designed to analyze Titan’s atmosphere and surface―to enter the moon’s atmosphere in January 2005.(ESA, “Huygens Begins Its Final Journey into the Unknown,” ESA news release 67-2004, 25 December 2004, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/SEMVR53AR2E_index.html (accessed 2 February 2010).)
The SMART-1 spacecraft, the first of ESA’s Small Missions for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART), successfully completed its first orbit of the Moon. ESA had launched SMART-1 in September 2003 to study the Moon’s surface. SMART-1 was noteworthy for its use of a host of techniques and technologies to reach lunar orbit―including a solar-electric propulsion system or ion engine, which made the journey of 52.2 million miles (84 million kilometers) from Earth to the Moon using only 130 pounds (59 kilograms) of the 181 pounds (82 kilograms) of xenon fuel that it had carried. That fuel consumption rate was equivalent to more than 5 million miles per gallon. The 809-pound (367-kilogram) spacecraft was able to achieve this rate of fuel efficiency using solar panels. During 13 months of expanding orbits around Earth, the solar panels had charged the xenon gas atoms, providing the spacecraft with occasional thrusts. ESA hoped to replace conventional propulsion systems―which were either too expensive or incapable of fulfilling the same objective―with the new solar-panel technology, to propel future spacecraft further into space.(ESA, “Europe Reaches the Moon,” ESA news release 60-2004, 16 November 2004, http://www.esa.int esaCP/SEM2S8WJD1E_index_0.html (accessed 2 February 2010); David Rising for Associated Press, “Europe’s First Moon Mission Successful,” 17 November 2004.)
720Spacewarn Bulletin, no. 614, 1 January 2005, http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/spacewarn/spx614.html (accessed 5 June 2009). around Saturn. Voyager’s best images of Iapetus had a resolution of 8 kilometers (4.97 miles) per pixel, but Cassini had produced a resolution of about 1 kilometer (0.6 mile) per pixel.(BBC News, “Cassini Passes ‘Two-Faced’ Moon,” 3 January 2005.)
060329_saturn_moonlets.html (accessed 25 August 2010); see also Matthew S. Tiscareno et al., “100-Metre- Diameter Moonlets in Saturn’s A Ring From Observations of ‘Propeller’ Structure,” Nature 440, no. 7084 (30 March 2006): 648−650. Saturn. The astronomers speculated that Saturn’s blue ring of small particles was the result of meteoroid impacts on the surface of Saturn’s moon Enceladus, impacts that had scattered debris into the moon’s orbit. The largest particles had remained within Enceladus’s orbit, but various forces, including pressure from sunlight, had pushed the smallest particles out of the moon’s orbit, causing Saturn’s broad ring of smaller scattered particles, which reflect predominantly blue light. De Pater explained that this explanation of the color of Saturn’s outer ring was directly applicable to the blue ring observed around Uranus. However, he cautioned that astronomers did not yet “understand the details of the process.”(Robert Sanders, “Blue Ring Discovered Around Uranus,” University of California at Berkeley press release, 6 April 2006, http://berkeley.edu/news/media/releases/2006/04/ 06_bluering.shtml (accessed 25 June 2010); see also Imke de Pater et al., “New Dust Belts of Uranus: One Ring, Two Ring, Red Ring, Blue Ring,” Science 312, no. 5770 (7 April 2006): 92−94.)
first human mission to the Moon to occur by 2020.(NASA, “NASA Selects Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle Prime Contractor,” news release 06-305, 31 August 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2006/aug/HQ_06305_Orion_contract.html (accessed 15 March 2010). 108 ESA, “Impact Landing Ends SMART-1 Mission to the Moon,” news release 31-2006, 3 September 2006, http://www.esa.int/esaCP/Pr_31_2006_p_EN.html (accessed 16 April 2010); Nic Fleming, “The Dust Settles After Europe Lands a Mission on the Moon,” Daily Telegraph (London), 4 September 2006.)
The International Astronomical Union (IAU) announced the official naming of Pluto’s newest small moons—Nix and Hydra, names from Greek mythology. The HST had discovered Nix and Hydra, previously known as S/2005 P1 and S/2005 P2, in May 2005. The two moons are approximately 5,000 times fainter than Pluto and approximately two to three times farther from Pluto than its larger moon Charon, discovered in 1978. The first initials of the two moons—N and H—are the same as the initials of the NASA spacecraft New Horizons, which launched in January 2006 toward the Pluto system. Scientists expected that New Horizons would map Nix and Hydra in detail when the spacecraft flew by Pluto in summer 2015.(Kenneth Chang, “Moons of Pluto Renamed,” New York Times, 23 June 2006; NASA, “Pluto and Its Moons: Charon, Nix and Hydra,” 23 June 2006, http://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/hubble/plutos_moons_prt.htm (accessed 23 August 2010).)
ESA ended its Small Mission for Advanced Research in Technology (SMART-1) with a planned crash landing of the SMART-1 spacecraft into the Moon. The spacecraft impacted at a speed of 4,500 miles per hour (nearly 7,200 kilometers per hour) in a volcanic plain called the Lake of Excellence. ESA had planned the crash so that scientists could study the composition of the resulting dust and debris. SMART-1 had launched on 27 September 2003, orbiting the Moon many times to acquire data about the chemical and mineralogical composition of the lunar surface. ESA had also used the mission to test deep-space communications techniques, autonomous spacecraft–navigation techniques, and other innovative technologies, such as an ion- propulsion engine and various miniaturized instruments.
Scientists published research on the dimmest stars ever observed in a globular star cluster, including findings that revealed important information about the universe’s age and provided supporting evidence for a theory of star transformation. Harvey B. Richer of the University of British Columbia, and his team of scientists, had used NASA’s HST to observe faint light from white dwarf stars in the cluster NGC 6397. Astronomers often make estimates of the universe’s age based on the age of stars. They are able to determine the age of stars because stars decline in temperature as they exhaust their available energy over their lifetimes. White dwarf stars, which are burned-out relics of stars and cool at predictable rates, are particularly useful for this purpose. However, white dwarves also become less visible as their radiation declines. According to the team’s observations of the light from the white dwarves in NGC 6397, the cluster is almost 12 billion years old. The light from the cluster’s white dwarf stars appears as faint as the light of a birthday candle on the Moon would appear to an observer on Earth. The HST images also revealed that the dimmest white dwarf stars in NGC 6397 have temperatures low enough to cause chemical changes in their atmospheres, making the stars appear blue rather than red. Scientists had theorized the existence of this phenomenon but had never observed it.
The X Prize Foundation and Google announced the creation of the Google Lunar X Prize, a contest with a US$30 million prize purse, inviting private companies worldwide to compete to land a privately funded robotic rover on the Moon. The prize purse consisted of a US$20 million grand prize, a US$5 million second prize, and US$5 million in bonus prizes. To win the grand prize, the rover would need to complete several mission objectives, including roaming the lunar surface for at least 500 meters (1,640 feet) and sending data back to Earth, including video and still images. The grand prize would be worth US$20 million until 31 December 2012, and then would be worth US$15 million until 31 December 2014. If no team claimed the grand prize by 31 December 2014, the competition would terminate, unless Google and the X Prize Foundation extended it. To win the second prize, which would also be available until 31 December 2014, a team would have to land a craft, which would roam the lunar surface and transmit data to Earth. The sponsors would distribute bonus prizes to teams that successfully completed additional mission tasks such as roaming distances greater than 5,000 meters (16,404 feet); capturing images of human-made artifacts, such as Apollo hardware; discovering water ice; or surviving a cold lunar night—the equivalent of 14.5 Earth days.
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) announced that its lunar orbiter craft, Chandrayaan 1, had dropped a Moon Impact Probe to the lunar surface. The 64-pound ( probe, which measured 14.70 inches (37.34 centimeters) by 14.7 inches ( by 18.5 inches (46.99 centimeters), landed on the Moon at 10:01 (EST). The probe’s mission was to test soft-landing technologies and to observe the lunar surface. It carried a mass spectrometer to study the lunar atmosphere, a radar altimeter to measure the probe’s altitude, and a video imaging system to photograph the descent. Chandrayaan 1, a US$80 million mission, had launched on 22 October 2008, joining China, Europe, Japan, Russia, and the United States as the only nations that had sent missions to the Moon.(Space.com, “India Slams Probe into the Moon,” 14 November 2008, http://www.space.com/6113-india-slams- probe-moon.html (accessed 25 August 2011); Associated Press, “India’s First Lunar Probe Lands on the Moon,” 15 November 2008.)
The People’s Republic of China’s Commission of Science, Technology, and Industry for National Defense released the first photographs that China had captured of the Moon’s polar regions. The 2,350-pound (1,066-kilogram) Chang’e-1 lunar probe had taken the photographs. Chang’e-1 had been orbiting the Moon at an altitude of 200 kilometers (124 miles) since 7 November 2007. On 4 January 2008, Chang’e-1’s cameras had adjusted, enabling them to photograph areas of the Moon above 70° north or south latitude. China intended the probe to produce a three-dimensional lunar-surface survey and to provide data and images for use in other experiments.(Xinhua News Agency, “Chang’e-1 Captures Pictures of Moon’s Polar Areas,” 31 January 2008, http://news. xinhuanet.com/english/2008-01/31/content_7532773.htm (accessed 14 December 2010).)
The X Prize Foundation announced that four new teams had registered for the Google Lunar X Prize competition, bringing the total number of registered teams to 14. The Google Lunar X Prize race would grant US$20 million to the first team to build a privately funded spacecraft that would land on the Moon, move 500 meters, and transmit data, images, and video back to Earth. The deadline for receiving the full purse had been set for 31 December 2012; after that date, the X Prize Foundation would reduce the value of the grand prize. The X Prize Foundation had also offered a second prize and bonus prizes. One of the new teams that had joined the competition was a mystery team. The contest rules permitted a team to keep its identity a secret until 20 July 2009. Also joining the race were the contest’s first Asian team, Team Advaeros of Malaysia, led by Hanidy Yusof; the Juxtopia Urban Robotics Brilliant Application National (JURBAN) team, led by Jayfus T. Doswell and composed of both professional and student engineers; and Team STELLAR, led by Richard D. Dell and based in North Carolina.(Space.com, “Four New Teams Join Moon Rover Race,” 22 May 2008, http://www.space.com/5383-teams-join- moon-rover-race.html (accessed 29 March 2011).)
The X Prize Foundation of Santa Monica, California, announced that two new teams, Independence-X Aerospace and Omega Envoy, had joined the Google Lunar X Prize competition, bringing the total number of registered teams to 14. Mohd Izmar Yamin led Independence-X Aerospace, a Malaysian team, and three University of Central Florida students—Jason Dunn, Justin Karl, and Rubin D. Nunez—led Omega Envoy. The Google Lunar X Prize competition was offering a US$20 million grand prize to the first team to land a privately funded spacecraft on the Moon, move it 500 meters, and transmit data, images, and video back to Earth. The X Prize Foundation was also offering a US$5 million prize to the second-place winner, as well as additional bonus prizes valued at US$5 million. The deadline to collect the full purse was 31 December 2012.(Space.com, “New Teams Join Private Race to Moon,” 9 October 2008, http://www.space.com/5957-teams-join- private-race-moon.html (accessed 11 August 2011); Google Lunar X Prize, “Announcing Our Newest Preferred Partner, Analytical Graphics, Inc., and Two New Teams,” 7 October 2008, http://www.googlelunarxprize.org/lunar/ featured-article/announcing-our-newest-preferred-partner-analytical-graphics-inc-and-two-new-t (accessed 17 August 2011).)
NASA announced that its Cassini craft had detected sodium salts in ice grains of Saturn’s outermost ring, an indication that Saturn’s moon Enceladus might harbor a reservoir of liquid water beneath its surface. In 2005 Cassini had discovered on Enceladus water-ice jets, which replenish Saturn’s outermost ring with tiny ice grains and vapor. Analysis of the data from Cassini’s cosmic-dust detector concluded that only the presence of liquid water could account for the dissolution of the significant amounts of minerals necessary to produce the levels of salt detected in the ring. Frank Postberg, Cassini scientist for the cosmic-dust analyzer at the Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics in Heidelberg, Germany, explained that the grains include table salt and carbonates, like soda, in concentrations that match the predicted composition of an Enceladus ocean. He added that, if the liquid source is indeed an ocean, its presence, coupled with the heat measured near the moon’s south pole and the organic compounds found in the plumes, creates an environment suitable for the formation of life precursors.(NASA, “Salt Finding from NASA’s Cassini Hints at Ocean Within Saturn Moon,” news release 09-147, 24 June 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/jun/HQ_09-147_Cassini_Enceladus_Salts.html (accessed 22 July 2011).)
The People’s Republic of China’s State Administration of Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense announced that Chang’e-1, China’s first lunar probe, had impacted the Moon at 4:13 p.m., Beijing time, successfully ending its 16-month mission. China had launched Chang’e-1 on 24 October 2007, on a mission to produce the first full map of the Moon’s surface. Chang’e-1 had accomplished the mission using stereo radar. The planned lunar impact, the culmination of the first phase of China’s three-stage Moon mission, would enable China to acquire experience that would help it land the second Chinese lunar probe, scheduled to launch in 2012.(Xinhua News Agency,, “China’s Lunar Probe Chang’e-1 Impacts Moon,” 2 March 2009; BBC News, “Chinese Probe Crashes into Moon,” 2 March 2009.)
NASA announced that three teams out of a field of 19 had claimed a total of US$750,000 in prizes at the 2009 Regolith Excavation Challenge on 18 October, marking the first time that any team in the competition’s three-year history had qualified for a cash prize. NASA required the competitors to use mobile, robotic digging machines to excavate a minimum of 330 pounds (149 kilograms) of regolith, or simulated Moon dirt, and to deposit the regolith into a container within 30 minutes. NASA had further stipulated that the vehicles must contain their own power source and weigh no more than 176 pounds (79.8 kilograms). Paul’s Robotics of Worcester, Massachusetts, had earned first place and US$500,000, for excavating 1,103 pounds (500 kilograms) of regolith within the allotted time of 30 minutes. Three-time returning competitor Terra Engineering of Gardena, California, had won second place and US$150,000 for excavating 595 pounds (270 kilograms) of regolith, and first-time competitor Team Braundo of Rancho Palos Verde, California, had earned third place and US$100,000 for excavating 580 pounds (263 kilograms) of regolith.(NASA, “Teams Win at NASA National Lunar Robotics Competition,” news release 09-245, 19 October 2009, http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2009/oct/HQ_09-245_Regolith_winners.html (accessed 30 September 2011).)
JAXA’s first lunar probe Kaguya (Selene) successfully completed its approximately one-year- and-a-half mission when it made a controlled crash landing on the Moon. JAXA had launched Kaguya in September 2007. Kaguya had conducted nominal operations for approximately 10 months, performing an extended operational phase for an additional seven months. Before undergoing the controlled crash landing, Kaguya had orbited the Moon, to map the lunar surface and to study the Moon’s mineral distribution and gravity levels.(Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, “Kaguya (Selene) Slam Crashed to the Moon,” JAXA press release 11 June 2009, http://www.jaxa.jp/press/2009/06/20090611_kaguya_e.html (accessed 27 July 2011); Shino Yuasa, “Japan’s First Lunar Probe Ends Mission,” Associated Press, 11 June 2009.)
ISRO ended its US$82 million Chandrayaan mission after failing to restore communication with the craft. ISRO had lost contact with Chandrayaan 1 on 29 August. Chandrayaan 1, known as Moon Craft, had launched on 22 October 2008 on a mission to map the lunar terrain in preparation for a future mission that would land a rover on the Moon’s surface. ISRO had designed the craft to orbit the Moon for two years, at an altitude of 100 kilometers (62 miles). Chandrayaan 1 carried 11 payloads, including an Indian-designed terrain-mapping camera, ESA mapping instruments, radiation-measuring equipment belonging to the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, and two NASA devices designed to assess mineral composition and to look for ice deposits. ISRO Chief Madhavan Nair reportedly told the state-run broadcaster Doordarshan that a malfunction in computers on board the craft had led to the failure in communications. Nair also stated that a committee of scientists would investigate the incident.(Ed Johnson, “India Ends Lunar Mission After Losing Probe Signal,” Bloomberg News, 31 August 2009; Associated Press, “Indian Moon Orbiter Loses Contact,” 29 August 2009.)
