Ihor Y. Gawdiak, a senior research analyst at the Library of Congress
Federal Research Division, has done extensive research and written
numerous government studies on Soviet and East European political and
military topics.  Since the demise of the Soviet Union, he has continued
to research and write primarily on political and military developments in
the Newly Independent States.  He is the author of the "Nationalities and
Religions" chapter in the Soviet Union: A Country Study and editor of
Czechoslovakia: A Country Study, both published by the Department of the
Army as part of its Country Studies/Area Handbook Program.  He is also the
author of NASA Historical Data Book, Volume IV, NASA Resources 1969-1978. 
He is likewise the editor of Ukraine: A Country Study and The Czech
Republic: A Country Study, both of which are are scheduled for publication
at a later date.  Mr. Gawdiak received his B.A. and M.A. degrees in
International Relations from Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts.
He has completed all requirements, but his dissertation, in the doctoral
program in Russian History at the University of Maryland.

Ramon J. Miro was a Latin American research analyst at the Library of
Congress Federal Research division from 1992 to 1996.  He has a B.A. in
Political Science from the University of Florida and an M.A. in Latin
American Studies from Georgetown University.  He resigned from the Library
of Congress in 1996 to accept a fellowship for a doctoral program in Latin
American Studies at Georgetown.

Sam Stueland has been a research analyst at the Library of Congress
Federal Research Division since 1992 where he has worked on a number of
different projects.  Prior to joining the Library of Congrees, Mr.
Stueland was a researcher at the Smithsonian Institute National Museum of
American History, Department of History of Science and Technology.  He
graduated Summa Cum Laude in American History from Gallaudet University in
1991.  He has published articles in "Technology and Culture" and "Railroad
History."  


